White Paper Series on mHealth and Aging
CREDIT: UN/HERWIG
mHEALTH TRANSFERRING THE BURDEN OF 
CAREGIVERS TO MOBILE TECHNOLOGIES
ADA KWAN
mHealth Alliance, UN Foundation
October 2013
ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS
This white paper would not have been possible without the vision and support of Pfizer, Inc., and the 
mHealth Alliance at the United Nations Foundation, as well as the insights from and conversations 
with individuals working in the fields of aging and mHealth. Many thanks to those who shared and 
contributed their thoughts, experience, passions, and time during the interview process for this white 
paper including: Sombit Mishra of QMedic, Stephen Johnston of Fordcastle LLC, Rajiv Mehta of 
Bhageera Consulting, Alice Borrelli and Dana Womack of Intel Corporation, Bethany Brown and Paul 
Ong of HelpAge International, Isabella Aboderin of the Oxford Institute of Aging, and Bill Walsh at 
AARP. I am indebted to Chelsea Solmo at the mHealth Alliance for her help in the interview process, 
as well as my other colleagues at the mHealth Alliance - Chelsea Hedquist, Avrille Hanzel, and Shariq 
Khoja – who provided support, coordination, and detailed feedback throughout the development of 
the paper. 
Lastly, my utmost respect and appreciation goes to Chris Gray and his colleagues at Pfizer, Inc., Patty 
Mechael and the mHealth Alliance, and all the members of the mHealth Aging Working Group for 
identifying the strong potential in mobile technologies to support those providing care to the world’s 
aging population. With their continual commitment and support for this under-recognized topic, we 
have taken a strong step towards prioritizing caregivers and their growing responsibilities. 
Ada Kwan, mHealth Alliance, United Nations Foundation
2
In 2000, the number of people over 
the age of 65 was just over 500 
million, and this number is expected 
to triple by the year 2050.
CREDIT: UN/PARK
ABSTRACT 
THIS WHITE PAPER, WHICH HAS EVOLVED environments, such as those often seen in LMICs. 
FROM PRIOR RESEARCH1, IS ONE PART mHealth solutions can support family members in 
OF A THREE-PART SERIES DEVOTED TO their roles as informal caregivers to the elderly and can 
EXPLORING THE USE OF MOBILE AND provide support to formal caregivers, such as health 
WIRELESS TECHNOLOGIES IN HEALTH care professionals or professional caregivers. This paper 
(MHEALTH) and the opportunities for impacting and defines the variety of caregivers for the rapidly growing 
advancing healthy aging in low- and middle-income older global population and details the role mobile 
countries (LMICs). This specific paper focuses on the technologies currently play and could potentially play 
use of mHealth for caregivers of aging individuals. to support the various types of caregivers in LMICs, 
while being mindful of anecdotal mHealth examples 
In 2000, the number of people over the age of 65 was from high-income countries. For caregivers and care 
just over 500 million, and this number is expected to recipients, mHealth solutions can be developed to fill 
triple by the year 2050(2). These figures reflect many social, functional, and instrumental task needs(3). Finally, 
achievements in public health, such as vaccination, a call to action is made to bring together stakeholders 
disease control, and access to safe drinking water from a variety of sectors to achieve the full potential of 
and basic sanitation. However, the growing size of mHealth as a tool for caregivers around the world.
an older world population foreshadows significant 
challenges. As individuals age and develop age-
related health conditions, these growing numbers 
will place considerable stress on the families, social 
networks, and health systems that provide caregiving 
support. Such stress can have costly consequences. 
Fortunately, mHealth offers unique solutions that can 
not only complement existing health care delivery 
systems but can also be implemented in resource-poor 
3
The number of mobile 
phone subscriptions 
globally is set to equal 
and even surpass the 
world population of 
seven billion in 2014.
CREDIT: UN/HERWIG
INTRODUCTION 
THE BURDEN OF CAREGIVING FOR OLDER populations, especially as health conditions of the elderly 
PEOPLE IS QUICKLY INCREASING AROUND combine with poverty(5). In low- and middle-income 
THE WORLD. The number of people over the age of countries (LMICs), where the majority of the growth of 
601 is expected to grow from 810 million in 2012 to over elderly populations is expected to occur,4 the situation 
a billion in less than 10 years, with the figure expected is more straining(2,8). Demographic transitions in LMICs 
to reach 2 billion by 2050(5). These figures reflect many are requiring countries to take on the additional burden 
achievements in public health, such as vaccination, of responding to chronic conditions while maintaining 
disease control, and access to safe drinking water and improving effective responses to existing health 
and basic sanitation. However, the rapidly expanding threats such as malnutrition and infectious diseases(9).
and aging population will place considerable stress on 
families, social networks, and health systems and can As the number of mobile phone subscriptions globally 
have costly consequences if action is not taken now 2,3. is set to equal and even surpass the world population 
of seven billion in 2014(10,11), there is massive potential 
Globally, the burden placed on caregivers will grow as for mobile and wireless technology to support healthier 
the world population ages and confronts age-related aging and to reduce the strain being put on caregivers 
health conditions, such as chronic diseases (e.g., around the world. The two objectives of this white 
cardiovascular diseases, cancer, and diabetes) – the paper are to (1) define the needs of caregivers for the 
major causes of death around the world – as well as rapidly growing older adult populations in LMICs, and 
declining cognitive acuity and mental health(7). Current (2) to understand the role mobile technologies have in 
dynamics between informal and formal caregiving and supporting the various types of caregivers in LMICs, 
existing health systems demonstrate that there is a while being mindful of anecdotal mHealth examples 
lack of preparedness to respond effectively to aging from high-income countries (HICs).
1  The World Health Organization accepts 65 years to define the term ‘elderly’ or ‘older person’ in the majority of developed countries; however, the age of 60 is often 
considered in low- and middle-income countries(4).
2  In the future, there will be a reduction of support base for older adults and an increase in their dependency on social support and health care services(4).
3  Although estimates of caregiving are difficult to achieve, a study focusing on the United States alone placed the economic value of informal caregiving at 18% of national 
healthcare spending(6).
4  The United Nations Population Fund (UNFPA) predicts that by 2050, the population aged 60 years or older will reach 10% in Africa, 24% in Asia, 24% in Oceania, 25% in 
4 Latin America and the Caribbean, 27% in North America, and 24% in Europe(5).
BACKGROUND
AS HEALTHY INDIVIDUALS AGE, THEY CAN members, spouses, other elderly individuals) or 
DEVELOP EARLY OR STABLE CHRONIC formal (e.g., health care professionals or caregivers at 
CONDITIONS, WHICH CAN LATER BECOME institutional care centers)(13). In HICs, formalized care 
SERIOUS AND CAN LIMIT DAILY ACTIVITIES(12). options often exist, such as home care, nursing homes, 
Further advancement of chronic conditions can have and residential care for individuals at advanced stages 
fatal outcomes. Advancing illnesses require older adults of illnesses(14). These care options are not as easily 
to rely less on self-care and more on the attention available, if at all, in LMICs, nor can institutionalization 
and services offered by different types of caregivers meet the growing needs of a globally aging population.
(see Figure 1). Caregivers can be informal (e.g., family 
Healthy persons and Persons with Persons with serious, Persons who are 
those with reversible manageable, early, progressive conditions hospice-eligible Figure 1. 
illness or stable chronic that limit daily A visualization of the evolution 
conditions activities
of advanced illness among 
individuals (adapted from Coal-
ition to Transform Advanced 
Care’s Call to Action on Trans-
ADVANCED ILLNESS forming Advanced Illness 
Care12) with the changing 
roles of different types of 
caregivers who may be involved 
in an individual’s life during 
INFORMAL CAREGIVERS aging. 
SELF FORMAL CAREGIVERS
Informal caregivers are the primary type of caregivers to make trade offs between caregiving and other life 
for older adults. These are usually family members who priorities, such as work and time with other family 
are primarily women, such as a daughter or daughter-in- members. This scenario is further complicated as 
law, but can also be members of extended families(14,15). family structures are spread geographically, with older 
These caregivers are often motivated by virtue of their adults living in rural areas and young adults migrating to 
binding duties and the sense of honor in supporting urban areas for employment. This urban migration may 
older kin – reciprocity and self-interest5, respectively(15). improve financial support, but it also removes social 
For example, a saying in Ghana goes, “If your parents support structures for elderly care, especially when the 
look after you when you are growing your teeth, you older generations are responsible for caring for younger 
must also look after them when they are losing their generations.
teeth”(15). Limited resources, rising costs of living, and 
escalating medical needs force caregivers in LMICs 
5  Children feel less obligated to give care if they feel as though their parents “failed” them.(15) 5
Informal caregivers are often the only or main caregivers, are described further below, but it is important to note 
but they seldom have the proper health training or skills that the needs for different kinds of support can change 
to properly and completely care for older adults with over time depending on the stage of the caregiver’s 
age-related health conditions, such as chronic diseases. journey(22) (see Appendix A).
Chronic diseases, in particular, develop slowly with 
unclear symptoms, so early detection when prevention Emotional support: Informal caregivers often report 
or cures are still possible is often difficult to achieve(16). feelings of guilt, resentment, and hostility when they 
Thus, formal caregivers often enter the equation when make personal sacrifices to provide care to older 
an older adults’ condition or health episode triggers or adults(23). These feelings can be quite overwhelming for 
warrants special care. Formal caregivers are trained the caregiver. Strategies for balancing and alleviating 
and have the skills to respond to the health needs of this stress include obtaining information (e.g., 
older adults but lack extremely useful information to information on home-based care or information on any 
make decisions considering the individual or family conditions affecting the care recipient), skill building, 
dynamics(17). The link between informal and formal getting psychosocial support, and accessing additional 
caregivers is complicated in LMICs where health resources that can help in balancing tasks.
systems can be fragmented and getting appropriate 
health services to older adults in a timely manner can Financial duties: Caregivers often have financial 
be financially and geographically challenging. duties for the elderly they care for. In some countries, 
because of rural-to-urban migration for work, working-
The global caregiving burden is exacerbated by class adults, who sometimes also play the role of 
insufficient resources and support for caregivers of informal caregivers, send remittances from urban 
older adults, as well as by a lack of adequate facilities centers to the rural areas where the elderly reside(24). 
with medical, psychiatric, and rehabilitative services(18). However, sending remittances can be challenging for 
Around the world, elderly care is rarely considered a these caregivers as banks and having bank accounts 
priority, which further complicates the challenge of are not common in some places.
mobilizing resources for appropriate services targeted 
at aging populations and their caregivers. In hard-to- Instrumental task support: Caregivers have to manage 
reach locations and rural areas, for example, outreach a multitude of tasks that play an instrumental part in 
services that go to households and communities tend daily activities, such as running errands, shopping 
to focus on reducing maternal and child morbidity and for food, providing personal care, taking care of the 
mortality and do not have explicit efforts tailored for house and household, and filling in when assistance 
the older segment of the population. At the policy level, is needed(13,25). Caregivers often require a great deal 
many LMICs lack comprehensive national policies of support, as they are not only providing care, but 
for elderly populations(9). A study that analyzed over also attempting to balance caregiving with other life 
6,000 projects backed by the United Nations in 2010- activities that require time and energy. This is reflected 
2011 found that only 61 (1%) targeted older adults or in existing caregiving research in developed countries, 
individuals with disabilities(19). In 20 countries, there which often evaluates caregiver burden, depression, 
were no projects that targeted older adults(19). subjective wellbeing, perceived caregiver satisfaction, 
ability, and knowledge(21). For formal caregivers, 
Reducing the burden of caregiving around the world instrumental tasks are those related to providing 
involves identifying how caregivers can be supported health or social support services, such as disease 
in their responsibilities. Emotions, financial duties, and management, treatment support for older adults taking 
instrumental tasks are three specific areas that can medications, or patient monitoring, particularly in the 
create burdens for caregivers, and identifying ways to case of chronic diseases. Appendix B lists tasks that 
support caregivers in these areas can help reduce the often belong to general caregivers(20).
burden of caregiving on an individual level(20,21). These 
6
For the emotional, 
financial, and 
instrumental support 
needs of informal 
caregivers, mobile 
options are plentiful...
CREDIT: TÉLÉCOMS SANS FRONTIÈRS
EXISTING SOLUTIONS: mHealth in Caregiver Support
FOR CAREGIVING, MOBILE TECHNOLOGIES informal caregiving and aging-linked health system 
OFFER NEW OPPORTUNITIES TO DELIVER inefficiencies, such as late diagnoses, access to 
EXISTING SOLUTIONS, BUT THE VERY medications, hospital readmissions, and excessively 
PRESSING CHALLENGE HINGES ON MAK- long hospital stays. 
ING CAREGIVING OVER A DISTANCE EASIER. 
By addressing this challenge, individuals would be able For the emotional, financial, and instrumental support 
to live where they choose and maintain a supportive needs of informal caregivers, mobile options are 
ecosystem wherever they happen to be. It is expected plentiful, as the field is in the midst of understanding 
that over time the increasingly interconnected world and applying what can be useful: 
will rely even more heavily on technologies to support 
healthy aging. For emotional support, mobile solutions that assist 
caregivers in obtaining psychosocial support include 
The current field of mHealth for caregiving is being voice calls, text messaging, and other multimedia 
created in and for developed countries, but it has yet communication (e.g., video communication). Mobile 
to gain full momentum in LMICs. Currently, mHealth games aimed at assisting caregivers in improving 
caregiving solutions focus on improving the quality of physical rehabilitation of the elderly, social networking, 
life for informal caregivers and providing monitoring and mobile access to networks could help fill the needs 
tools for formal caregivers. Most of these efforts of caregivers. Mobile and wireless technologies can 
are concentrated in high-income countries, which support caregiver networks so caregivers can exchange 
can be linked to the lack of prioritizing both aging with each other psychosocial support and information, 
and caregiving support in LMICs. In general, certain such as how to balance tasks and look for additional 
caregiving burdens can be addressed by meaningfully resources.
designed technology, which will be detailed in this 
section. If leveraged appropriately, mobile strategies For their financial duties, the ability to send money 
can offset massive and increasing costs related to with mobile phones offers caregivers an easy way 
7
to support the elderly they care for. In particular, The context for caregiving varies based on individual 
mobile money options in LMICs, such as G-Cash in preferences, severity of health issues, availability of 
the Philippines or mPesa, first launched in Kenya and family members, and economic and social resources(14), 
now available in other countries, allow for money which makes it particularly valuable to use mobile tools 
or credit transfers to happen without bank account that are tailored to individuals and take into account 
requirements(26). This is helpful since family members their contexts. Below are examples of existing mHealth 
in LMICs often do not live near one another and their initiatives for informal and formal caregivers. Since very 
health systems are not fully equipped to support or few examples of mobile strategies for caregivers have 
respond to age-related conditions(5). been applied in the LMIC context, examples are drawn 
from developed countries.
For instrumental task support, mHealth solutions 
that ease the demands, eliminate or reduce the risks, mHEALTH FOR INFORMAL CAREGIVERS
and lower the costs of caregiving can reduce the actual Unfrazzle, United States – an iPhone application that 
toll absorbed by caregivers(20). mHealth solutions and helps users remember, keep track of, and coordinate 
services linked to mobiles can allow older adults to care activities while considering a caregiver’s larger 
maintain their independence not only by delivering spectrum of other life responsibilities(29).
ways to better self-manage daily activities but also by 
offering opportunities for caregivers to help encourage QMedic, United States – a wearable, fashionable, 
healthier behavior in older adults(14). Education and and wireless platform that passively monitors physical 
support programs delivered to mobile technologies activity and sleep in older adults and provides clinical 
have also been identified as ways that can help support support available through a call center accessible 
the instrumental tasks of caregivers. More specifically 24 hours a day, 7 days a week(30). The platform also 
for instrumental task support among formal caregivers, notifies caregivers when individuals have fallen and can 
mHealth allows health care professionals to monitor send real-time alerts to family members in the case of 
blood pressure, blood glucose levels in patients with any abnormal behaviors or emergencies. 
diabetes, heart rates, and other vitals, such as respiratory 
rates, from afar to better manage disease conditions, as mHEALTH FOR FORMAL CAREGIVERS
well as monitor symptoms and how patients perceive Parental Health’s MISTY (Medical Information 
their quality of life(27,28). As specialized care becomes Systems To You) Daily Activities Feature, United 
necessary, mobile technologies allow formal caregivers States – a remote patient monitoring product, MISTY 
to remotely interact and observe higher level issues, has nine features, one of which is designed to allow 
such as drug adherence and treatment compliance and home health agencies and other formal caregivers, 
acute or emergency care referrals. in addition to family members, to monitor the daily 
7  Voice over IP, or Voice over Internet Protocol, are technologies that allow for communication to happen over the Internet
8
activities of the elderly(31). In addition to being able mobile phone content, which was then transformed 
to share with caregivers their activities, such as their into educational and social media delivered on mobile 
meals and moods, the elderly can access clinical phones.
assistance through a video call center.
Due to the diversity of caregivers and the range 
Medication reminder and feedback system, of relationships that exist between caregivers and 
Thailand – a platform that leverages Voice over IP7, recipients, there is no panacea approach on how to apply 
text messaging, and web services. This system sends mHealth to caregiving. However, existing categories 
out reminders and enables feedback interactions for caregiver interventions, described by Sorenson et 
among older adults in Thailand and their health care al. (2002) help identify areas of caregiving that have 
professionals(32). not yet capitalized on the opportunities offered through 
mHealth(21). These interventions can be delivered to 
Procura Clinical Solution at PatientPoint, United individuals, in group settings, and sometimes mixed 
States – a remote monitoring platform that helps individual-group(21,36). In Table 1 below, Sorenson et al.’s 
professional caregivers coordinate workflow and categories are used to frame both existing and potential 
manage adults with complex disease conditions. With mobile strategies for caregiving.
the platform, clinicians are able to update patient files 
and use case management and decision support tools 
to improve the quality of care received by older adults(33).
Electronic Dispenser by Helsinki City Health Care, 
Finland – an electronic medication monitoring system 
that sends a voice call reminder to customers who 
have not taken their medication(34). If the medication 
is not removed from the pill dispenser, even after 
the reminder, an alarm is sent to the individual, and a 
message is sent to a nurse’s mobile phone.
Community 2.0, South Africa – an ICT project in 
South Africa that aims to lower barriers that exist from 
lack of information and poor education to identified 
communities that experience stress(35). The project 
reported success in having caregivers develop their own 
9
APPROACH APPROACH DEFINITION(21) mHEALTH POTENTIAL
“Structured programs geared towards Information and messages delivered to handsets on training, 
providing information about the care education, and support in self care or caregiving (e.g. on 
receiver’s disease process and about geriatrics or specific chronic diseases)(37)
resources and services and training 
caregivers to respond effectively to mHealth strategies that educate caregivers on what actions 
disease-related problems, such as they can participate in to reduce the consequences of late 
memory and behavior problems in diagnosis, medication-related issues, hospital readmissions, 
dementia patients or depression and and institutionalized care
anger in cancer patients. These are mHealth treatment support for caregivers that can inform 
usually delivered through lectures, and support them in making sure older adults take their 
group discussions, and written medications, understand the frequency, and where they can 
materials by a trained leader”(21). obtain medication
“Often led by professionals or peers, Platforms and services that bring together caregivers 
unstructured support groups focused to improve the efficiency of caregiving workflow across 
on building rapport among participants caregiver types
and creating a space in which to 
discuss problems, successes, and Creating social awareness through mobile platforms, such 
feelings related to caregiving. Support as raising awareness within communities about aging, 
groups assist participants in recognizing age-related conditions, and how youth can successfully age 
that others have similar problems, while healthier in terms of physical and mental health
offering space to exchange ideas and Applications or services that provide psychosocial support, 
generate strategies for coping”(21). improve mental health, or emphasize networks(38) or advice 
or support hotlines that can connect caregivers with other 
caregivers
“Provides at-home or site supervision, Mobile applications and wireless options that help manage 
assists with daily living activities, or the daily activities of caregivers and check-in on older adults 
offers skilled nursing care that can from a distance
add flexibility into the schedules of 
caregivers. Often, these interventions Ways to interact with older adults in their homes, as well 
offer ways to engage with the care as health providers and community-based health workers 
recipient from home or stimulating since care is often fragmented, as well as ways to connect to 
(37)
programs toward the client’s needs”(21). additional caregiving resources  
Improving training in medical education for formal caregivers 
to be able to better identify, respond, and treat clients with 
age-related conditions
Monitoring individuals with chronic conditions, which 
can include linked systems for detecting and preventing 
any complications or instances that could have severe 
repercussions. Outside of general activities, the advent of 
body sensors allows vital signs, such as respiratory rates, 
blood pressure, sleep activity, and blood glucose levels, to be 
monitored. 
10
Psycho-educational 
Respite / adult day care Supportive interventions interventions
APPROACH APPROACH DEFINITION(21) mHEALTH POTENTIAL
“Supports a therapeutic relationship Any aggregator that delivers services to older adults at their 
between caregivers and trained homes (to support personal care) with a cognitive-behavioral 
professionals and are often approach
approached with cognitive-behavioral 
approaches to self monitoring, mHealth networks that provide caregivers with preventive 
challenging negative thoughts, helping support or medical assistance as formal linkages to existing 
caregivers develop problem-solving health systems or health care professionals who are able to 
abilities for time management, respond to a potential increase in demand for relevant age-
overload, and emotional reactions; related services
and helping caregivers reengage Electronic medical dispensers that monitor when individuals 
in pleasant activities and positive take or do not take their medications. If an individual hasn’t 
experiences”(21). taken his medication (as detected by the pill container not 
being opened at the correct time), programmed reminders 
can be sent to the individual or informal and formal 
caregivers to help support compliance.
“Memory clinics for older adults mHealth that supports caregivers in encouraging older 
with dementia and activity therapy adults to effectively use and interact with components of 
programs that improve affect and existing health systems
everyday competence”(21).
Mobile components that complement existing care 
services to make visits to memory clinics or activity therapy 
programs more seamless
A combination of the interventions Any aggregator that delivers services to older adults at their 
above homes (to support personal care)
Services that support community-based health workers in 
offering screening or early diagnosis in the community or 
home
Traditional telehealth and telemedicine technologies 
– Center for Technology and Aging describes this as 
technologies that were built for certain purposes with 
expensive and highly specific hardware
 
 
TABLE 1. The table contains caregiver interventions categories as described by Sorenson et al. (2002) that help 
identify areasof caregiving that have not yet capitalized on the opportunities and potential offered through mHealth(21). 
The categories are used to frame the spectrum of existing and potential mHealth strategies for caregiving.
11
Interventions 
Multi-component interventions to improve care receiver Psychotherapy
competence
Turning the discussion and devoting 
fiscal space towards aging will 
require strong political will and 
continued efforts demonstrating 
the urgency of this matter to 
individuals, families, and societies.
CURRENT BARRIERS TO Lack of donor interest Wearing identifiable Need to design the 
ADOPTION Low literacy and  Need to customize and fiscal space for aging Invasion of privacy technology that labels technology for the  numeracy in LMICs mHealth content populations and their 
people as “old” end user
caregivers
THE RESEARCH FOR THIS PAPER HELPED 
IDENTIFY GAPS IN KNOWLEDGE AND An increasing number of mHealth interventions, Some mHealth applications Care recipients do not like A study on mobile technology In LMICs, mobile strategies 
PRACTICE, AS WELL AS BARRIERS TO older people are using mobile in general, need to be allow for wireless carrying items that visibly factors that influence the are not commonly developed 
ADOPTION, FOR APPLYING mHEALTH TO technologies around the world; customized to suit the monitoring of older adults. display that something is adoption and use among for aging, which can be related 
FACILITATE CARE-GIVING. These gaps and however, in certain LMIC contexts, user needs, particularly Consequently, developers wrong(41). For example, older adults concluded that to the current lack of donor 
barriers need to be taken into consideration when low rates of literacy and numeracy taking into account must create mobile carrying assistive the end user and the device interest and fiscal space for 
developing and evolving mHealth solutions in order affect how messages should be language and cultural solutions that give users technologies that draw must match, or as the study aging and for addressing 
to reach mHealth’s full potential towards assisting delivered to end users. Illiteracy is barriers. mHealth control over their own attention, such as items with describes, “a user must be demographic transitions, in 
also a crucial issue, as it is a known solutions must be privacy. If privacy concerns blinking lights or devices capable to handle the physical general. For example, in Africa, 
caregivers. The most predominant barriers identified 
risk factor for developing dementia developed with cultural are not addressed, this that make strange sounds, device as well as to understand health programs in many 
have been listed in the table.
and hinders the use of text sensitivity, and in areas can hinder the rate of can make care recipients and remember how the device countries focus on maternal and 
messaging to prevent or manage where many languages technology adoption. feel uncomfortable(34). If the and the services work”(34). child health and HIV/AIDS, with 
age-related conditions(4,39). Video, are spoken, mHealth Options should be available technology is visible (e.g., However, the variety of much lower investment in aging 
which provides a more personal efforts must be available for caregivers and care in the case of wearable caregivers and their varying populations or chronic diseases. 
experience than text messaging or in (or designed to enable recipients to easily control sensors), care recipients needs makes designing a Turning the discussion and 
Caregivers’ voice calls, may be a better option translation into) relevant the type and amount of appreciate devices that give “one size fits all” solution devoting fiscal space towards 
Needs for improving behavior change, languages to ensure information that is shared a dignified look and feel. complex(34). Feedback from aging will require strong political 
compliance, and satisfaction(3). widespread use and with others. QMedic suggests that users do will and continued efforts 
adoption(40). not want to manage devices – demonstrating the urgency 
they want to put them on and of this matter to individuals, 
Older forget about them(41). families, and societies(42).
Adults’ 
Needs
12
CREDIT: MARC KELLEY
Lack of donor interest 
Wearing identifiable Need to design the 
Low literacy and  Need to customize and fiscal space for aging 
Invasion of privacy technology that labels technology for the  
numeracy in LMICs mHealth content populations and their 
people as “old” end user
caregivers
An increasing number of mHealth interventions, Some mHealth applications Care recipients do not like A study on mobile technology In LMICs, mobile strategies 
older people are using mobile in general, need to be allow for wireless carrying items that visibly factors that influence the are not commonly developed 
technologies around the world; customized to suit the monitoring of older adults. display that something is adoption and use among for aging, which can be related 
however, in certain LMIC contexts, user needs, particularly Consequently, developers wrong(41). For example, older adults concluded that to the current lack of donor 
low rates of literacy and numeracy taking into account must create mobile carrying assistive the end user and the device interest and fiscal space for 
affect how messages should be language and cultural solutions that give users technologies that draw must match, or as the study aging and for addressing 
delivered to end users. Illiteracy is barriers. mHealth control over their own attention, such as items with describes, “a user must be demographic transitions, in 
also a crucial issue, as it is a known solutions must be privacy. If privacy concerns blinking lights or devices capable to handle the physical general. For example, in Africa, 
risk factor for developing dementia developed with cultural are not addressed, this that make strange sounds, device as well as to understand health programs in many 
and hinders the use of text sensitivity, and in areas can hinder the rate of can make care recipients and remember how the device countries focus on maternal and 
messaging to prevent or manage where many languages technology adoption. feel uncomfortable(34). If the and the services work”(34). child health and HIV/AIDS, with 
age-related conditions(4,39). Video, are spoken, mHealth Options should be available technology is visible (e.g., However, the variety of much lower investment in aging 
which provides a more personal efforts must be available for caregivers and care in the case of wearable caregivers and their varying populations or chronic diseases. 
experience than text messaging or in (or designed to enable recipients to easily control sensors), care recipients needs makes designing a Turning the discussion and 
voice calls, may be a better option translation into) relevant the type and amount of appreciate devices that give “one size fits all” solution devoting fiscal space towards 
for improving behavior change, languages to ensure information that is shared a dignified look and feel. complex(34). Feedback from aging will require strong political 
compliance, and satisfaction(3). widespread use and with others. QMedic suggests that users do will and continued efforts 
adoption(40). not want to manage devices – demonstrating the urgency 
they want to put them on and of this matter to individuals, 
forget about them(41). families, and societies(42).
13
The use of mHealth for 
caregivers of older adults is 
at an early stage; however, 
the potential impact of 
mHealth is being considered. 
REALIZING THE mHEALTH Design mHealth caregiving 
POTENTIAL FOR CAREGIVING Work to identify effective Draw insights from solutions for those who Emphasize the importance Adapt already-existing solutions for caregivers of  relevant caregiving need them the most, such of women in their roles as 
caregiving tools for mobile
elderly in LMICs strategies as caregivers of the elderly caregivers
THE USE OF mHEALTH FOR CAREGIVERS OF OLDER with cognitive impairment
ADULTS IS AT AN EARLY STAGE; HOWEVER, THE 
POTENTIAL IMPACT OF mHEALTH IS BEING CONSIDERED. Issues related to caregiving for older Relevant caregiving issues Though the evidence mHealth solutions can be Changing social dynamics 
The following items related to knowledge and practice have been identified adults in some LMICs are discussed in include: preventing health for mHealth solutions better tailored to alleviate the such as declining fertility 
to strategically move the field towards realizing the full mHealth potential research, often in parallel with dialogue problems (e.g., hygienic in caregiving is responsibilities of caregivers rates, later marriage, women 
for caregivers: about how urbanization of populations practices, preventing malaria, small(44), it is possible for individuals with cognitive entering and remaining in the 
reduces the number of available preventing infections); that some findings impairment. For example, work force, as well as changing 
caregivers to care for the older adults managing symptoms (e.g., from assistive many applications have been family structures around the 
living in rural areas. However, these managing weight loss, diarrhea, technology9 (AT) developed for family and formal world will have consequences 
findings rarely can be generalized. controlling pain); treatment and aging could be caregivers of individuals with on caregiving options(13,47). In 
When developing a solution, there and other support related transferred(14,45). AT dementia, but these applications resource-limited settings around 
must be an assessment of local needs to HIV/AIDS (e.g., adhering has been shown to frequently do not correspond the world, women who are 
so efforts can have concrete aims and to antiretroviral treatment, accommodate some with needs(46). One strategy to informal caregivers generally 
objectives. Examples of what should grieving after the loss of a of the needs of older better design solutions for those make tradeoffs in favor of raising 
be assessed include specific dynamics loved one, preparing for death). adults either by itself suffering from dementia, for their own children, which can 
of informal caregivers in LMICs, such For these issues, materials or in combination with example, is to involve individuals affect how much care older 
as the nature and causes of declining have already been developed formal and informal with dementia in the decision adults receive(15). Emphasizing 
family support for older adults(14). to support caregivers in their care. making process. This strategy the importance of women in 
Another component to consider is how responsibilities; however, can also help empower and their roles as caregivers can help 
to design mHealth tools so that they access can be increased if increase the autonomy of care reduce the individual burden that 
capture and communicate aspects of these materials can be adapted recipients and has been shown is taken on by these women.
care needs so formal caregivers can and simplified for mobile to improve quality of life(46).
more readily understand the history of phones in a fashion similar to 
aging individuals and create tailored what has been done for the 
care plans. Integrated Management of 
8  An electronic version of IMCI called e-IMCI was developed for health workers in Tanzania and was found to Childhood Illnesses (IMCI) 
improved adherence to protocols and reduced training time(43). approach for child health.8 
9  Assistive technology is the “use of portable devices, such as canes or wheelchairs, and of home modifica-
tions, such as grab bars or ramps”(14).
14
CREDIT: MARC KELLEY
Design mHealth caregiving 
Work to identify effective Draw insights from solutions for those who Emphasize the importance 
Adapt already-existing 
solutions for caregivers of  relevant caregiving need them the most, such of women in their roles as 15
caregiving tools for mobile
elderly in LMICs strategies as caregivers of the elderly caregivers
with cognitive impairment
Issues related to caregiving for older Relevant caregiving issues Though the evidence mHealth solutions can be Changing social dynamics 
adults in some LMICs are discussed in include: preventing health for mHealth solutions better tailored to alleviate the such as declining fertility 
research, often in parallel with dialogue problems (e.g., hygienic in caregiving is responsibilities of caregivers rates, later marriage, women 
about how urbanization of populations practices, preventing malaria, small(44), it is possible for individuals with cognitive entering and remaining in the 
reduces the number of available preventing infections); that some findings impairment. For example, work force, as well as changing 
caregivers to care for the older adults managing symptoms (e.g., from assistive many applications have been family structures around the 
living in rural areas. However, these managing weight loss, diarrhea, technology9 (AT) developed for family and formal world will have consequences 
findings rarely can be generalized. controlling pain); treatment and aging could be caregivers of individuals with on caregiving options(13,47). In 
When developing a solution, there and other support related transferred(14,45). AT dementia, but these applications resource-limited settings around 
must be an assessment of local needs to HIV/AIDS (e.g., adhering has been shown to frequently do not correspond the world, women who are 
so efforts can have concrete aims and to antiretroviral treatment, accommodate some with needs(46). One strategy to informal caregivers generally 
objectives. Examples of what should grieving after the loss of a of the needs of older better design solutions for those make tradeoffs in favor of raising 
be assessed include specific dynamics loved one, preparing for death). adults either by itself suffering from dementia, for their own children, which can 
of informal caregivers in LMICs, such For these issues, materials or in combination with example, is to involve individuals affect how much care older 
as the nature and causes of declining have already been developed formal and informal with dementia in the decision adults receive(15). Emphasizing 
family support for older adults(14). to support caregivers in their care. making process. This strategy the importance of women in 
Another component to consider is how responsibilities; however, can also help empower and their roles as caregivers can help 
to design mHealth tools so that they access can be increased if increase the autonomy of care reduce the individual burden that 
capture and communicate aspects of these materials can be adapted recipients and has been shown is taken on by these women.
care needs so formal caregivers can and simplified for mobile to improve quality of life(46).
more readily understand the history of phones in a fashion similar to 
aging individuals and create tailored what has been done for the 
care plans. Integrated Management of 
Childhood Illnesses (IMCI) 
approach for child health.8 
15
CREDIT: UN/HERWIG
CALL TO ACTION: Health Care Mobile Phone and Caregivers Developers Organizations Researchers Governments Donors
REALIZING THE mHEALTH Professionals Network Operators
POTENTIAL Voice your Create mobile solutions Help support the Think of Continue developing Support aging legislation Participate in this Be active in needs and the for caregivers that can link of mHealth meaningful and the evidence base and policy as long- growing need by developing 
community’s be seamlessly integrated strategies for contextual ways around mHealth for range planning will be joining in partnerships appropriate fiscal 
THE SOONER APPROPRIATE ACTION IS needs in terms into their daily lives with caregivers to caregivers can be healthy aging, starting critical in order to avoid that support the space for policies 
TAKEN, THE SOONER THE BURDEN OF of caregiving. options to connect to professional assisted in their with existing mHealth or reduce what can aging population. and programs. 
CAREGIVERS CAN BE REDUCED, WHICH further clinical or social health advice, responsibilities. solutions. Find ways to be a heavy economic Develop handsets, Earmark funding for 
CAN ENHANCE THE QUALITY OF LIVES support as needed. formal care Assure that communicate successes, toll. Enhance financial products, and projects that aim to 
AROUND THE WORLD. Thus, a call to action For solutions that send support, and uniform standards shortcomings, and other and insurance systems networks with older improve quality of 
is warranted. All stakeholders involved in this call messages or monitoring health systems. for devices to lessons learned from to provide support for adults in mind. life and access to 
to action must share responsibility in placing more information from care help treat chronic implementation so caregivers in the larger care for older adults, 
practical emphasis on prevention, early diagnosis, and recipients to caregivers, diseases are future efforts can learn context of aging. Invest the ecosystem 
treatment of age-related diseases so that the effects of developers must design adopted (see from experience and in improving quality of life of caregivers that 
these diseases can be less debilitating on older adults with the needs of the Continua Health the field can evolve. and universal access to participate in their 
(i)
and their caregivers. caregiver in mind and Alliance ). Eventually, research will care services that address lives, and individuals 
make sure that solutions Implement cost- need to address the chronic diseases affecting with chronic 
allow end users to effective home- costs of implementation the older segments of the conditions.
Partnerships between stakeholders should focus on receive useful signals, and community- and whether mHealth population. Develop or 
enabling factors, such as value, usability, affordability, instead of a constant based mHealth solutions improve amend existing policies 
accessibility, and technical support(48). Identifying stream of information strategies of care. efficiencies and health to remove barriers that 
partners and collaborating with them to contextualize where distinguishing outcomes, which will help prevent integration of 
data that can feedback into the design of mobile what is important and investment and policy mHealth solutions into the 
solutions will be paramount in creating better solutions. what is less important decisions. mainstream healthcare 
can become difficult or delivery system.
not useful.
10 Continua Health Alliance connects over 200 companies around the world to 
establish interoperable health solutions.
16
Partnerships between stakeholders 
should focus on enabling factors, 
such as value, usability, affordability, 
accessibility, and technical support.
Health Care Mobile Phone and 
Caregivers Developers Organizations Researchers Governments Donors
Professionals Network Operators
Voice your Create mobile solutions Help support the Think of Continue developing Support aging legislation Participate in this Be active in 
needs and the for caregivers that can link of mHealth meaningful and the evidence base and policy as long- growing need by developing 
community’s be seamlessly integrated strategies for contextual ways around mHealth for range planning will be joining in partnerships appropriate fiscal 
needs in terms into their daily lives with caregivers to caregivers can be healthy aging, starting critical in order to avoid that support the space for policies 
of caregiving. options to connect to professional assisted in their with existing mHealth or reduce what can aging population. and programs. 
further clinical or social health advice, responsibilities. solutions. Find ways to be a heavy economic Develop handsets, Earmark funding for 
support as needed. formal care Assure that communicate successes, toll. Enhance financial products, and projects that aim to 
For solutions that send support, and uniform standards shortcomings, and other and insurance systems networks with older improve quality of 
messages or monitoring health systems. for devices to lessons learned from to provide support for adults in mind. life and access to 
information from care help treat chronic implementation so caregivers in the larger care for older adults, 
recipients to caregivers, diseases are future efforts can learn context of aging. Invest the ecosystem 
developers must design adopted (see from experience and in improving quality of life of caregivers that 
with the needs of the Continua Health the field can evolve. and universal access to participate in their 
caregiver in mind and Alliance(i)). Eventually, research will care services that address lives, and individuals 
make sure that solutions Implement cost- need to address the chronic diseases affecting with chronic 
allow end users to effective home- costs of implementation the older segments of the conditions.
receive useful signals, and community- and whether mHealth population. Develop or 
instead of a constant based mHealth solutions improve amend existing policies 
stream of information strategies of care. efficiencies and health to remove barriers that 
where distinguishing outcomes, which will help prevent integration of 
what is important and investment and policy mHealth solutions into the 
what is less important decisions. mainstream healthcare 
can become difficult or delivery system.
not useful.
17
CONCLUSION
This paper has defined the variety of caregivers for the rapidly growing older global population and has 
detailed the role mobile technologies currently play and could potentially play to support the various 
types of these caregivers in LMICs, while also being mindful of anecdotal mHealth examples from 
HICs. For the informal and formal caregivers taking care of the aging population around the world, 
mHealth solutions can be developed to fill social, functional, and instrumental task needs(3). However, 
for mobile and wireless technologies to truly make a positive impact, the solutions must meet the 
needs of the people who use it. Both formal and informal caregivers for older adults have many 
needs, and there is a place for mHealth to alleviate some of the burden of their responsibilities. A 
strategic effort for leveraging mHealth to reach its full potential requires action from a range of actors 
across many sectors. Caregivers, developers, health care professionals, organizations, researchers, 
governments, mobile phone and network operators, and donors are called to action, and through this 
action mHealth can have a large and positive impact on caregiving for the world’s aging population.
18
REFERENCES
1. Kwan A. Using mobile technologies for healthier aging: 10. International Communications Union (ITU). ICT Facts and 
mHealth Alliance and Pfizer; 2012. Figures: The World in 2013: International Communications 
Union (ITU); 2013.
2. National Institute on Aging National Institutes of Health 
U.S. Department of Health and Human Services, World 11. International Communications Union (ITU). ITU releases 
Health Organization. Global Health and Aging; 2011. latest global technology development figures. 2013 [cited 
July 12, 2013]; Available from: 
3. Donnelly M, Nugent C, McClean S, Scotney B, Mason https://http://www.itu.int/net/pressoffice/press_releases 
S, Passmore P, et al. A Mobile Multimedia Technology to /2013/05.aspx
Aid Those with Alzheimer’s Disease. Mobile and Ubiquitous 
Multimedia. 2010: 42-51. 12. Coalition to Transform Advanced Care. Call to Action: 
Transforming Advanced Illness Care; 2012.
4. Noroozian M. The elderly population in Iran: An ever 
growing concern in the health system. Iran J Psychiatry 13. Brody EM. “Women in the middle” and family help to 
Behav Sci. 2012; 6(2): 1-6. older people. The Gerontologist. 1981; 21(5): 471.
5. United Nations Population Fund, HelpAge International. 14. Agree EM, Glaser K. Demography of Informal Caregiving. 
Ageing in the Twenty-First Century: A Celebration and A International handbook of population aging. Netherlands: 
Challenge. New York and London: UNFPA and HelpAge Springer; 2009. p. 647-68.
International; 2012.
15. Aboderin I. Decline in Material Family Support for Older 
6. Arno PS, Levine C, Memmott MM. The economic value People in Urban Ghana, Africa: Understanding Processes and 
of informal caregiving. Health Affairs. 1999; 18(2): 182-8. Causes of Change. Journal of Gerontology. 2004; 59B(3): 
S128-S37.
7. Yach D, Hawkes C, Gould L, Hofman KJ. The global 
burden of chronic diseases: Overcoming impediments to 16. Agarwal S, Tong Lau C. Remote health monitoring 
prevention and control. Special Communication. 2004; using mobile phones and web services. Telemedicine and 
291(21): 2616-22. e-Health. 2010; 16(5): 603-7.
8. Population Division of the Department of Economic 17. Hermanns M, Mastel-Smith B. Caregiving: A qualitative 
and Social Affairs of the United Nations Secretariat. World concept analysis. The Qualitative Report. 2012; 17(75): 1-18.
Population Prospects: The 2010 Revision; 2010.
18. Parkash J, Younis MZ, Ward W. Healthcare for the 
9. Gresh A, Maharaj P. Policy and Programme Responses. Ageing Populations of Countries of Middle East and North 
In: Maharaj P, editor. Aging and Health in Africa, International Africa. Ageing Int. 2012.
Perspectives on Aging. New York: Springer Science Business 
Media; 2013. 19. HelpAge International. Aid failing older people. Ageing & 
Development. 2012; (31): 1-6.
19
REFERENCES (continued)
20. Clark NM, Rakowski W. Family Caregivers of Older 29. Unfrazzle. Unfrazzle: The Caregiver’s Assistant. 2013 
Adults: Improving Helping Skills. The Gerontologist. 1983; [cited 07/10/2013]; Available from: 
23(6): 637. http://www.unfrazzledcare.com
21. Sorenson S, Pinquart M, Duberstein P. How effective 30. QMedic. QMedic keeps your loved one connected, 
are interventions with caregivers? An updated meta-analysis. healthy, and safe in the home. 2013 [cited 07/10/2013]; 
The Gerontologist. 2002; 42(3): 356-72. Available from: http://www.qmedichealth.com
22. CareGiving. The Caregiving Years: An Introduction. 2013 31. Parental Health. MISTY Product Overview. 2013 [cited 
[cited July 25, 2013]; Available from: July 25, 2013]; Available from: 
http://www.caregiving.com/the-caregiving-years/ http://www.parentalhealth.com/MISTY-Product-Overview
23. Ghosh A, Ratan S, Lindeman D, Steinmetz V. THE 32. Ronglong S, Sookplang C, Arpnikanondt C, Vanijja V. 
NEW ERA OF CONNECTED AGING: A Framework for Design of a Medication Reminder and Feedback System 
Understanding Technologies that Support Older Adults in for Thai Elders. International Conference on Computer & 
Aging in Place: Center for Technology and Aging; 2013. Information Science (ICCIS); 2012; 2012. p. 44-9.
24. EveryChild, HelpAge International. Family first: 33. Procura Solutions. US Clinical Solution. 2013 [cited July 
Prioritising support to kinship carers, especially older carers. 24, 2013]; Available from:
London: EveryChild and HelpAge International; 2012. http://goprocura.com/solutions/us/us-clinical-solution
25. Pearlin LI, Mullan JT, Semple SJ, Skaff MM. Caregiving 34. Mallenius S, Rossi M, Tuunainen VK. Factors affecting 
and the Stress Process: An Overview of Concepts and Their the adoption and use of mobile devices and services by 
Measures. The Gerontologist. 1990; 30(5): 583-94. elderly people – results from a pilot study. 6th Annual Global 
Mobility Roundtable; 2007; 2007.
26. Comninos A, Esselaar S, Ndiwalana A, Stork C. Towards 
evidence-based ICT policy and regulation: M-banking the 35. de la Harpe R, van Zyl I. Community 2.0: a collaborative 
Unbanked: IDRC CRDI and Acacia; 2008. university-community network to inform and educate 
caregivers in home-based healthcare in South Africa. In: 
27. Wang CS. Mobile and wireless technologies applying on IEEE, editor. Pervasive Computing and Applications (ICPCA) 
sphygmonameter and pulsimeter for patients with pacemaker 6th International Conference; 2011; 2011. p. 57-66.
implementation and other cardiovascular complications. J 
Biomedical Science and Engineering. 2010; 3: 47-51. 36. Knight BG, Lutzky SM, Macofsky-Urban F. A 
metanalytic review of interventions for caregiver distress: 
28. Blake H. Mobile phone technology in chronic disease Recommendations for future research. The Gerontologist. 
management. Nursing Standard. 2008; 23(12): 43-6. 1993; 33: 240-8.
20
37. Fernandes R, Osarch S, Bell CL, Flynn BW, Nguyen 46. Span M, Spits C, Groen-van de Ven L, Jukema J, Hettinga 
LV, Abad MJ, et al. Aging and Caregiving in the Republic of M, Cremers A, et al. Developing eHealth Technology for 
Palau. J Cross Cult Gerontol. 2013. People With Dementia: Towards a Supportive Decision Tool 
Facilitating Shared Decision-Making in Dementia. In: IARIA, 
38. Dias A, Dewey ME, D’Souza J, Dhume R, Motghare DD, editor. eTELEMED 2013: The Fifth International Conference 
Shaji KS, et al. The Effectiveness of a Home Care Program on eHealth, Telemedicine, and Social Medicine; 2013; 2013.
for Supporting Caregivers of Persons with Dementia in 
Developing Countries: A Randomised Controlled Trial from 47. HelpAge International. Ageing in Africa. 2012.
Goa, India. PLOS ONE. 2008; 3(6): e2333.
48. Lee YS. Older adults’ user experiences with mobile 
39. Kalaria RN, Maestre GE, Arizaga R, Friedland RP, Galasko phones: Identification of user clusters and user requirements. 
D, Hall K, et al. Alzheimer’s disease and vascular dementia Blacksburg, Virgina: Virginia Polytechnic Institute and State 
in developing countries: prevalence, management, and risk University; 2007.
factors. The Lancet Neurology. 2008; 7(9): 812-26.
49. Comfort Keepers. The six stages of a caregiver’s journey. 
40. iHeed Institute. Preparing the next generation of 2013 [cited July 24, 2013]; Available from:
community health workers: The power of technology for http://comfortkeepers.com/information-center/news-and-
training. Cork, Ireland: iheed institute; 2012. highlights/six-stages-caregivers-journey
41. Mishra S. Interview on QMedic. 2013.
42. Aboderin I, Beard J. Ageing and health in sub-Saharan 
Africa. 2013.
43. Modi. Mobile Health Technology in Developing 
Countries: The Case of Tanzania. Pepperdine Policy Review. 
2013; 6(5).
44. Blaschke CM, Freddolin PP, Mullen EE. Ageing and 
Technology: A Review of Research Literature. British Journal 
of Social WOrk. 2009; 39: 641-56.
45. McCreadie C, Tinker A. The acceptability of assistive 
technology to older people. Ageing and Society. 2005; 25(1): 
91-110.
21
APPENDIX A: Stages of an informal caregiver’s journey(22,49).
STAGE 1
The Expectant Caregiver - When a caregiver expects to help an aging relative and may have time to 
prepare for the upcoming caregiver responsibilities. The caregiver can set up care processes or speak with 
necessary health care professionals
STAGE 2
The Freshman Caregiver – When a caregiver takes on the initial caregiving responsibilities, such as 
instrumental tasks, to help an aging relative
STAGE 3 
The Entrenched Caregiver – When a caregiver has already adjusted to caregiving responsibilities and may 
feel mentally and physically exhausted
STAGE 4 
The Pragmatic Caregiver – When a caregiver continues with caregiving responsibilities but begins to insert 
effective strategies that relieves the caregiving burden
STAGE 5 
The Transitioning Caregiver – When the role of the caregiver is nearing an end because he or she can no 
longer provide the necessary care or because the care recipient’s time is coming to an end
STAGE 6
The Godspeed Caregiver – When an individual is no longer a caregiver, but can become a caregiving 
advocate from his or her experience
22
APPENDIX B: Caregiver tasks as detailed by  
Clark and Rakowski (1983)(20).
CAREGIVER TASKS
Tasks associated with the caregiver role as a provider of direct assistance
1. Be available when (or if) needed. 8. “Run interference” for care-receiver in social and   
2. Supervise prescribed treatment and general    community settings.
 recommendations. 9. “Normalize” care-receiver’s routine, within bounds of the  
3. Evaluate options for treatment and/or services.  impairment(s).
4. Monitor course of the condition and evaluate   10. Supervise/directly manage care-receiver’s resources.
 significance of changes. 11. Cope with upsetting behavior of the care-receiver.
5. Evaluate strengths/resources of the care-receiver. 12. Maintain adequate communication with the care-receiver.
6. Anticipate needs for future assistance and services. 13. Perform basic ADL for the care-receiver.
7. Provide structure for care-receiver’s daily activities. 14. Satisfy need for creativity/originality to offset tedious routines.
Personal tasks faced by family caregivers
1. Compensate for emotional drain from constant responsibility. 11. Work through changes in the lifelong relationship   
2. Compensate for or recover personal time.  between caregiver and care-receiver.
3. Gain knowledge about the disease/condition. 12. Find a locus of blame for the condition/disease.
4. Avoid severe drain on physical strength/health. 13. Assume financial costs (actual and potential).
5. Resolve guilt over “negative feelings” toward care-receiver. 14. Confront the possibility of institutionalization.
6. Resolve disappointment or feelings of guilt over one’s  15. Compensate for or avoid loss/reduction of physical and  
 performance.  emotional intimacy.
7. Make up for or avoid loss/restrictions on future plans and  16. Separate feelings regarding condition from feelings  
 perspective.  toward the care-receiver.
8. Readjust personal routines. 17. Resolve uncertainty about one’s skills as a caregiver.
9. Compensate for disruption of sleep. 18. Release tensions/feelings toward the care-receiver.
10. Emotionally accept the likelihood of a progressive   19. Adjust to/cope with an uncertain future.
 downward course.
Familial and societal tasks of the caregiver role
FAMILIAL 7. Give appropriate consideration to care-receiver’s opinions  
1. Designate other “responsible caregiver(s)”.  and preferences.
2. Maintain family communication and exchange of   8. Consider as a family the need for institutionalization.
 information.
3. Balance the giving of assistance with responsibilities to  SOCIETAL
 other family members. 1. Interact with medical, health, and social service professionals.
4. Cope with the loss/restriction of family future planning. 2. Maintain knowledge of the service system and options.
5. Manage feelings toward other family members who do  3. Act as advocate or third-party negotiator for the care-receiver.
 not regularly help. 4. Maintain knowledge of reimbursement mechanisms.
6. Maintain the family as effective decision-making group  
 over a long period of time.
23

