27 Top Five Reads and Resources: mPowering Frontline Health
Mar Workers
Each month, mPowering partners compile our top five recent articles, videos, and resources related to
mHealth, global health, and technology for development. This month, Carolyn Moore, Program Officer with
mPowering Frontline Health Workers, shares her top five reads and resources: Online Book: Taking Stock:
Why U.S. Investments in Global Health… [more]
23 Training Health Workers for Ebola Response and Community
Mar Support
A team of organizations, led by mPowering Frontline Health Workers andIntraHealth International, are
coming together to share tools and information on how to support health workers responding to and
rebuilding from the Ebola crisis. Please join us in a three-part webinar series beginning April 1 Health
workers in West Africa have… [more]
02 Human-Centered Design in Practice
Mar
Human centered design, or design with the user, is the first of the nine Principles for Digital
Development.  Designing with the user involves just that- engaging the people you hope will use the solution,
and bringing their ideas to life in technology that meets their needs. On February 10, mPowering… [more]
02 Top Five Reads and Resources: Frontline Health Workers
Mar Coalition
Each month, mPowering partners compile our top five articles, videos, and resources related to mHealth,
global health, and technology for development. This month, Deepanjali Jain, Global Health Corps Policy
Fellow, IntraHealth International, shares her top five recommended resources: Cost of Scaling Up the Health
Workforce in Liberia, Sierra Leone, and… [more]
28 January Top Reads and Resources
Feb
Each month, mPowering partners will compile our ‘top five’ articles, videos, and resources related
to mHealth, global health, and technology for development. This month, Clodagh McLoughlin, Global Health
Research Officer at iheed, shares her top reads: Is the desire for Innovation substituting the need for
Evidence? The second GETHealth Summit… [more]
1 2 Next »
Latest
Posts
27 Top Five Reads and Resources: mPowering Frontline Health Workers
Mar
23 Training Health Workers for Ebola Response and Community Support
Mar
02 Human-Centered Design in Practice
Mar
02 Top Five Reads and Resources: Frontline Health Workers Coalition
Mar
28 January Top Reads and Resources
Feb
16 Connecting health workers to information and tools – what does it take?
Jan
© Copyright 2019 mPowering Frontline Health Workers. All rights reserved.11
