surveys
records
Emergency
outbreaks
Innovative Treatment
Remote
reminders systemsAwareness
disease mobilization centersinformation
raising Communication support
compliance
Calltelephone Decision
Doctor
health Health logistic monitoring
time
issues Diagnostic Real
Appointment SurveillanceMobile
PushingEmergencies Patientconsultation Community
the Frontier:
THE ROLE OF mHEALTH IN THE 
FIGHT AGAINST TUBERCULOSIS
care
line
mapping
help
telemedicine
Tuberculosis (TB) is curable and can be treated with drugs that cost 
as little as 25 Dollars. However, some three million people every year fail to 
access quality diagnosis and treatment. This in turn can cause the development 
of drug resistance and fuels further infection among family members, work 
colleagues, and members of the community. The TB epidemic still kills 
more people every year – almost a million and a half – than traffic accidents 
worldwide.
To bring about a step change in the fight against 
TB, we need new tools and simple, affordable Mobile health, or mHealth, is a 
innovations to better detect people suffering from component of eHealth. The WHO’s 
it. We also have to make health services avail- Global Observatory for eHealth 
(GOe) defines mHealth or mobile 
able to the people most vulnerable to contracting 
health as medical and public health 
it. We believe that mobile phones can bring about practice supported by mobile devices, 
such positive change. This paper showcases the such as mobile phones, patient 
potential of mobile technologies for TB, monitoring devices, personal digital 
assistants (PDAs), and other wire-
explores some outstanding applications, and less devices.
seeks to catalyze the conversation about mobile 
health (mHealth) within the TB community.
“The spread of mobile technology enables communities 
to voice their own needs and become change agents in 
creating a healthier and more sustainable future.”
Ted Turner, Businessman, Philanthropist, and Chairman  
UN Foundation (host of the mHealth Alliance)
2
THE OPPORTUNITY: 
MHEALTH AND TB
These days it can often appear as if ‘everyone’ is going mobile. However the potential of mHealth 
for TB remains relatively underexplored. To change this, we would like to highlight a few mobile solu-
tions from the field, which represent low cost, easily implementable tools for tackling key issues that 
remain barriers in overcoming TB. In the five key areas below, we see mHealth already starting to 
have an impact on TB care and control.
Some of these highlighted mHealth 
applications rely on basic GSM ser-
vices, the world’s most dominant 
1. mobile phone standard. These GSM 
Treatment Adherence services are a standard collection of 
applications and features available 
to mobile phone subscribers all over 
the world, such as calls and (SMS) 
5. 2. 
Health Awareness & Monitoring TB Diagnosis text services.
Information Dissemination & Treatment
However, technology spreads quickly 
and widely, and an increasing num-
ber of mHealth projects necessitate 
additional functionality and access to 
the Internet. While a “feature” phone 
4. 3. offers some limited additional func-
Disease Surveillance Mobile Diagnosis tions over and above calls and text, 
a smartphone is built on a mobile 
computing platform and offers more 
advanced functionality and ability to 
run complex applications. 
1. TREATMENT ADHERENCE
Taking TB medicines every day for at least six months can be annoying for patients and a 
challenge for health workers. Interrupted treatment on the other hand triggers drug resistance and 
prolonged illness. Mobile phones can provide a cheap and simple way to encourage patients to 
take their medication. A variety of projects already show that text (SMS) messages, or other reminders 
like automatic call-backs on your personal phone, can be used in a wide array of methods to 
communicate with patients, who are otherwise required to visit a TB clinic or to be monitored by a 
visiting health worker.
Combining reminders with incentives, which can be sent as phone credits or as cash via mobile 
banking, offers new opportunities to support people with TB to complete their treatment and to play 
an active role in their own health. The additional functionality of smartphones, such as touch screens 
with icon’s guided menu options, or small supportive applications, or “apps”, can enable even illiterate 
people to utilise mobile phone based treatment support. 
3
EXAMPLE: A team at the Indus Hospital in Pakistan was supported by a TB REACH grant 
from the Stop TB Partnership to use an integrated real time mobile phone enabled database. This 
catalyzed a novel TB treatment compliance and case holding scheme that worked by sending a 
monetary reward as incentive to the patient’s or doctor’s personal mobile phone. The “X–out–TB” 
technology is one element in this project. It uses strips, which reveal a code when exposed to the 
urine of patients who have taken TB medication. When texting these codes back to the hospital, 
patients are rewarded via a mobile money model in which cash can be collected or forwarded to 
other phone customers anywhere in the country. Another incentive scheme pays out to doctors that 
identify additional cases and support treatment adherence from TB patients throughout the neces-
sary treatment cycle. This innovative scheme that leverages the expertise and technologies of each 
of its partners has led to a four-fold increase in case detection in the catchment area and pushed 
treatment adherence to over 90 percent – all of this at lower cost per case than the existing public 
health solution.
 
2. MONITORING TB DIAGNOSIS  
 AND TREATMENT
High-burden TB areas often face limited human and technical 
resources. Paper-based systems are still common to monitor 
TB diagnosis and treatment, making the administrative system 
slow and labour-intensive. It also limits the ability of health 
workers to analyse the copious amounts of data generated. To 
address this, mHealth components have been developed that 
streamline the collection and monitoring of patient information 
using mobile phones. There are additional benefits: mobile-
based data collection software has early warning systems 
that can now be activated to indicate faulty or missing entries. 
Projects exist that integrate Global Positioning System (GPS) CLOSING THE 
enabled phones to monitor the location of where field workers INFORMATION DIVIDE:
enter patient data, ensuring that fraudulent data are not being A decade ago a major concern among 
entered from the field workers’ homes. Other projects have international development policymak-
sought ways to streamline the reporting system in laboratories ers was the information divide; it was 
said that the African continent had fewer 
– connecting lab technicians, lab directors, physicians, field 
telephone connections than the island of 
workers and, ultimately, patients – via text (SMS) and mobile 
Manhattan. Now there are an estimated 
or web interfaces. 430 million mobile phone subscriptions 
across Africa;this means around one for 
EXAMPLE: Health workers’ malaria case-management every two people living on the continent.
practices often differ from national guidelines, threatening the 
outcomes of public health programs. In Kenya, one program 
assessed whether text-message reminders sent to health workers’ mobile phones could improve 
and maintain their adherence to treatment guidelines for outpatient paediatric malaria. The trial 
showed that correct management of fixed-dose combination therapy improved by almost 24 per 
cent immediately after intervention, and these results kept up even six months later. As this case 
demonstrates – in resource-limited settings, public health programmes should consider use of 
text messaging to improve health workers’ case-management practices.
4
3. MOBILE DIAGNOSIS
Applications and accessory attachments can turn mobile phones into medical devices. This 
additional functionality of phones now makes diagnosis accessible in more geographic areas and 
outside health centres with laboratories. Such innovations are exciting developments for TB, where 
active case finding in vulnerable groups is necessary to stem the epidemic. This approach thrives in 
public-private partnerships, especially for the development or the roll out of such new tools. 
EXAMPLE: In Vietnam, the Stop TB Partnership’s TB 
REACH program supports CellScope, a project that mobilizes 
health workers at communal health posts to take pictures of 
sputum smear slides using camera-enabled phones. Images 
are sent to diagnostic hubs where they are analysed and 
results are sent back to the community health worker with 
minimal delay. This helps community health workers deliver 
their diagnosis while with the patient. As a result, someone 
living in a rural or remote area does not have to travel long 
distances to have her or his tests analysed and can instead 
receive diagnostic services in their hometown. Simple mobile 
phones that merely enable large file data transfer through 
data compression are also already used to relay digital x-ray 
pictures, taken from mobile containerized units that screen 
populations for TB, to central radiology hubs. This enables 
quick analysis of results without the need of specialists on site. 
MOBILE WORLD TODAY: Another example is a low-cost stethoscope, made of an 
Mobile phone networks cover 90% of eggcup that can be attached to mobile phones, which enables 
the world’s population, with 75% of patients to monitor their heart. This is used for patients with 
mobile subscriptions held by nearly a particular form of TB (tuberculous pericarditis) that leads to 
80% of the population in low- and cardiac arrest. The onset of symptoms of this form of TB is 
middle-income countries. insidious and can be detected through heart monitoring. The 
 use of this mobile technology enables people to have their 
In a world of 7 billion people, there heart monitored remotely by specialists who can pick up early 
are already 6 billion mobile phone signs of deterioration.
subscriptions held. In India, far more 
people have access to a cell phone  
than to a toilet. 4. DISEASE SURVEILLANCE
It is estimated that one third of all TB cases go undetected, 
resulting in over three million people each year who are not 
accessing the diagnosis and treatment they require to be cured. Therefore, disease surveillance 
efforts are a vital component of national TB programs. With the use of mobile phones, electronic 
data capture can potentially make it easier for health care personnel to collect and manage large 
volumes of data and shortens the time needed for analysis. This process streamlines the reporting of 
patient data to their respective national TB programmes. In addition, GPS allows real-time mapping 
of disease outbreaks to accelerate the response time among governments and health workers alike.
5
EXAMPLE: Alerta DISAMAR is a national disease monitoring system in Peru that allows users to 
transmit or access data through multiple technologies, including mobiles, to increase the reach of its 
disease surveillance activities and to dramatically reduce the time for remote notifications to reach 
the central level. Health care workers in the field can enter information into this system with numeric 
codes through dial tones and voice messages. The information is immediately transmitted to a central 
system where it is processed and stored and then alerts are sent via short message service to 
mobile phones or by email to personnel who can act immediately on potential outbreaks. Authorized 
users can access information through a web interface. The system, which has led to early outbreak 
identification and response, timely case management, and increased review of clinical procedures 
within reporting units, represents a fully functional, sustainable and cost-effective solution for real-
time disease surveillance. The system has also been deployed in Ecuador, Colombia and Paraguay.
Several examples that include or specifically address TB surveillance through mobiles are also being 
piloted e.g. in Cameroon (improving Laboratory Data Management for drug resistant patient TB 
diagnosed in EXPAND – TB projects) and Pakistan (based on an open Medical Record System for 
multidrug resistant TB cases and alongside projects for childhood pneumonia and rabies surveillance). 
 
5. HEALTH AWARENESS & 
 INFORMATION DISSEMINATION
Mobile phones make ideal tools for the wide dissemination of 
information relating to TB prevention, diagnosis, and control. In 
some health fields, such as HIV/AIDS and maternal and new-
born health, mobile phones are already commonly used. There 
are also many ways to inform communities and people-at-risk 
about TB, and to send health messages about when to seek 
care. In addition, reducing the stigma associated with the dis-
ease by way of information might increase the willingness of 
people to see a counsellor or accept treatment. 
EXAMPLE: The Mobile Alliance for Maternal Action (MAMA) 
is providing culturally sensitive and adaptable health information 
messages to expectant mothers via mobile phone. They 
piloted this scheme in three countries where mobile phones are 
widely used and maternal and infant mortality is high, including 
Bangladesh, India, and South Africa. MAMA is partnering with 
local governments, mobile operators and non-government THE ADVANCE OF MOBILE:
organizations in these countries to ensure that its efforts can Mobile phones provide migrant and rural 
be expanded or replicated to reach the most mothers possible. populations with access to information 
The program is also enhancing the capability of globally operating and communication opportunities that 
agencies that create and develop mobile health information would otherwise be nearly impossible.
programs for moms by documenting lessons learned and 
sharing information and adaptable message libraries. There are 
many parallels that can be applied to TB, including the development and open access to a library of 
proactive health messages to deliver via mobile phones and the goal of building a replicable programme.
6
THE ROAD AHEAD
We have presented encouraging initiatives. However, mHealth is approaching a tipping point, and 
additional momentum is needed to transition to the next stage. There have been hundreds of proj-
ects piloted with a relatively limited reach, but the continued challenge is implementing effective 
approaches and applications to reach national scale. At this point, we would like to take a moment 
to highlight common lessons learned in this field.
In many of the existing projects, the evidence base that would enable decision-making and 
prioritization for further investment needs to be strengthened and expanded. For these projects to 
continue or advance to scale, it will be critical to know what works and what does not. Building this 
evidence base and thus the business case for mHealth will also be a key ingredient to maximize 
return on investment for early-stage initiatives and to inform funding decisions to scale up ideas that 
work. Rigorous monitoring and evaluation is needed to do this and to identify the key aspects neces-
sary for the success of a project. This is where partners and 
current funders can help, guide, and drive toward advance-
ments in the mHealth field.
Today we see that partnerships have moved beyond a purely
philanthropic approach to wide-ranging alliances of compe-
tence and interest. It has proven important to be inclusive 
while building these partnerships, and to account for all areas 
in which a partner may add value. There are many stakeholders 
in the mHealth ecosystem, from mobile network operators 
and pharmaceutical companies to governmental health 
ministries and healthcare providers. Each of them is able to 
provide greater benefit by working together instead of alone. 
Another observation is that mHealth tools are not always 
“We have more pilots in mHealth clearly linked to health systems’ needs and priorities, 
than there are in the US Air Force or especially when technical developers design projects with-
Indian Air Force.” out closely partnering with national programs and with those 
who will eventually use the system. In order to scale many 
Prof. K. Ganapathy, President Apollo  mHealth pilots, they must be integrated into the national plans 
Telemedicine Networking Foundation and budgets that are eventually funded by governments and 
their external donors.
The availability of technology, the policy environment, and literacy in health and technology vary 
widely across countries; an adaptation of technology to country realities is therefore vital. For 
example, if the challenge is illiteracy, incorporate audio messages; if the challenge is lack of uptake, 
use incentives; if the challenge is lack of capacity to use mobile devices, invest in training. Solutions 
that target the needs of the community and make the technology as simple as possible for the users 
have the best results. 
7
 
The Stop TB Partnership is a unique international body with the power to align actors all over the 
world in the fight against TB. Together our nearly 1000 partners are a collective force that is trans-
forming the fight against TB in more than 100 countries.  The mission of the Partnership Secretariat, 
hosted by the World Health Organization in Geneva, is to serve every person who is vulnerable to TB 
and ensure that high-quality treatment is available to all who need it. As demonstrated in this document, 
mHealth solutions are proving to be a vital tool to achieve this. 
Innovations will move forward only if knowledge and experi-
ence from the various actors engaged in mHealth for TB are 
gathered and disseminated. The Partnership is joining forces 
with the mHealth Alliance as a first step. The next step will 
be to co-ordinate projects and exchange experiences with 
implementers from other health areas that have experience in 
mHealth. We also need to link TB projects and those being 
conducted in the wider mHealth community by involving TB 
implementers in working groups and networks, so that experi-
ence flows both ways. 
Through one of its initiatives, TB REACH, the Partnership 
funds projects that use cost-effective, innovative and ground-
breaking approaches and activities to reach people who 
otherwise would not receive TB care. Some of the grantees 
have used mHealth tools and are featured in this report. These 
projects have already resulted in increasing the number of mHEALTH FOR PATIENTS
people receiving TB services at relatively low cost. These first mHealth can enable patients to receive 
successes are a good starting point to raise funds for addi- health information; access their health 
tional projects employing mHealth tools. records; participate in remote, real-time 
monitoring; and take greater responsibility 
For more information, visit for their own health.
http://www.stoptb.org and 
http://www.stoptb.org/global/awards/tbreach/
“As a technologist and an entrepreneur, I can 
attest to the potential of technology to transform 
communities and, indeed, entire societies.”
Professor Muhammad Yunus, Founder, Grameen Bank, 
Nobel Peace Prize Laureate 2006
8
 
 
The mHealth Alliance champions the use of mobile technologies to improve health throughout the 
world. Working with diverse partners to integrate mHealth into multiple sectors, the Alliance serves 
as a convener for the mHealth community to overcome common challenges by sharing tools, knowl-
edge, experience, and lessons learned. The mHealth Alliance 
advocates for more and better quality research and evaluation 
to build the evidence base;  seeks to build capacity among 
health and industry decision-makers, managers, and practi-
tioners; promotes sustainable business models; and supports 
systems integration by advocating for standardization and 
interoperability of mHealth platforms. The mHealth Alliance 
also hosts HUB (Health Unbound), a global online community 
for resource sharing and collaborative solution generation.
The mHealth Alliance is hosted by the United Nations Foun-
dation, and founded by the Rockefeller Foundation, Vodafone 
Foundation, and UN Foundation. The Alliance now also in-
cludes HP, the GSM Association, and Norad among its found-
ing partners.
For more information, visit 
MOBILE TECHNOLOGY http://www.mhealthalliance.org and 
BEYOND HEALTH: http://www.healthunbound.org/.
The use of mobiles for health can be 
integrated with other mobile services. 
The use of mobile money can serve 
as a means of providing incentives or 
managing health insurance payments/
reimbursements. The utility of a mobile 
phone’s Global Positioning System 
enables pinpointing new cases and 
enables surveillance though mapping 
the location and spread of new cases.
9
JOIN THE CONVERSATION 
Powered by the mHealth Alliance, Health Unbound (HUB) is the interactive network and online 
knowledge resource center for the mHealth community. One of the challenges in advancing mHealth 
is that many of the projects being implemented are isolated from one another, and are unable 
to share information and best practices. HUB overcomes this 
obstacle by enabling the mHealth community to exchange 
ideas, share projects and outcomes, and build connections 
among the dynamic mHealth community. The Stop TB Partner-
ship works with the mHealth Alliance to enable the exchange 
of experiences in mHealth from the TB community and its own 
partners. 
Through HUB, the mHealth Alliance brings together individuals 
from all disciplines of the mHealth community, from developers 
to doctors, to generate collective solutions and inspire new 
innovations that will transform health with technology. HUB 
is also where the mHealth Alliance offers a comprehensive 
database of mHealth technologies, programs, organizations 
and policies to promote collaboration of efforts and best prac-
tices from lessons learned.
mHEALTH FOR PUBLIC HEALTH:
Currently, there are already dozens of programs, organiza- Through mHealth, health services can be 
tions, and technologies related to TB in HUB’s database. If you delivered more effectively and efficiently  
have an example – or want to explore what others are doing, – by providing real-time information to 
join HUB to add to this database, start a discussion, share the public and healthcare providers alike.
an idea, and learn more about mHealth and its potential to 
improve TB care around the world.
Join us at www.healthunbound.org. We look forward to hearing from you!
“If mobile phones aren’t part of your 
health strategy today, you need to revise 
your health strategy.”
Mikkel Vestergaard Frandsen, CEO of 
Vestergaard Frandsen Group 
10
