Timely Delivery of Lab Result Notifications to 
Health Care Workers
Soyapi Mumba,
Baobab Health Trust
l This information is confidential and was prepared for Baobab Health Trust  use; it is not to be relied on by any 3rd party without Baobab Health Trust's prior written consent.
Diagnosis is challenging
Worst Doctor to Patient Ratio
Malawi 1 : 88,000
USA 1 :188
Lab improves diagnostic process
Delayed notification of results
- inhibits delivery of patient care
l This information is confidential and was prepared for Baobab Health Trust  use; it is not to be relied on by any 3rd party without Baobab Health Trust's prior written consent.
Problem
Late notification and delivery of lab results
Delayed diagnosis and treatment
Lead to:
● Worsening of patient illness
● Prolonged length of stay at hospital
● Preventable deaths
l This information is confidential and was prepared for Baobab Health Trust  use; it is not to be relied on by any 3rd party without Baobab Health Trust's prior written consent.
Baobab Health Trust
• Since 2001
• Build Electronic Medical Record (EMR) 
system for Ministry of Health
• Over 65 high-burden health facilities
• Over 4,000,000 patients registered.
• ART
● 1,000,000 people HIV infected.
●    500,000 on treatment.
●       40% are managed by EMRs
• Technical implementer of national Lab Info 
Management System
l This information is confidential and was prepared for Baobab Health Trust  use; it is not to be relied on by any 3rd party without Baobab Health Trust's prior written consent.
Lab Information Management 
System (LIMS)
Electronic ordering of lab tests
Real-time tracking of specimen
Dynamic work-lists and standard 
operating procedures
Electronic result reporting
l This information is confidential and was prepared for Baobab Health Trust  use; it is not to be relied on by any 3rd party without Baobab Health Trust's prior written consent.
Proposed Solution.
Automated notification of lab results via SMS
l This information is confidential and was prepared for Baobab Health Trust  use; it is not to be relied on by any 3rd party without Baobab Health Trust's prior written consent.
Builds on existing infrastructure
● Open source, low-cost power-efficient 
hardware, battery backup, wide area 
network (GRPS, Wireless)
● Local development & support
l This information is confidential and was prepared for Baobab Health Trust  use; it is not to be relied on by any 3rd party without Baobab Health Trust's prior written consent.
Way forward
LIMS pilot at Kamzu Central Hosp.
To be scaled up to:
• 4 central hospitals
• 28 district hospitals
Need SMS notification to health care workers these 32 
facilities
l This information is confidential and was prepared for Baobab Health Trust  use; it is not to be relied on by any 3rd party without Baobab Health Trust's prior written consent.
Timely Delivery of Lab Result Notifications to 
Health Care Workers
Thank You
Soyapi Mumba,
Baobab Health Trust
soyapi.mumba@baobabhealth.org
www.baobabhealth.org
l This information is confidential and was prepared for Baobab Health Trust  use; it is not to be relied on by any 3rd party without Baobab Health Trust's prior written consent.
