THE SAFE DELIVERY APP 
Utilizing smartphones to improve the quality of emergency obstetric and 
newborn care in Ethiopia  
SERVICE DELIVERY 
Implementation date: 2014 to 2017 
In 2013, more than 290,000 women died from pregnancy related causes globally and 42 percent of all under-5 deaths occurred 
in the neonatal period. In sub-Saharan Africa, which accounts for almost half of all maternal deaths, a woman faces a one in 39 
lifetime risk of dying due to pregnancy or childbirth-related complications, in sharp contrast to one in 3,700 among women in 
developed countries. In addition, sub-Saharan Africa also has the highest neonatal mortality rate globally with 31 out of 1,000 
babies dying within the first 27 days of life. Improving health workers’ knowledge and skills managing emergency obstetric and 
neonatal care is essential to reducing maternal and perinatal deaths. However, most complications happen in the peripheral part 
of the health system, where health workers are difficult to reach through conventional training programs. As such, there is a huge 
unmet need to overcome the current outreach gap and find innovative, cost effective solutions to strengthen health worker skills 
and quality of care in developing countries. 
About The Safe Delivery App 
The Safe Delivery App was developed by the Maternity Additionally, the application features push messages with 
 
Foundation, in collaboration with University of Copenhagen. quiz questions spurring the health worker to use the 
It is a smartphone application that aims to improve the application to update their knowledge and enables easy 
quality of emergency obstetric and neonatal care. It is access to essential drug and equipment lists. The application 
 
designed to train birth attendants in developing countries in can also be used as a reference tool during clinical work. 
the management of normal and complicated deliveries and to The tool is useful in various scenarios such as preparation 
o vercome conventional barriers such as reaching peripheral before attending a birth, a situation where a complication 
health facilities with quality training; training health workers occurs or for debriefing and self-evaluation after a 
with low literacy; low retention of skills.  complication. 
 
The Safe Delivery App currently contains three animated The application can be preinstalled on the phone and it is 
clinical instruction films on manual removal of the placenta; therefore not a requirement to have network connection or 
p ostpartum hemorrhage; and neonatal resuscitation. internet access with the phone. 
 
 
82  |  mHealth Compendium Volume 4 
Evaluation and Results 
Cluster randomized control trials are being conducted in Ghana and Ethiopia to assess the effectiveness of the Safe Delivery 
App in increasing/improving health worker knowledge and skills, increasing successful neonatal resuscitations and reduced 
occurrence of postpartum hemorrhage.  
The preliminary midterm results from the research study show a remarkable increase in the skill level of the health workers 
and midwives, who have been working with the Safe Delivery App for a six-month trial period. Although the results are 
preliminary at this point, they indicate that skill levels improve the most, where capacity building is needed the most: in the 
peripheral parts of the health system, which can be very challenging to reach through conventional training programs. 
Furthermore, the Safe Delivery app has been very 
well received by both end-users and global health 
experts. 
One health worker expresses the use of the app 
state: “If I have a problem, I can find exactly the 
procedure I need in the app - it is like LIVE for me. 
So this mobile app is like my new best friend, 
whom I will be working together with to serve my 
community” (Tadelu, Health extension worker in 
Gimbie, Ethiopia). 
The final conclusions with results and final 
assessments will be ready by the beginning of 2015. 
Lessons Learned 
 End-user feedback about the tool have underscored the need for health workers to have easy-to-access and high-quality 
clinical instruction and tutorial material – especially in rural areas 
where refreshment trainings are scarce 
 Mobile solutions such as the Safe Delivery App can strengthen Geographic Coverage: Pilot test is being 
access to essential MNCH care in low-resource settings conducted in five districts in West Wollega Zone, 
Ethiopia: Gimbie, Homa, Haru, Nole, and Genji.  
 As the tool communicates visually and in local language it 
overcomes low literacy and language barriers; Hereby it Implementation Partners: Maternity 
empowers health workers to improve their skills and knowledge   Foundation, University of Copenhagen, and 
University of Southern Denmark  
Conclusion Funder: Merck for Mothers’ Global Giving 
Program  
The Safe Delivery App overcomes the conventional outreach barriers 
of low literacy and reaching peripheral health facilities by being easily Contact Information: 
adaptable, communicating visually and in local languages. Thus, the 
Maternity Foundation | Ida Marie Boas, 
Safe Delivery App overcomes the outreach barriers of conventional 
(ida@maternity.dk); Lotte Fast Carlsen, 
training programs in an innovative, cost-effective way and holds a 
(lfast@maternity.dk) 
huge, scalable potential. 
University of Copenhagen | Stine Lund 
Because of the promising midterm results, Maternity Foundation, 
(stine_lund@dadlnet.dk) 
University of Copenhagen and University of Southern Denmark are 
currently developing an additional five clinical instruction films, so that University of Southern Denmark | Bjarke Lund 
the Safe Delivery App will address all major life threatening MNCH- Sørensen (bjarkebjarke@yahoo.dk) 
related complications. These films include Pregnancy Induced 
Hypertension/Pre-eclampsia; Post Abortion Care; Sepsis; Prolonged MSD Denmark | Trine Juul Wengel, 
Labor; and Early Neonatal Management. The full app will be tested in (trine.juul.wengel@merck.com) 
an implementation study in 2015/2016 and then rolled out with key 
See References on page 89. 
players in sub-Saharan Africa. 
 
mHealth Compendium Volume 4  |  83 
