White Paper Series on mHealth and Aging
CREDIT: UN/ ISSAC
mHEALTH SOLUTIONS FOR 
IMPROVING MENTAL HEALTH AND 
ILLNESSES IN THE AGING PROCESS
ADA KWAN
mHealth Alliance, UN Foundation
October 2013
CREDIT: WIRING AFRICA
ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS
This white paper would not have been possible without the vision and support of Pfizer, Inc. and the 
mHealth Alliance at the United Nations Foundation. I would like to extend my appreciation to them 
for highlighting the under-recognized health topic of mental health in the context of aging and how 
mobile technologies can add value. Many thanks are also due to the individuals who contributed 
their insights and experiences to this topic: Ting Shih of ClickMedix; Bethany Brown and Paul Ong 
of HelpAge International; Jennifer Pollex of the Institute of Development Studies; Rosemary Gathara 
and Victor Gathara of Kenya Association for the Welfare of People with Epilepsy (KAWE); Raghu 
Kiran Appasani of the MINDS Foundation; Adam Haim, Jovier Evans, and Anne Sperling from the 
National Institute of Mental Health at the National Institutes of Health; Isabella Aboderin of the Oxford 
Institute of Aging; and Rhodah Mwangi and David M. Ndetei of the Africa Mental Health Foundation. 
For their coordination, reviews and constructive feedback throughout the development of this paper, 
I am also greatly indebted to my colleagues at the mHealth Alliance: Sharia Khoja, Avrille Hanzel, 
Chelsea Hedquist and Chelsea Solmo.  
Lastly, many thanks go to Chris Gray and his colleagues at Pfizer, Inc., Patty Mechael and the mHealth 
Alliance and all the members of the Aging Working Group for their commitment to not only address 
mental health for the world’s elderly but also investing their time and efforts in rethinking what is 
possible with existing technologies. It is my sincere hope that this paper helps catalyze discussion 
and collaboration for mHealth to reach its full potential in creating enabling environments for better 
mental health. 
Ada Kwan, mHealth Alliance, United Nations Foundation
2
ABSTRACT 
THIS WHITE PAPER, WHICH HAS EVOLVED wireless technologies, even in the most remote regions 
FROM PRIOR RESEARCH(1), IS ONE PART of the world, mean that such technologies may offer 
OF A THREE-PART SERIES DEVOTED TO feasible solutions. Some mHealth efforts are already 
EXPLORING THE USE OF MOBILE AND being implemented to address mental health education 
WIRELESS TECHNOLOGIES IN HEALTH and awareness in communities, enhance mental health 
(MHEALTH) and the opportunities for impacting and care professionals’ training and extend therapy and 
advancing healthy aging in low- and middle-income treatment options to individuals with mental illnesses. 
countries (LMICs). This specific paper focuses on the This paper describes mHealth interventions for mental 
use of mHealth for mental health among older adults. health in general and, more specifically, for depression, 
epilepsy and schizophrenia. Suggestions are then made 
In the year 2012, 11.5% of the world population of for how to properly leverage mobile technologies so 
seven billion was aged 60 or older, and by 2050, this their full potential can be reached to improve mental 
proportion is expected to grow to 22%(2). The largest health conditions among the elderly. This paper ends 
growth will occur in LMICs, which is an encouraging with a call to action to bring together stakeholders from 
reflection of many achievements in public health. a variety of sectors to achieve this potential.
However, mental health disorders are increasingly 
recognized as major contributors to the global disease 
burden, and over the next 20 years these conditions In the year 2012, 11.5% 
are estimated to cost US $16.1 trillion in terms of global 
economic loss (3). Through targeted investment, much 
more can be done to turn these costly consequences of the world population 
into gains. Unfortunately, individuals who are affected 
by mental illnesses often cannot overcome structural of seven billion was 
barriers to receive care and treatment. These barriers 
include poor awareness of their conditions, as well as aged 60 or older, and by 
stigma and discrimination in their communities. Many 
of these individuals go without any care at all, to say 2050, this proportion is 
nothing of appropriate and high quality care. For the 
elderly, who are already prone to cognitive decline as expected to grow  
part of the natural process of aging, getting appropriate 
care is particularly challenging. The situation is further to 22%.
exacerbated by the human resource crisis in mental 
health services and the lack of funding and prioritization 
of mental health and aging in policies.
The need for more awareness, human resources, 
capacity building efforts, and stronger advocacy in 
mental health and aging will take time. For the mental 
health situation for elderly people in LMICs, immediate 
solutions that have sustainable potential and can leverage 
existing resources must be implemented now to mitigate 
the significant challenges ahead. The near ubiquity 
and increasing penetration rates of mobile phones and 
3
CREDIT: mHEALTH ALLIANCE/SOLMO
INTRODUCTION 
THE WORLD’S SOCIETIES ARE QUICKLY in the community against mental disorders, prevent 
AGING. The proportion of elderly in the world access to services and trained professionals (8, 10). 
population is growing three times faster than the world The situation is further exacerbated by the human 
population itself, and by 2050, one out of four people resource crisis in mental health care delivery and the 
will be older than 60 years of age (4, 5). An aging society lack of funding and prioritization of mental health and 
offers many benefits, as older adults possess a wealth aging in policy. Mental health issues are particularly a 
of knowledge and experience that can be an invaluable growing concern in LMICs, where most of the aging 
asset to economic development. population growth is expected to occur, and existing 
health systems and caregiver support are not prepared 
However, as people age, they are prone to experience to respond properly to either of these growing issues (3). 
physical and cognitive impairments during the natural If strategic preparation and action is not taken now, the 
process of growing older, and getting appropriate care growing disease burden for mental disorders among an 
can become challenging. Older adults are also more expanding aging population will be costly to the elderly, 
vulnerable to social isolation, loss of autonomy, loss their families and governments (3). 
of privacy, economic barriers and depression, which 
has been linked to further disability and is associated Another global trend could be part of the urgently 
with loneliness and poverty (2, 6). In countries around needed solution. With the number of mobile phone 
the world, individuals with poor mental health may subscriptions predicted to surpass the world population 
not have strong support systems that can help, and of over seven billion in 2014, mobile offers a way to 
the individuals who are affected by mental illnesses reach individuals in almost all corners of the world (11, 12). 
often do not receive the care and treatment they By providing new and easier ways to send information 
require to get better (7-9). Poor awareness of mental and communicate with others, mobile and wireless 
health conditions and disorders (e.g., dementia, technologies are being used to support health 
epilepsy, schizophrenia, and depression), combined interventions for healthier aging in the field of mental 
with financial barriers or stigma and discrimination health. The objectives of this white paper are twofold: 
4
The proportion of elderly in the world 
population is growing three times 
faster than the world population itself, 
and By 2050, one out of four people 
will be older than 60 years of age (4, 5).
(i) to understand the context and conditions related to 
mental health and mental illnesses among older adults Mobile and wireless 
in LMICs and (ii) to identify mHealth solutions that 
are enabling or could enable improved mental health technologies are 
or early detection and support for mental illnesses, as 
well as provide psychosocial support to older adults being used to support 
and their caregivers. The focus of this paper will be on 
LMICs while drawing on relevant information from high- health interventions for 
income countries (HICs).
healthier aging in the 
field of mental health.
5
BACKGROUND
“NO HEALTH WITHOUT MENTAL HEALTH,” to 24.4% (15). However, interpreting these rates by 
IS A PHRASE ENDORSED BY THE WORLD country cannot be done without further understanding 
HEALTH ORGANIZATION (WHO) (13) and reflects other factors, such as family structures, prevalence of 
the increased recognition that “mental health and well- war and other sources of stress, urbanization of the 
being are essential components of a healthy society” (8). population and belief systems (15). Regardless, mental 
However, the world’s societies are growing and aging, health conditions, which include schizophrenia, bipolar 
which has stark implications on the disease burden of disorder, unipolar disorder, alcohol and substance 
mental disorders. By 2050, the number of individuals 60 abuse and dependence, phobias and depression, are 
years of age and older will make up nearly 22% (two particularly threatening because they are associated 
billion individuals) of the world population – a dramatic with high levels of disability, risk factors for non-
increase from 11% (760 million individuals) in 2011 (14). communicable diseases (NCDs) and consequently, 
The largest growth of the elderly population will occur in premature mortality (8, 16, 17).
LMICs, where health systems are inadequately prepared 
to respond to mental, neurological, and substance abuse Among older people, depression and dementia are the 
disorders (2). most common mental illnesses (13). For depression, 
prevalence estimates in LMICs are difficult to establish 
Mental health conditions1,  defined as “a set of medical for older adults; however, in HICs, prevalence for major 
conditions that affect a person’s thinking, feeling, depressive episodes among older adults have been 
mood, ability to relate to others and daily functioning” (3), estimated to be 6-10% in primary care settings and 
affect approximately 450 million people around the 30% in inpatient medical and long-term care settings 
world (9). When the WHO conducted the most recent (18). In these settings, incidence rates for depressive 
World Mental Health Survey in 14 countries, prevalence episodes are estimated to be around half these values 
rates for mental health disorders ranged from 4.3% (19). For dementia, the number of cases among older 
1 Mental health conditions can also be referred to as mental disorders, mental illnesses or neuropsychiatric disorders (3).
2 However, some studies on dementia prevalence in LMICs have reported “strikingly low” rates (8). 
6
Mental health conditions,  defined as 
“a set of medical conditions that affect 
a person’s thinking, feeling, mood, 
ability to relate to others and daily 
functioning” (3), affect approximately 
450 million people around the world (9).
CREDIT: mHEALTH ALLIANCE/SOLMO
adults are expected to increase from 25 million in 2000 surrounding mental health issues not only complicate 
to 63 million by 2030, with the majority of affected education and awareness strategies, but also make 
elderly persons living in LMICs2 (20). In the context providing adequate care to those affected difficult. These 
of aging, depression and dementia symptoms have factors prohibit people from understanding care exists 
been attributed to abuse, neglect, tension, family and from seeking adequate attention for individuals 
conflict, housing, financial insecurities and feelings with mental illnesses. Among elderly individuals, 
of isolation, especially if older adults do not receive these conditions, combined with frailty, contribute to 
strong care support from family members such as their poor access to health care and delayed diagnosis that 
children (8,21). Positive solutions include moral support, complicates treatment and the ability to receive other 
in addition to demonstrated love and affection, which types of necessary care. There is a need for improved 
would require families to be better educated about awareness of mental health issues, stronger social 
age-related conditions and ways to provide enhanced support and better medication management.
support to elderly members of their families. However, 
many older people turn to alcohol to help cope with Despite the challenges in reducing the disease burden 
feelings of loss or loneliness in an attempt to alleviate attributed to mental disorders, the time to act is now. 
depression (22). Without action, mental illnesses will account for 
US$16.1 trillion in economic and productivity losses 
Evidence from various countries has shown that public over the course of the next 20 years (3). Developing 
knowledge is minimal in terms of how to treat mental solutions to mitigate the growing burden of mental 
illnesses, the ability to recognize when an illness is disorders among the elderly will require investment, 
developing, knowledge of help-seeking options and prioritization, and resources. However, not investing 
treatments, knowledge of effective strategies for and failing to prioritize mental health will have costly 
milder issues, and first aid skills to support individuals consequences that will be harder to reverse in the 
with mental health issues (23). Stigma and discrimination future.
7
CREDIT: MOBILE DIAGNOSIS/BELLINA
SOLUTIONS: mHealth for Mental Health and Illnesses in Aging
MITIGATING THE CHALLENGES AHEAD of health, other target populations, and from HICs, 
IN MENTAL HEALTH FOR OLDER ADULTS where relevant.
WILL REQUIRE STRATEGIC INVESTMENT 
IN: generating awareness for mental health issues The application of mHealth to mental health and 
among the general population; developing capacity illnesses is a fairly new topic, but some reviews of 
for mental health service delivery; providing training potential uses and existing efforts have been published 
for mental health workers and shifting certain tasks (6, 25-27). These reviews describe existing mobile 
to less skilled workers to reduce the work burden on applications designed to collect information related to 
the low numbers who are trained3;  and implementing moods, anxiety levels, sleep patterns, and treatment 
immediate health management and treatment compliance, among other strategies to improve mental 
solutions. For each of these investment needs, the health. Described in Table 1, these strategies are listed 
near ubiquity of mobile phone subscriptions and within a framework adapted from approaches identified 
increasing mobile network penetration rates around by HelpAge International and public health priorities in 
the world offer exciting opportunities to leverage mental health identified by WHO4  (8, 22).
existing resources while having strong potential for 
scale-up. This section will detail the uses of mobile 
and wireless technologies for mental health among 
older adults in LMICs. However, the implementation 
of mobile applications for mental health with a specific 
focus on aging or older adult populations is fairly 
new and seldom discussed in the existing literature. 
Therefore, additional examples are drawn from 
mHealth solutions implemented for other aspects 
3 Studies in India, Chile, Pakistan and Uganda have demonstrated that depression, anxiety and schizophrenia interventions can be successfully delivered with nonmedical mental 
health workers (24).
4 The approaches by HelpAge International and by WHO were combined for the purpose of this paper because of their significant overlap and their additive ability to provide a 
8 comprehensive framework to describe relevant mHealth solutions for mental health in aging (8). 
For the emotional, financial, and 
instrumental support needs of 
informal caregivers, mobile options 
are plentiful...
MENTAL 
HEALTH APPROACHES RELEVANT mHEALTH STRATEGIES
PRIORITIES
• Promoting active aging – regular • Text messages, games or quizzes to send information  
exercise, planning for lifestyle on better dietary habits and encouraging exercise
changes such as retirement, 
seeking support following • Text messages or quizzes to eliminate falsehoods 
bereavement, pursuing a range of surrounding mental disorders and break down stigma 
interests (22) associated with mental health and aging
• Accessing information on the Internet or through  
• Promoting public and media hotlines
awareness of aging and mental 
health issues (22) and educating the • Connecting other adults or caregivers in applications or 
public (8) social networks to reduce social isolation and impacts of 
loss or to encourage active participation in communities
• Challenging discrimination (22)
• Improving economic opportunities, • Providing patients or caregivers mobile health tips to 
including opportunities for older integrate individuals with mental illnesses into society
people (22)
• In-between psychotherapy sessions transferred through 
• Providing social protection, voice calls or text messaging
including basic pensions for older • Mobile options to facilitate or connect individuals with work 
people (22) options and job support
• Developing mechanisms to  
resolve conflict and reduce levels 
of violence (22)
9
Security promotion Public education
MENTAL 
HEALTH APPROACHES RELEVANT mHEALTH STRATEGIES
PRIORITIES
• Giving care in the community (8) • eLearning and mobile training options for community-based 
and developing community-based health workers to be aware of or be able to spot signs of 
outreach counseling services for mental illnesses in households with elderly people
older people (22)
• Point-of-care tools or protocols accessible on mobile 
• Developing human resources phones for community-based health workers
(8) and training health workers, • Person tracking options with mobile and GPS
community workers and health 
facility staff in residential settings • Mobile communication among the elderly, family members 
to diagnose and treat mental  and healthcare professionals
health problems (22)
• Remote counseling support or automated reminders or self-
• Establishing multi-disciplinary managing exercises for coping strategies learned in therapy
teams to promote mental health • Voice or text messages to share information on or 
and provide effective care (22) encourage treatment adherence and good dietary habits 
specific to improving mental health 
• Providing practical and emotional 
support for people with mental • Remote monitoring of moods, vital signs, and other health 
health problems and their families data through wireless monitoring options 
– information, support groups, 
telephone helplines (22) • Links to hotlines, support groups or trained health 
professionals
• Developing services for trauma 
counseling (22)
• Providing treatment in primary  • Cognitive fitness technologies, including thinking  
care (8) games, with assessment and tracking components (28)
• Making psychotropic medications • Mobile-based supply tracking monitoring for medicine
available (8) • Automated and wireless detection for monitoring treatment 
adherence, such as mHealth solutions that can monitor the 
• Establishing national policies frequency of medicine intake through  
and legislation and involving pill dispenser detectors (29)
communities, families and 
consumers (8) • Mobile accessibility to social networks or other groups 
that can encourage community participation or link to 
• Linking with other sectors (8) and peer support (e.g., although there is no specific focus on 
other community agents (e.g.,  older adults, the South African Depression and Anxiety 
faith and traditional healers) Group holds Facebook online chats where individuals 
can converse with experts about certain topics related to 
• Supporting more research (8) mental health) 
(30).
 
TABLE 1. Adapted from HelpAge International and from WHO (8, 22), this table includes positive approaches to 
enhance mental health in the context of aging alongside relevant mHealth opportunities.
10
Security promotion Community-based mental health programs
Other examples of mHealth solutions in mental health Specific examples of mHealth projects for mental 
to emphasize include: mobile phone games to promote health are displayed in Table 2. Only two examples 
healthier behaviors (31); assessments developed for are described from LMICs, as mHealth is less 
mobile phones, such as mobile assessments for alcohol commonly applied in LMIC contexts when compared 
and substance use (32, 33); and psychosocial interventions to HICs. During the research for this paper, very few 
developed for mobile phone delivery and aimed at mHealth efforts specifically targeting older adults 
reducing feelings of isolation or managing severe were identified; however, many of the projects 
mental illnesses. Strategies for these solutions involve described below provide coverage to seniors or the 
mobile phone prompts that allow real-time monitoring elderly, in addition to adolescents and adults.
of personalized self-management behavior change, 
“between-session” engagement with therapists over 
the mobile phone, and text messaging to facilitate Different elements of 
case management (26). Normally conducted with pen 
and paper, a psychological measurement tool called treatment are tailored for 
ecological momentary assessment (EMA), which 
“samples attitudes, behaviors, and experiences in real each of the clients, who 
time in subjects’ natural environments”, can now be 
conducted with mobile technologies (34-36). Evidence-
based therapy sessions have also been adapted for can access the therapy 
ease of access on mobile phone applications, and 
even “virtual coaches” to help in relaxation techniques online in the comfort of 
are downloadable (37). Additionally, text messages or 
wireless monitoring options that can check on the their own home.
moods of older adults can be designed to improve 
wellbeing, dietary habits and physical health or to reduce 
feelings of social isolation or loneliness, which do not 
necessarily result in mental illness − or the onset of other 
NCDs, since poor mental health and mental illnesses 
are risk factors − but can take a toll on mental wellbeing 
(38). The flexibility of mobile and wireless technologies 
allow therapy sessions to also be conducted through 
voice or video5 (27). Furthermore, interventions delivered 
on the Internet, which is increasingly accessible on 
mobile phones, are already being implemented and 
will become more feasible over time. One example of 
this is Ilajnafsy, an Internet site that offers scientifically 
tested treatment of post-traumatic stress disorder in 
Arabic (39). Different elements of treatment are tailored 
for each of the clients, who can access the therapy 
online in the comfort of their own home.
5 This is further discussed in a recently published book on using technologies to improve mental health (27).
11
mHealth Interventions for Mental Health 
RELATED APPLICATION OR 
MENTAL IMPLEMENTING PROJECT DESCRIPTION
ILLNESS ORGANIZATIONS, LOCATION
For use by individuals with mild to moderate depression, 
Companion-SMS is a software system that sends text 
messages to monitor the emotional state of individuals (41). 
This information, such as feelings of sadness or loneliness, 
decreased energy, difficulty concentrating, and disinterest in 
Companion-SMS project, United States
activities, gets sent to clinicians who are able to respond. The 
model behind this intervention is based on how genuine and 
immediate support through the mobile phone can improve 
the way someone feels and can encourage that individual to 
interact with trained clinicians.
M-Kifafa is an mHealth program that uses text messages to 
exchange information with health workers, caregivers, and 
epilepsy patients (42). In addition to receiving text message 
reminders and information, caregivers and patients log and 
transmit seizure diaries and condition updates on their phones, 
and these data inform the supply of anti-epilepsy drugs. 
M-Kifafa, Kenya Additionally, health workers are trained through mobile phones, 
which also assist workers in registering patients and collecting 
relevant patient information (43). Supported by Safaricom 
Foundation, M-Kifafa is implemented by the Kenya Association 
for the Welfare of People with Epilepsy (KAWE), the Ministry of 
Public Health, Sanofi Access to Medicines Program and Shujaa 
Solutions.
The MATS intervention incorporates remote monitoring with 
cognitive behavioral therapy interventions to assist individuals 
with schizophrenia (44). The program sends a different set of 
Mobile Assessment and Treatment of 
four text messages daily for each of the following: medication 
Schizophrenia (MATS), United States
adherence, socialization or auditory hallucinations6.  An 
evaluation of the intervention found that text messages 
significantly improved medication adherence among 
independently living patients, increased the number of social 
interactions and reduced the severity of auditory hallucinations (44).
6 The sets of text messages were developed based on cognitive behavior therapy. In their article, Granholm et al. (2011) describe the content of the messages:
 Thoughts about medications, socializing and voices were elicited (e.g., “Do you think your voices are powerful?”), and the next messages encouraged participants to ques-
tion unhelpful beliefs (e.g., “Maybe your voices can’t really do what they say”) and try a behavioral experiment (e.g., “Try ignoring them and see what happens”). Evidence 
12 used to challenge unhelpful beliefs included personalized information provided by the participant. (44)\
Schizophrenia Epilepsy Depression  (Mild to Moderate)
RELATED APPLICATION OR 
MENTAL IMPLEMENTING PROJECT DESCRIPTION
ILLNESS ORGANIZATIONS, LOCATION
A project being implemented by the MINDS Foundation injects 
capacity for mental health services in rural India (45) The project 
consists of three phases: (1) education and awareness to inform 
people that mental illnesses can be supported through health 
services; (2) free transportation for mental health patients to 
the hospital with mental health services to eliminate prohibitive 
barriers from transportation costs; and (3) a mobile-based data 
MINDS Foundation, India
collection tool for trained community health workers to check 
on mental health patients in the community. Patients, who are 
often adolescents or adults in these communities, are able to 
improve their mental health because of access to consistent 
care. The project provides these individuals with additional 
skills training, such as job assistance, to help them reintegrate 
into their communities.
As a feasible option for filling a service delivery gap, SCARF, 
a non-governmental organization (NGO) and a Collaborating 
Centre of the WHO for Mental Health Research and Training, 
implemented a telemedicine service in different areas in 
India (7, 46). As an extension of community outreach, the 
telemedicine services began when SCARF delivered free 
Schizophrenia Research Foundation 
psychosocial and counseling support to victims of a tsunami 
(SCARF), India
in 2004. The model used drew a telemedicine network across 
its outreach programs, which included clinical examinations 
and delivery of drugs to patients (7). The program found many 
individuals who went “untreated or irregularly treated” due to 
lack of access to affordable care, to NGOs and fieldworkers 
who could identify cases or to existing mental health services (7).
 
TABLE 2. mHealth interventions for mental health and specific mental illnesses.
13
All Mental Illnesses                         
CREDIT: mHEALTH ALLIANCE/SOLMO
Other examples of mHealth applications have shown who begin treatment possess little knowledge of the 
that mobile solutions can take a central role in already treatment process and are poorly prepared to receive 
existing evidence-based therapies. For example, one care. These factors have both been associated with 
mHealth strategy that may be relevant for older adults poorer response to therapy (48, 50-52).
is an adaptable game called PlayWrite (47). PlayWrite 
consists of 10 therapeutic games that can be adapted 
by mental health professionals, and currently it is being Other examples of 
implemented to support adolescent mental health. In 
the game, the player interacts with dialogue generated mHealth applications 
by the mental health professional. Additionally, Price et 
al. (2013) describe additional strategies: an application have shown that mobile 
that uses geolocation information to send substance 
abusers “warning” messages when they enter solutions can take a 
geographical areas that have been categorized as more 
at risk; mobile games and exercises that are sent during 
emotional crises to patients with borderline personality central role in already 
disorder in order to divert their emotions away from 
intense situations; and other mHealth applications that existing evidence-based 
give patients access to essential coping mechanisms 
learned through recovery processes (48, 49). therapies.
In locations where mental illnesses are highly 
stigmatized, mHealth offers a channel to educate and 
increase awareness within communities on the facts 
surrounding mental illnesses. Increasing education 
and awareness is often most relevant for caregivers 
and mental health patients since most individuals 
14
Focusing on a more positive approach 
in advance can absorb the shock 
of sudden transitions in emergency 
situations and reverse the vicious 
cycle that is driven by the loss of 
confidence and worry during old age.
mHEALTH CONSIDERATIONS RELEVANT FOR MENTAL 
HEALTH AND ILLNESSES IN AGING
DESIGNING AND IMPLEMENTING mHEALTH Lack of mHealth evidence related to elderly pop-
SOLUTIONS FOR MENTAL HEALTH AND ulations can benefit from implementers focusing 
ILLNESSES FOR OLDER ADULTS POSES on the aging population beginning with project 
MANY CHALLENGES and, to help advance design and continuing through implementation. 
the field, the following considerations have been To improve mHealth evidence related to elderly 
identified to take into account. populations, involving elderly populations in design, 
tapping their knowledge and expertise as older adults 
Knowledge gaps of the mental health context and engaging them to participate in decision-making 
in LMICs can be improved by building upon will become increasingly important. Previous mHealth 
information from existing efforts in mental projects have found formative research through semi-
health and sharing learned lessons in the future. structured interviews and focus groups to be helpful 
In general, much less is known about mental illnesses in informing project design, and older adults or their 
and sustainable mental health care delivery options in perspectives should be taken into account (56, 57).
LMICs, especially for older adults (8). To address this, 
evidence must be generated in the proper context The vicious cycle associated with aging can 
and given thorough examination, and lessons should become the virtuous cycle by changing perspectives. 
be transparently shared for mental health outcomes Positive approaches to leverage when applying 
to improve. A current debate of global mental health mHealth include: tapping the knowledge and expertise 
criticizes the way in which global health concepts of older adults and engaging them to participate in 
and “realities” are driven predominantly by western decision-making around the household and in their 
scientific perspectives, which may have limited trade; providing ways for them to stay independent 
relevance to LMICs (53-55). (if possible given the stage of illness) or adopt new 
hobbies; and offering strategies that can help families, 
15
caregivers, and older adults to plan finances – all of mHealth should complement traditional mental 
which can contribute to a more positive, virtuous health system strengthening efforts. From the 
cycle for healthier aging. Focusing on a more positive health systems perspective, one way to strengthen 
approach in advance can absorb the shock of sudden mental health service capacity is to develop mobile 
transitions in emergency situations and reverse the platforms that can be accessed anywhere and 
vicious cycle that is driven by the loss of confidence anytime mental health workers conduct their daily 
and worry during old age. responsibilities and activities. In this case, existing 
guides and protocols should be adapted to mobile 
Treatment gaps and health system gaps can be technologies and, if possible, face-to-face trainings 
filled with a good understanding of how older on how to access digitized versions should be 
adults interact with existing health systems and integrated into existing training sessions to reduce 
informal providers, such as faith and traditional any initial discomfort, enhance familiarity and increase 
healers. Tor individuals who require treatment, there are confidence in using technology. Korste describes the 
several challenges in maintaining proper compliance. strong value of digitizing WHO’s Mental Health Gap 
First, poor or inconsistent supplies of essential Action Programme (mhGAP) Intervention Guide for 
medicines in the health system can prevent individuals non-specialist health workers for eLearning materials, 
from receiving the adequate treatment they need. smartphone applications, text messaging, and voice 
Second, in some countries, there is a lack of trust in platforms (59). For child health, international guidelines 
the formal health system’s ability to provide medicine, have been successfully implemented on mobile 
and patients seek consultations from other community phones7.  
agents, such as traditional healers and chemical sellers, 
who can sometimes cause more harm because they are More mHealth does not mean better mHealth. In a 
unregulated and can create “avoidable complications” review of mobile phone applications on the BlackBerry 
(e.g., by advising patients to terminate their current App World site, Luxton et al. (2011) found over 200 
treatment) (58). Third, there is often a tendency to different applications related to anxiety, depression, 
terminate treatment regimens when individuals begin smoking, alcohol use, psychosis, diet, exercise, weight 
feeling better. For mental health issues in aging, all of loss, nutrition, parenting, cognitive performance, 
these challenges are further compounded by cognitive relationships, relaxation, sleep, spirituality, and general 
decline, weak caregiving support, and the fact that wellbeing (37). But the sheer number of mobile phone 
medications are often confusing for the elderly (24). applications does not determine the effectiveness of 
mHealth solutions must aim to tackle these challenges mHealth use. Rather than quantity, coordination and 
to be effective. strong partnerships will be necessary to make sure 
that the field evolves towards higher quality and more 
Customization on the individual level for mHealth useful solutions that can be incorporated into formal 
will be key. Monitoring or sending treatment adherence health systems.
interventions should be customized or tailored to 
individuals in order to maximize effectiveness. Although 
the elderly are perceived to be technology-averse, 
some studies have reported how individuals from 
older age segments of the population welcomed, and 
in some cases were excited about, the use of mobile 
technologies. As populations age, more individuals will 
enter the elderly age segment, and these individuals 
will have more exposure to technology, particularly with 
the Internet, computers and mobile phones. 
7  This refers to the case of e-IMCI (electronic Integrated Management of Childhood Illnesses), an electronic version of IMCI protocols first deployed in Tanzania (60).
16
CALL TO ACTION: WAYS FORWARD FOR BETTER 
MENTAL HEALTH WITH mHEALTH
EFFECTIVE mHEALTH STRATEGIES ALONE Governments – Support comprehensive policies and 
WILL NOT OVERCOME THE CHALLENGES IN implementation of mental health services, especially 
DELIVERING APPROPRIATE AND ACCESS- those tailored for the aging population, and consider 
IBLE MENTAL HEALTH SERVICES TO THOSE the integration of technologies where they can be most 
WHO NEED IT. Moving forward in the field will effective. These policies and interventions must fit well 
require participatory action from stakeholders across within the larger health system and consider relevant 
sectors to coordinate and work together towards modes of health service delivery (e.g., community- or 
achieving reduced morbidity and mortality attributed facility-based), as well as work towards reducing stigma 
to mental health and aging. For this, developers and and discrimination and improving capacity for mental 
implementers, mental health workers, researchers, health human resources.
governments, and donors are all called to action
Donors and development agencies – Direct funds 
Developers and Implementers – Identify and pursue towards proven models for mHealth that are working 
technologies and models that have been deployed and have established results, as well as those in 
and scaled, and build off of existing systems and mental health, and encourage integration of services 
knowledge while looking towards collaborations and across health systems through sustainable strategies 
partners who can add value for mental health in aging. and sustainable models of financing. Existing funding 17
Using mobile technologies also requires training or should not be shifted to mental health, but should 
formal informational sessions, which can remove initial incorporate mental health. Much is already known 
discomfort from technologies among end users. about delivering community-based services; however, 
more investment is needed to support strategies over 
Mental health workers – Participate in the design of time. Developing incremental funding for existing 
mobile solutions implemented by developers and local efforts and earmarking funding for building capacity and 
NGOs and advocate for tools that can improve working supporting partnerships to scale effective projects can 
conditions, motivation, training and services for elderly encourage sustainability and encourage the mHealth 
people with mental illnesses. When integrating mobile field to develop higher quality, more useful solutions 
solutions for mental health services, these solutions that can scale.
should never replace, but instead supplement existing 
standards and guidelines (61).
Researchers – Conduct research on mHealth 
implementations in mental health while being sure to 
address the elderly and their social, financial and family 
situations. It will also be important to share lessons 
learned from mHealth projects because the field is 
rapidly evolving and successful development will rely 
on the ability to grow and adapt quickly.
17
CONCLUSION
mHealth can help avert risk factors associated with mental illnesses and improve mental and cognitive 
health. For older adults confronting mental illnesses or cognitive decline, mHealth interventions can 
help monitor moods, promote healthier behaviors associated with better mental health, develop 
awareness about what to expect during mental health care and treatment, and provide access to 
interventions without traveling to trained professionals. For individuals and their caregivers who are 
dealing with mental illnesses during old age, mobile options allow for mobile-based self-assessments, 
check-ins between visits to facilities, reminders about certain components of therapies, and monitoring 
of activities for acute events made available within an individuals’ environment. On the health provider 
side, mobile technologies can offer accessible and portable reference guides and protocol support 
for health workers, mobile-based assessment and monitoring options, follow-up for treatment with 
patients and − put simply − a conduit to communicate with patients and their caregivers. As mobile 
phones continue to become the preferred mode of communication among communities around the 
world, the ubiquitous nature of mobile technologies and connectivity will drive mHealth development 
towards continuous monitoring and more enhanced mobile-assisted strategies for mental health. 
Now is the best time to coordinate across stakeholders to strategically realize the full potential of 
mobile solutions to promote active aging and good mental health, as well as reduce the quickly 
growing disease burden associated with mental disorders. 
Although an aging population will bring a wealth of knowledge and experience to societies, health 
systems are not prepared to respond to the progressively increasing burden of age-related health 
conditions, such as mental disorders. This paper describes the imminent challenges in scaling up 
mental health resources across the world in the near future as the world’s elderly population and 
mental health disease burden grow quickly. This paper, however, also suggests potential solutions to 
confront these challenges, taking into account existing resources. Although implementing mHealth 
successfully will require an unprecedented shift in the way public health strategies are implemented 
for meeting the mental health care needs for aging populations, mobile technologies can spread 
awareness of mental health facts to reduce barriers related to stigma, improve awareness on mental 
health issues for families and aging adults, create new ways to screen for mental illnesses and to 
detect cognitive impairment without traditional resources or training.
18
The use of mHealth for 
caregivers of older adults is 
at an early stage; however, 
the potential impact of 
mHealth is being considered. 
CREDIT: TÉLÉCOMS SANS FRONTIÈRS
REFERENCES
1. A. Kwan, “Using mobile technologies for healthier 8. V. Patel, A. J. Flisher, A. Cohen, in International Public 
aging”  (mHealth Alliance and Pfizer, 2012). Health: Diseases, Programs, Systems, and Policies, 2nd 
ed., M. H. Merson, R. E. Black, A. J. Mills, Eds. (Jones 
2. United Nations Population Fund, HelpAge International, and Bartlett Publishers, Sudbury, MA, 2006).
“Ageing in the Twenty-First Century: A Celebration and A 
Challenge”  (UNFPA and HelpAge International, New York 9. R. Kohn, S. Saxena, I. Levav, B. Saraceno, The treatment 
and London, 2012). gap in mental health care. Bulletin of the World Health 
Organization 82,  (2004).
3. D. Bloom et al., “Globalisation and the prevention 
and control of non-communicable disease: the neglected 10. N. Sartorius, Stigma and mental health. The Lancet 
chronic diseases of adults”  (World Economic Forum, 370, 810 (2007).
Geneva, 2011).
11. International Telecommunications Union (ITU), “ICT 
4. World Health Organization. Director-General’s message Facts and Figures: The World in 2013”  (International 
on World Health Day.  (2012). Accessed on: Access Year Communications Union (ITU), 2013).
Access Date|. Available rom: URL
12. International Telecommunications Union (ITU). ITU 
5. M. Tsang, Connecting and caring: innovations for releases latest global technology development figures. 
healthy ageing. Bulletin of the World Health Organization (2013). Accessed on: Access Year Access Date|. Available 
90, 157 (2012). rom: URL
6. I. Plaza, L. Martín, S. Martin, C. Medrano, Mobile 13. World Health Organization, “Promoting Mental 
applications in an aging society: Status and trends. Journal Health: Concepts, Emerging Evidence, Practice”  (World 
of Systems and Software 84, 1977 (2011). Health Organization, Geneva, 2005).
7. R. Thara, S. John, K. Rao, Telepsychiatry in Chennai, 14. J. Beard et al., “Global Population Ageing: Peril or 
India: The SCARF experience. Behav Sci Law 26, 315 Promise?”  (Harvard Institute of Global Health, 2012).
(2008).
19
REFERENCES (continued)
15. A. Mohit, Report of WHO’s World Mental Health 25. D. Ben-Zeev, K. E. Davis, S. Kaiser, I. Krzsos, R. E. 
Survey. The Lancet 367, 968 (2006). Drake, Mobile Technologies Among People with Serious 
Mental Illness: Opportunities for Future Services. Adm 
16. W. W. Eaton et al., The Burden of Mental Disorders. Policy Ment Health 40, 340 (2013).
Epidemiol Rev 30, 1 (2008).
26. C. A. Depp et al., Mobile Interventions for Severe 
17. L. G. Exalto et al., Risk score for prediction of 10 year Mental Illness: Design and Preliminary Data from Three 
dementia risk in individuals with type 2 diabetes: a cohort Approaches. J Nerv Ment Dis 198, 715 (2010).
study. The Lancet Diabetes & Endocrinology,  (2013).
27. K. Myers, C. Turvey, Telemental Health: Clinical, Technical, 
18. C. F. Reynolds et al., Early Intervention to Reduce the and Administrative Foundations for Evidence-Based 
Global Health and Economic Burden of Major Depression Practice.  (Elsevier, Inc., Waltham, MA, 2013).
in Older Adults. Annu Rev Public Health 33, 123 (2012).
28. Center for Technology and Aging, “Technologies to 
19. C. F. Reynolds, The cutting edge: prevention of Help Older Adults Maintain Independence: Advancing 
depressive disorders. Depress Anxiety 26, 1062 (2009). Technology Adoption”  (Center for Technology and Aging, 
20. A. Wimo, B. Winblad, H. Aguero-Torres, E. von Strauss, 2009).
The magnitude of dementia occurrence in the world. 29. SIMpill. The SIMpill Medication Adherence Solution. 
Alzheimer DIs Assoc Disord 17, 63 (2003). (2012). Accessed on: Access Year Access Date|. Available 
21. V. Patel, M. Prince, Ageing and mental health in a rom: URL
developing country: who cares? Qualitative studies from 30. The South African Depression and Anxiety Group. 
Goa, India. Psychological Medicine 31, 29 (2001). Welcome.  (2013). Accessed on: Access Year Access 
22. HelpAge International, Mental health: What’s the Date|. Available rom: URL
problem? Ageways September 2004, 4 (2004). 31. M. Papastergiou, Exploring the potential of computer 
23. A. F. Jorm, Mental health literacy: Empowering and video games for health and physical education: A 
the community to take action for better mental health. literature review. Computers & Education 53, 603 (2009).
American Psychologist 67, 231 (2012). 32. J. M. Bernhardt et al., Alcohol Assessment Among 
24. V. Patel et al., Treatment and prevention of mental College Students Using Wireless Mobile Technology. 
disorders in low-income and middle-income countries. Journal of Studies on Alcohol and Drugs 70, 771 (2009).
The Lancet 370, 991 (2007).
20
33. D. H. Gustafson et al., Explicating an evidence-based, 39. Ilajnafsy. Arabic Internet-based treatment of PTSD. 
theoretically informed, mobile technology-based system (2013). Accessed on: Access Year Access Date|. Available 
to improve outcomes for people in recovery for alcohol rom: URL
dependence. Substance Use & Misuse 46, 96 (2011).
40. The Alzheimer’s Reading Room. Brainy App for 
34. A. M. Cohn, D. Hunter-Reel, B. T. Hagman, J. Mitchell, Alzheimer’s (2011). Accessed on: Access Year Access 
Promoting behavior change from alcohol use through Date|. Available rom: URL
mobile technology: The future of ecological momentary 
assessment. Alcoholism: Clinical and Experimental Research 41. E. M. La Rue, Y. Li, H. A. Karimi, A. M. Mitchell, A 
35, 1 (2011). Description of the Development and Architecture of an 
SMS-Based System for Dealing With Depression. Procedia 
35. M. J. Freedman, K. M. Lester, C. McNamara, J. B. Milby, Technology 5, 670 (2012).
J. E. Schumacher, Cell phones for ecological momentary 
assessment with cocaine-addicted homeless patients in 42. Text to Change. M-Kifafa: Mobile technology for 
treatment. Journal of Substance Abuse Treatment 30, 105 epilepsy.  (2012). Accessed on: Access Year Access Date|. 
(2006). Available rom: URL
36. B. Smith et al., Enhancing behavioral health treatment 43. Center for Health Market Innovations. M-Kifafa. 
and crisis management through mobile ecological (2012). Accessed on: Access Year Access Date|. Available 
momentary assessment and SMS messaging. Health rom: URL
Informatics Journal 18, 294 (2012). 44. B.-Z. Granholm, F. Linkov, Mobile Assessment and 
37. D. D. Luxton, R. A. McCann, N. E. Bush, M. C. Mishkind, Treatment for Schizophrenia (MATS): A Pilot Trial of An 
G. M. Reger, mHealth for mental health: Integrating Interactive Text-Messaging Intervention for Medication 
smartphone technology in behavioral healthcare. Adherence, Socialization, and Auditory Hallucinations. 
Professional Psychology: Research and Practice 42, 505 Schizophrenia Bulletin 38, 414 (2012).
(2011). 45. The MINDS Foundation. Our Method: Our 3-Phase 
38. A. E. Kazdin, S. M. Rabbitt, Novel Models for Grassroots Program.  (2013). Accessed on: Access Year 
Delivering Mental Health Services and Reducing the Access Date|. Available rom: URL
Burdens of Mental Illness. Clinical Psychological Science 46. Schizophrenia Research Foundation. Tele Medicine. 
1, 170 (2013). (2013). Accessed on: Access Year Access Date|. Available 
rom: URL
21
REFERENCES (continued)
47. D. Coyle, G. Doherty, J. Sharry, in CHI EA 2010 55. S. Fernando, Mental health services in low-income 
Extended Abstracts on Human Factors in Computing countries: Challenges and innovations. International 
Systems. (2010). Journal of Migration, Health & Social Care 1, 13 (2005).
48. 48. M. Price, P. L. Anderson, Outcome expectancy as 56. P. Mechael et al., “Barriers and gaps affecting 
a predictor of treatment response in cognitive behavioral mHealth in low and middle income countries: Policy white 
therapy for public speaking fears with social anxiety paper”  (The Earth Institute Columbia University and the 
disorder. Psychotherapy 49, 173 (2011). mHealth Alliance, 2010).
49. D. Erhardt, E. Dorian, Going Mobile: A Case Vignette 57. P. Mechael, The Dodowa Health Research Center, For 
Illustrating the Integration of Mobile Technology in the Grameen Technology Foundation, “MoTECH: mHealth 
Psychotherapy. Independent Practitioner 33, 15 (2013). Ethnography Report”  (2009).
50. M. Price et al., mHealth: A Mechanism to Deliver 58. A. de-Graft Aikins, P. Boynton, L. L. Atanga, 
More Accessible, More Effective Mental Health Care. Developing effective chronic disease interventions in 
Clinical Psychology & Psychotherapy,  (2013). Africa: insights from Ghana and Cameroon. Globalization 
and Health 6,  (2010).
51. P. Verhaak, E. Van de Lisdonk, J. Bor, G. Hutschemaekers, 
GPs’ referral to mental health care during the past 25 59. R. Korste, How to convey the new World Health 
years. The British Journal of General Practice 50, 307 Organization mental health Intervention Guide to workers 
(2000). in the field? Intervention 10, 66 (2012).
52. R. P. Greenberg, M. J. Constantino, N. Bruce, Are 60. B. DeRenzi, in CHI. (Florence, Italy, 2008).
patient expectations still relevant for psychotherapy 
process and outcome? Clinical Psychology Review 26, 61. G. M. Kramer, M. C. Mishkind, D. D. Luxton, J. H. 
657 (2006). Shore, in Telemental Health: Clinical, Technical, and 
Administrative Foundations for Evidence-Based Practice, 
53. D. A. Summerfield, The exaggerated claims of the K. Myers, C. Turvey, Eds. (Elsevier Insights, Waltham, 
mental health industry. BMJ 344, e1791 (2012). MA, 2013).
54. D. A. Summerfield, How scientifically valid is the 
knowledge base of global mental health? BMJ 336, 992 
(2008).
22


