  
  
  
Text Me! Flash Me! Call Me!  
 
 
 
B rief Overview 
Given the repeated anti-MSM (men who have sex with men) attacks in the media, by politicians and religious 
leaders, and most recently by community vigilantly groups, it has become increasingly difficult for MSM to 
access health information and services in Ghana. Only a fraction of MSM that live in Ghana are being reached 
through peer education, HelpLine Counseling and drop-in-centers. mHealth and social media has transformed 
the ability of programs to reach most-at-risk populations (MARPs) or key populations (KPs) who are 
otherwise ‘hidden’. 
The USAID/GHANA Strengthening HIV/AIDS Response 
Partnership with Evidence-Based Results (SHARPER) 
project, led by FHI 360, aims to contribute to Ghana’s 
national goal of reduction in new HIV infections by 50 
percent by 2013 through delivery of an integrated 
project, tailored to the needs of key populations and 
their partners.   
Launched in September 2008 under a previous USAID 
funded project, the Text Me! Flash Me! Helpline uses 
cell phone technology to provide KPs in Ghana with 
friendly and accessible HIV/ AIDS and other STIs 
information, referrals, and ART reminders through SMS and counseling services from qualified providers. 
These services are opt-in so only those that feel comfortable in sharing their mobile number to the project 
receive messages. 
 
 
 Geographic Coverage: 
Ghana 
 
 Implementation Partners: 
FHI360, under the USAID/Ghana SHARPER project, leads a team of partners which includes: 
The Ghana AIDS Commission, National AIDS Control Program, Ghana Health Services (GHS) 
and 33 Local NGOs  
 
 Funder: 
USAID 
 
 For More Information Contact: 
USAID 
 Peter Wondergem, Senior HIV/AIDS Advisor, USAID Ghana;  
Tel: +233-244-329-003; email: p.wondergem@usaid.gov 
 
FHI 360  
 Dr. Henry Nagai, Chief of Party, USAID/SHARPER project; 
Ghana Country Office Demmco House, 1st Dzorwulu Crescent, Accra, Ghana; 
Tel: +233-302-740780; +233-244-26666; email: hnagai@fhi360.org 
 21 
 
Behavior Change Communication 
 Text Me! Flash Me! Call Me! 
 
About Text Me! Flash Me! Call Me! with HIV prevention information. Additionally, over 
Text Me! Flash Me! Call Me! is designed to increase KP's 20,600 calls were made to MSM during the same period, 
access to and use of friendly and confidential HIV/AIDS (an average of 57 calls per counselor per month).  An 
and other STI information, referrals, and counseling average call lasts twenty minutes. 
services. It is also intended to reinforce information and  
key messages provided by peer educators and facility- Information from monitoring data of the project indicates 
based health workers, as well as provide a safe haven for that the main reasons for contacting the HelpLine are to 
first time or shy clients to make anonymous inquiries and access information and advice about ART, HIV, and other 
get help.  Finally, it seeks to strengthen the referral STIs. In addition, as part of routine monitoring of the 
networks and community-facility linkages within the intervention, telephone-one-on-one interviews and focus 
continuum of prevention, treatment, care, and support group discussions (FGDs) conducted revealed strong 
services for KPs. clients’ satisfaction.  
  
The HelpLine interventions enable clients to text or ‘flash’ “I sometimes forget to take my medicine but these messages 
(call and immediately hang-up which is free of charge) or are serving as very reliable reminders…These messages are 
call a HelpLine Counselor (HLC) on duty. Each HLC is my second ‘Nyame’ (Lord).” 
assigned a mobile telephone, and the phone numbers and  
duty hours are disseminated through social networks, Lessons Learned 
discrete fliers, and by peer educators. Helpline counselors • Consistent key message reminders have contributed 
call clients back within 24 hours. Through telephone to KPs seeking appropriate and timely health 
counseling, HLCs provide quality and confidential information and services. 
information on some ten HIV-prevention centered • Confidentiality and non-discrimination provides KPs 
behaviors and prevention of gender-based violence (GBV) (especially MSM) with an assured medium to 
to the said target groups. communicate. 
 • mHealth provides an effective means for health 
Currently, there are a total of 30 Helpline Counselors message recipients to participate in health promotion 
(HLCs) based at government HIV testing and by enabling them to forward SMS messages to their 
counseling/STI clinics in six regions of Ghana. They peers. 
receive calls from all regions of Ghana, and thus their • Inclusion of PLHIV in the target population for the 
telephone counseling services are offered nationwide. The Helpline counselors has reinforced information on 
HLCs are nationally certified HIV nurse counselors with ART adherence and provided an avenue to seek 
the National AIDS Control Program (NACP) of the additional psychological and emotional counseling for 
Ghana Health Service. Additionally, the SHARPER Project positive living. 
provides training for all recruited HLCs on  
communication, human rights, gender-based violence Conclusion 
(GBV), other sexually-transmitted infections (STIs), and 
The monitoring and evaluation findings revealed that there 
stigma reduction. The intervention also incorporates: a 
was an increase in demand for information about HIV 
HealthyLiving SMS service where weekly health messages 
counseling and testing, as well as sexually transmitted 
are sent to MSM and other KPs; LifeLine service where 
infection, diagnosis, and treatment services. The SMS 
daily ART adherence reminders are sent to people living 
service and HelpLine increased clients' knowledge of and 
with HIV (PLHIV); and the use of mHealth!, a smart phone 
intention to use condoms and lubricants.  mHealth and 
social media networking to reach ‘hidden’ MSM 
social media have enhanced the ability of programs to 
 
reach MARPs who are most at risk of HIV but are also 
Evaluation and Results the hardest to reach.  
Between October 2011 and September 2012, over 63,000 
SMS contacts were made, and 9,800 clients were reached 
22  Information was excerpted from: 
http://www.comminit.com/node/291748 
 
