MALARIA COMMUNITY SURVEILLANCE 
FOR ELIMINATION 
Leveraging mobile phones and community health workers for malaria 
surveillance in Zambia  
SERVICE DELIVERY 
Implementation date: February 2012 
Zambia has set the forward-looking goal of malaria elimination, targeting select areas before expanding efforts nation-wide. This 
is a very ambitious goal given the landlocked country has varied malaria risk with areas of the north possessing a very high 
malaria burden with more than 24 percent of children infected and the central and southern regions with far less malaria. Akros 
and partners developed a surveillance system that leverages community health workers (CHWs) and mobile phones to increase 
access to malaria testing and treatment services, provides high-resolution data and maps that illustrate hotspots, and reveals 
areas nearing the goal of malaria elimination.  
About Malaria Community Surveillance for Elimination 
There was a need to go further beyond  the facility-level in Health Information System) through java-enabled feature 
 
diagnosing and treating malaria if Zambia is to be successful phones. Dashboards and feedback loops have been 
in eliminating the disease. Malaria services need to be developed and implemented, also leveraging mHealth 
e xtended to the community level, especially in the rural technologies, to ensure district and community counterparts 
areas of Zambia, where these services are difficult to access. understand and utilize data in their resource allocation and 
People living in these communities often have to travel long decision-making. The district dashboards created within 
d istances to access malaria services and treatment.  In DHIS2 provide graphs and maps showing different types of 
acknowledging this critical need, Akros and partners information including reporting rates, commodity stocks and 
developed a community-level malaria surveillance system, malaria burden indicators, by clinic and on a monthly basis. 
 
which relies on tireless efforts of community health workers This allows districts to monitor performance of clinics 
(CHWs). The CHWs were trained to diagnose and treat remotely and target areas that require on-site technical 
m alaria and report these data to the central DHIS2 (District support or additional malaria response activities.  
 
 
 
 
70  |  mHealth Compendium Volume 4 
Evaluation and Results 
This new system has revitalized malaria surveillance in eight districts of Zambia. Malaria-related data are now reported on a 
weekly and monthly basis by cell phone in the districts of Choma, Kalomo, Kazungula, Namwala, Pemba and Zimba in 
Southern Province as well as Itezhi tezhi and Mumbwa Districts in Central Province. Surveillance coverage has also been 
significantly improved from some 150 data points represented by health facilities to more than 1,500 data points now 
represented by CHWs tasked with providing services for malaria screening and treatment in their villages.    
Data received provide a near real-time picture of the location of malaria hotspots as well the progress of areas towards the 
achievement of zero malaria cases (elimination). In the trenches of malaria elimination campaigns, the speedy, granular data 
provided through the community surveillance system are necessary to encourage political will and a continued push towards 
achievement of elimination. 
Lessons Learned 
 CHWs are the crucial workforce within this system; their 
involvement in this system is a source of pride; maintaining 
communication through feedback loops (via mobile phone and Geographic Coverage: Three provinces (four 
personal interaction) is essential districts) in Zambia  
 Incentives such as providing prepaid air time vouchers for Implementation Partners: Akros, MACEPA, 
personal cell phones encourages strong reporting rates Zambia Integrated Systems Strengthening (ZISSP)/
USAID, Isdell Flowers Cross-border Malaria 
 Keep it simple; long lists of indicators to collect are not a good Initiative  
choice for rural community surveillance systems 
Funder: MACEPA, USAID, Isdell Flowers/
 Data must be extremely tangible and accessible to all Zambian Anglican Council  
stakeholders in order to actually be integrated into decision-
making; DHIS2 dashboards have been an invaluable tool in that Contact Information: 
regard 
Akros | Anna Winters, Epidemiologist (+26 
0974366783,  awinters@akros.com) 
Conclusion 
Akros | Zunda Chisha, Malaria Surveillance 
As Zambia, and other countries embark on malaria elimination goals, Program Manager (+26 0977707717, 
the establishment of quality surveillance systems is crucial. Clinic- zchisha@akros.com)  
based systems are typically not enough in areas moving from the pre-
elimination to elimination stages. Increasing access to care to ensure See References on page 89. 
all malaria infections are identified and treated to prevent onward 
transmission is essential. Leveraging mHealth tools such as the use of 
mobile phones to capture and report data from the most rural of 
areas is possible and can be highly successful.   
 
mHealth Compendium Volume 4  |  71 
