  
  
C ommunity IMCI (cIMCI) 
  
B rief Overview 
 
Malawi is home to 6.8 million children. Infant and 
child mortality rates are high due in part to 
widespread  poverty, lack of access to sanitation, 
food insecurity, and preventable diseases. While the 
prospects for child survival have improved over the 
past few years, one in eight children are still dying, 
mostly of preventable causes such as neonatal 
conditions, pneumonia, diarrhoea, malaria, and HIV-
related diseases. Malnutrition levels remain high and 
underly over half of all child deaths. 
 
D-tree International is a technical assistance partner 
in the USAID-funded “Integrated (HIV Effect) Mitigation and Positive Action for Community Transformation” 
(IMPACT) project, which is designed to improve the quality of life of orphans and vulnerable children (OVC) 
in targeted districts of Malawi.  D-tree designed a mobile phone-based application that is being used by 50 
health surveillance assistants (HSAs) in three districts in Malawi. The application assists the HSAs in accurately 
treating children aged two to 59 months who are sick and supports them to follow the community integrated 
management of childhood illness (IMCI) protocol provided by the Ministry of Health’s IMCI unit. The tool was 
modeled on the government of Malawi’s community case management (CCM) protocol, which was developed 
to ensure that the front lines of the health system have the tools they need to reduce the common causes of 
childhood morbidity and mortality. 
 
The IMPACT project is being implemented from June 2010 to June 2014, and the last cIMCI mobile application 
training was completed in August 2012. Over 4,000 children have been assisted with the use of the CCM 
mobile application through the IMPACT project. 
 
   Geographic Coverage: 
 Three districts in Malawi 
 
  Implementation Partners: 
D-tree International | Malawi Ministry of Health, Integrated Management of Childhood 
 Illness Unit 
 
  Funder: 
USAID/Malawi 
  
 For More Information Contact: 
 USAID  
 Kate Vorley, Community Care and OVC Advisor; 
P.O. Box 30455, Lilongwe, Malawi; 
Tel: +265-1-772-455; email: kvorley@usaid.gov 
D-tree 
 Dr. Marc Mitchell, President; 
52 Whitney Tavern Road, Weston, MA 02493;  
Tel: +1 617-432-6322; email: mmitchel@hsph.hardard.edu 
 
 55 
 
Service Delivery 
 
 Community IMCI (cIMCI) 
 
About Community IMCI (cIMCI) At the beginning of the project, some caregivers were 
The stand-alone application runs on a java-enabled skeptical about the use of the phone at the village clinic. 
phone that HSAs use offline. HSAs are guided step by However, anecdotal data suggest that they came to 
step through the process of registering sick children, appreciate the tool once they experienced the improved 
listening to their complaints, performing an examination, thoroughness of examinations. One of the HSAs reports 
delivering diagnosis, and administering treatment. The hearing one caregiver tell another, “You were lucky, 
tool follows the Ministry of Health (MoH) guidelines because your child was assessed with the phone today.” 
exactly and makes it difficult for HSAs to make mistakes  
such as missing danger signs or examination points, or A planned evaluation in 2013 will compare performance 
prescribing the wrong or incorrect quantities of on the following indicators by the mobile phone-based 
medicine.  The application also supports HSAs to refer system vs. paper-based: 
children who are in need of more advanced care to a • Protocol adherence; 
health facility and allows the HSA to follow up with the • Correct diagnosis and treatment; 
child after referral. The current CCM protocol used by • Appropriate referrals; 
HSAs primarily focuses on four conditions: fever, cough, • Data quality; and  
diarrhea, and acute malnutrition. • Attitudes of HSAs and their patients (or caretakers 
 of children) towards the use of phone-based 
On a daily or weekly basis, HSAs send their completed protocols at the village clinic. 
data to a server using general packet radio service  
(GPRS), a packet oriented mobile data service which is Lessons Learned 
many times less costly than SMS, for backup and 
• Input from MoH is important to ensure the 
reporting purposes. Data and reports are then available 
application is compliant with government guidelines.  
for supervisors from the website at any time, rather 
than having to wait for the paper forms to be submitted • Replacing a paper-based system with a mobile 
and tabulated. application influences the reporting and supervisory 
 structures. This calls for careful consideration of 
appropriate alternatives. 
Evaluation and Results • It is important to research phone suppliers, 
To analyze the effect of the mobile application, D-tree whether local or US-based, in order to avoid 
compared data from a village clinic register for a five procuring non-genuine or defective phones. 
month period before the introduction of the mobile • Establishing local champions or “super-users” in 
application with data the HSA sent through the mobile each area is critical so that they can provide basic 
application for the same five month period a year later. troubleshooting support to other HSAs. This is 
The comparison revealed that the use of the mobile especially important as the project scales up. 
application increased the number of referrals from five • The main reason users failed to submit data is due 
percent to 11 percent. These findings affirm those of to either a lack of medicine at their village clinic or 
other studies which indicate that danger signs are often competing activities that prevented them from 
overlooked. This further suggests that the HSAs are operating the clinic. 
now more fully examining the children and referring  
where necessary.  Conclusion 
 
The findings also show that follow up has increased cIMCI can be effectively programmed and deployed on 
substantially since the introduction of the mobile an easy to use mobile device to support HSAs working 
application. No follow up information was entered in in hard to reach areas.  The HSAs using this application 
the paper register whereas 26 percent of visits were adhere more effectively to protocols, perform better at 
actively followed up, according to mobile data.  identifying very sick children and referring them to 
health facilities, and are more likely to follow-up with 
the sickest clients. 
56 Information was excerpted from:  http://www.unicef.org/malawi/children.html 
https://groups.google.com/forum/?fromgroups=#!topic/ict4chw/uVMANnkDSeg 
 
