Improving the quality of child health care  
in Malawi at the primary level through  
decision-support tools
Hotensia Dzuwa, HSA, Mlangali Health Centre, Dedza
30  n  INTEGRATED COMMUNITY CASE MANAGEMENT
iCCM
Integrated Community Case Management is used in hard-to-
reach areas to complement facility-based services. In this project, 
health surveillance assistants use a mobile application to assist in 
providing health services to children under five years.
Malawi is among the nine low-income countries that reduced their under-five mortality rate by 60% or more between 
1990 and 2011.  Despite this progress, many children continue to die from conditions that are easily preventable and 
treatable. 
-A large proportion of children in Malawi are still at increased risk of mortality due to common childhood infections. 
The leading causes of under-five mortality in Malawi are malaria (13%),  AIDS (13%), pneumonia (11%), diarrhea 
(7%), and neonatal conditions (31%).  The Ministry of Health (MOH) and its partners have been scaling up a package 
of high-impact interventions to reduce under-five child mortality since 2007 under the Accelerated Child Survival and 
Development strategy.  These efforts have included integrated Community Case Management (iCCM) in hard-to-reach 
areas to complement fixed or scheduled facility-based services. D-tree International is the partner providing mHealth 
solutions to support the implementation of iCCM to improve the quality of care provided to children under five.  
About iCCM
In this project, health surveillance assistants (HSAs), a cadre The second component links the iCCM application to the of community health workers, use a mobile application to logistics management system to improve the availability of 
assist them in providing health services to under-five chil- needed drugs to the rural clinics where HSAs see patients. 
dren (2-59 months) in line with the MOH-approved iCCM This work has been coordinated with the MOH cStock pro-
protocol. The iCCM mobile application is a Mangologic gram to improve its use in tracking drug inventories. D-tree 
application which runs on an Android platform.  developed a simple user interface within the application for 
The components of the mobile application strengthen the the health workers to use to report stock levels, which is then 
ability of HSAs to deliver effective and efficient care. These submitted to cStock via structured SMS.
components are synergistic in providing a comprehensive array The third component of this project is the supervisory tool 
of tools and a supportive supervisory framework for the HSA. for those who are managing and supervising HSAs. The tool 
The first component of the iCCM application captures all is based on the new paper-based routine supervision checklist 
the elements of the village register used by the HSA. The developed by the MOH and Save the Children. It focuses on 
application supports HSAs to make the appropriate decisions key performance indicators for the HSAs. The tool facilitates 
on treatment. HSAs are also enabled to accurately report on both collection and interpretation of data and also has a 
their work in a timely manner. The iCCM mobile applica- dashboard so users can see the status of the work being done 
tion therefore enforces adherence to clinical protocols and by HSAs; it will also provide information for project-related 
iCCM holistically. decision-making.
mHEALTH COMPENDIUM  SPECIAL EDITION 2016  n  31
Program Design Process
The algorithm for the application was developed using the UNICEF, Support for Service Delivery Integration, and the 
MOH’s approved iCCM protocol. After the development World Health Organization.
and design of the application, D-tree trained six HSAs from D-tree employs a number of avenues to solicit feedback to 
Ntchisi District to use the application in their respective improve the application. D-tree has set up a chat group on 
village clinics. The six HSAs were engaged to solicit feedback Whatsapp which serves as a community of practice among 
about the functionality, relevance, and user friendliness of the HSAs in their respective health facilities to share informa-
the application to refine it. The refinement process took two tion on the usage and difficulties they may be facing. HSA 
months. The district health management team and Integrated supervisors also have a chat group on Whatsapp where they 
Management of Childhood Illnesses (IMCI) Unit were then share ideas and give feedback on the use of the application. 
informed and permission was granted to roll out the appli- There is a dedicated helpline, which is available to all HSAs to 
cation to all HSAs conducting iCCM in the district. D-tree call during working hours. D-tree interacts with IMCI experts 
trained MOH officials to train the HSAs. MOH officials were who have the mandate from MOH to make changes to the 
used as trainers with the objective of ensuring sustainability, protocols and to give feedback which is incorporated into 
support, and easy management of mobile application use. the application. As part of project implementation, there are 
To keep the MOH and other relevant stakeholders informed scheduled review meetings at the district and health facility 
about the progress of the implementation, presentations on levels where HSA supervisors and HSAs review progress and 
the application functionality and roll-out were made during give feedback on use of the application. When feedback has 
IMCI technical working group meetings, which are hosted been incorporated into the application, a new version is cre-
by the MOH and attended by partners such as the Malar- ated and deployed remotely to the users. Users are informed 
ia Control Program, Central Monitoring and Evaluation through their respective chat forums and/or through SMS 
Department in the Ministry of Education, Save the Children, about the changes.
Growth in Scale
After initial development and refinement, the iCCM application was expanded to HSAs in Dedza and Ntcheu 
mHealth application was rolled out in Ntchisi District with districts in 2014 and in Mzimba North District in 2015. 
about 20 HSAs in 2013. By December 2014, 138 HSAs and By February 2016, 128 HSAs and 33 HSA supervisors in 
15 HSA supervisors in Ntchisi District had been trained. The Dedza, 116 HSAs in Mzimba North, and 133 HSAs and 38 
Figure 1.  
Number of children seen by quarter 
80,000 Dowa
Machinga
60,000 Ntchisi
Ntcheu
40,000
Mzimba 
North
20,000
Dedza
Q3 Q4 Q1 Q2 Q3 Q4 Q1 Q2 Q3 Q4 Q1
2013 2014 2015 2016
32  n  INTEGRATED COMMUNITY CASE MANAGEMENT
Flackson Chibwato, HSA, Chinguluwe Health Centre, Ntchisi
supervisors in Ntcheu had been trained to use the iCCM and application to support the work of the HSAs. The current 
supervisory applications. The HSAs have dedicated two to iCCM application was integrated with CBMNH protocols to 
three days a week to running the village clinics. However, they have an integrated CCM/CBMNH application. This appli-
see children who come to the village clinic even outside the cation was rolled out to 350 HSAs in Dowa District and 166 
dedicated days. On average, 75% of the HSAs are consistently HSAs in Machinga District in 2015. In total, the program 
using the mHealth application when assessing and treating has trained and equipped 1,031 HSAs and 84 HSA supervi-
children at the village clinics. sors since 2013. The total number of clients seen as of March 
HSAs are responsible for a number of health services, in- 2016 is 307,762 (see Figure 1). 
cluding family planning; community case management; During 2016, D-tree will also add a family planning com-
community-based maternal and neonatal health (CBMNH); ponent to the application and add coverage to at least one 
nutrition; and water, sanitation, and hygiene (WASH). more district.
D-tree plans to integrate as many services as possible into one 
Evaluation and Results
D-tree International carried out an evaluation to determine treatment given depends on the availability of the drugs and 
the clinical effectiveness of the electronic CCM. A mixed supplies recommended. Sixty percent of cases were referred 
approach was used to collect both quantitative and qualitative appropriately in the intervention (phone) group while 48% of 
data. The results showed higher scores in assessment, identi- the cases were referred correctly in the control (paper) group. 
fication of danger signs referrals (diagnosis), treatment, and Counseling and treatment advice were seen to be higher 
counseling. These are the key elements in the management of among the phone users (93%) than the paper users (87%).
illnesses in children under-five. From the HSA and caregiver interviews, considerable pos-
Adherence to assessment using the eCCM app was 100% itive feeling and feedback were recorded. HSAs felt more 
compared to 91% for those using paper. With the phone confident in using the iCCM application. They also felt that 
application, all questions are asked and recorded before going there was a reduction in the frequency of visits by the same 
on to the next phase to encourage the HSA to go through the children as compared to before, which they attributed to the 
complete assessment. Paper users correctly identified 60% comprehensiveness of the assessment and care given to the 
of the danger signs compared to 100% of the phone users. child when using the phone. HSAs expressed knowledge gain 
Treatment of cases with no danger signs was higher in the pa- in using the application from the prompts and advice as well 
per users (79%) compared to the phone users (74%). While as counseling messages they get from the phone. HSAs also 
the phone provides the recommended treatment, the actual expressed improved follow-up rates for cases. However, they 
mHEALTH COMPENDIUM  SPECIAL EDITION 2016  n  33
were concerned with the double entry of data as they use both “The phone enables me to conduct a comprehensive assessment 
the phone and paper registers. of the child. The phone makes a diagnosis for me, so it makes 
Quotes from the district health team and HSAs include: my work easier, unlike before where I had to make sense of the 
symptoms to make a diagnosis.” —Daniel Mandevu, Bembeke 
“It is better to use the phone than the paper, because the phone has Health Centre, Dedza
everything you need to do CCM.” —District IMCI coordinator
Lessons Learned in Program Implementation and Scaling
n It takes effort to train and generate stakeholder in- iCCM system, when there are drug stock-outs, the 
terest in using data arising from the implementation of HSAs tend to close the village clinics, so a mobile tool 
a mHealth application; simply building program dash- will only have limited effectiveness. Therefore, contin-
boards is not enough. We have now worked to ensure ued supervisory support is needed for both eCCM and 
that the results from each district’s activities are reviewed non-mobile sites to help the HSAs feel confident to still 
and presented at the quarterly program meetings. For see sick children even if they lack medication, as they 
instance, based on the usage levels from Dowa District should be able to successfully diagnose them and identi-
in 2016, D-tree was able to establish that the HSAs fy those who need home care and those who need to be 
faced acute drug shortages and therefore were unable to urgently referred.
operate the village clinics at full scale. This was brought 
n When scaling up, it is important to have clear and 
to the attention of the IMCI unit, which sent a team to sustainable follow-up and support processes in place. 
try to resolve the situation. It is more helpful to avoid creating parallel structures and 
n The involvement of communities in managing the instead use existing structures to provide the support. 
phones is critical to their sustainability. There have 
n In order to enhance coordination efforts between pro-
been occasions when an HSA’s phone was stolen and grams at the MOH and to support the use of data for 
later returned by another community member, as they decision-making, D-tree placed a team member at 
saw this as a tool that belonged to the community and the IMCI unit to serve as mHealth coordinator.
not just an individual. This is because after the applica-
tion training, the HSAs sensitize the communities that n Although the mHealth application does not yet directly 
they will now be using the phone to assess and treat the connect into the District Health Information Software 2 
children. The community then sees the phone as a tool (DHIS2), the monthly reporting feature has shown 
for running the village clinic. to be useful as the districts using the mobile application 
have shown improved reporting rates into DHIS2. In 
n The implementation of the mHealth system is not the Central West Zone, for example, the mobile districts 
a panacea to fix all the problems of the health showed 100% reporting rates for the last 5 months with 
system. It is and should be part of an integrated system 89% reporting on time as compared to a 77% reporting 
to improve health care and outcomes. Specific to the rate and 53% on time in the non-mobile districts.
Future Plans
D-tree plans to develop a supervisory application for the With the continuous support to improve quality of care, the 
integrated CCM/CBMNH application, which will allow the next step for D-tree is to integrate family planning into the 
HSA supervisors to monitor the performance of their HSAs existing CCM/CBMNH application. This is another key 
from a mobile device. As the program has grown, we have component of the work of the HSAs and was identified as 
seen the need to engage HSA supervisors as well as assistant a priority following discussions with the MOH. With the 
environmental health officers as a way of extending the ability addition of family planning, the application will now serve 
of the program to identify HSAs who are struggling and to re- to support most of the functions the HSAs perform. The 
solve common issues. In addition, the supervisory application integration of applications is in line with the MOH strategic 
will improve interaction between the HSAs and their super- plan where standalone services are being integrated to ensure 
visors through remotely checking the HSAs’ performance. a holistic approach to health care given to clients whose health 
Currently, physical supervisions to check HSAs’ performance needs span across multiple services. 
are irregular due to financial constraints in the MOH.
34  n  INTEGRATED COMMUNITY CASE MANAGEMENT
Two HSAs doing a role play at a CCM mHealth app training in Ntcheu
D-tree, in collaboration with other partners, is working with Snapshot: iCCM
the MOH to put systems in place that will enable interoper-
ability of both systems to allow data from the mobile applica- Geographic MalawiCoverage Districts: Dedza, Mzimba North, Ntcheu, Ntchisi, 
tion to be sent to DHIS2. Currently, the health information Dowa, and Machinga
system (HIS) policy has been approved and standard operat- Implementation July 2012–March 2017
ing procedures (SOPS) are being developed. The SOPs will Dates
determine the process of interoperability. Implementation D-tree International (project design and 
While there is strong support from the MOH for contin- Partners implementation support)ThingsPrime (solutions architect)
ued use of the application and scale-up, the current funding Ministry of Health (implementer)
streams end in 2016 and 2017, presenting a challenge for the Save the Children (project partner)
future. This is an issue the MOH faces in other programs as Jhpiego Support for Service Delivery Integration (project partner)
well, as donors are directing funding through development 
partners rather than through the MOH, limiting the govern- Donor(s) Barr FoundationSave the Children Canada
ment’s ability to fund their priorities.  n Jhpiego Support for Service Delivery Integration
Contact Steve Ollis, Chief Operating Officer, D-tree 
Information International, sollis@d-tree.org
References & Additional Resources 
1. Agarwal Smisha, LeFevre Amnesty E, Lee Jaime, L’Engle Kelly, Mehl Garrett, Sinha Chaitali et al. Guidelines for reporting of health 
interventions using mobile phones: mobile health (mHealth) evidence reporting and assessment (mERA) checklist. BMJ. 2016.
2. UNICEF. Committing to Child Survival : A Promised Renewed. Progress Report 2012
3. Bryce J, Requejo JH. 2010. Countdown to 2015 Decade report (2000–2010): Taking stock of maternal, newborn, and child survival. New York, 
Countdown to 2015 for Maternal, Newborn and Child Health.
mHEALTH COMPENDIUM  SPECIAL EDITION 2016  n  35
