  
  
e Nutrition 
 
B rief Overview 
 
Malnutrition is a disease that threatens the lives of children 
worldwide. It is especially serious in Zanzibar, where nearly 12 
percent of children have acute malnutrition. While acute 
malnutrition is an entirely treatable condition, 2009 data 
available from sites in Zanzibar showed that between 20 to 30 
percent of children who were admitted with severe acute 
malnutrition (SAM) died, despite receiving treatment. If 
children with SAM are treated according to the 
WHO/UNICEF standard treatment recommendations, case 
fatality rates can be reduced to as low as five percent.  
 
In 2010, the Zanzibar Ministry of Health and Social Welfare 
(MOHSW) developed guidelines for outpatient therapeutic 
care (OTC) and rolled it out to all health facilities. However, 
implementation has been challenging as the guidelines are 
relatively complex and depend on access to information about 
a child’s past weight, past treatment, and guideline targets. This 
information is only available when a variety of records are 
referenced for each visit. Typically, the records are either 
missing or difficult to interpret.  
 
In response to this, D-tree International developed a mobile decision support tool for nurses providing OTC 
for children with SAM in Zanzibar.  The pilot program is currently being implemented in 12 health centers in 
two districts and will scale up to cover 50 sites covering all districts in Zanzibar.  The program implementation 
period is from July 2010 to December 2013. 
   Geographic Coverage: 
 Zanzibar, Tanzania 
 
 Implementation Partners: 
D-tree International, with funding from the Government of Norway through the 
mHealth Alliance’s Innovation Working Group’s Catalytic mHealth Grants Program 
under the UN Secretary-General’s Every Woman Every Child, is leading a team of 
partners which include: 
Ministry of Health Zanzibar Nutrition Unit | Etisalat | Zantel 
 
 Funder: 
UNICEF’s Innovation Working Group and Norad through the mHealth 
Alliance 
 
 For More Information Contact: 
UNICEF  
 Brenda Muwaga;  
Tel: +255-763-099-724; email: bmuwaga@unicef.org 
D-tree  
 Marc Mitchell, President 
 52 Whitney Tavern Road, Weston, MA 02493 59 
   Tel: +1-617-432- 6322; email: mmitchel@hsph.harvard.edu 
 
 
Service Delivery 
  
 eNutrition 
 
 
About eNutrition Early evaluation also reveals that caretakers accept the 
In order to make acccess to records and protocols use of phones in the provision of care, and nurses are 
easier for nurses, D-tree developed a mobile phone- enthusiastic about the intervention, reporting that the 
based tool that provides relevant information in a application: 
format that is easily followed and monitored. The tool • Makes their job easier; 
replicates the MOH’s guidelines for provision of care to • Makes it easier to follow national guidelines; 
children with SAM. The software runs on the Android • Simplifies the interactions with clients; and 
operating system and combines on-device electronic • Is easy to use. 
medical records with detailed instructions for patient  
visits and a platform for recording information. The The use of electronic protocols and records can lead to 
application protects data via a login procedure requiring better adherence by nurses to national guidelines. This 
a username and password.  is especially true for those aspects of the protocols 
 demanding arithmetic calculations, such as the amount 
The tool partitions the national guidelines into several of food supplement to provide. For the comparison of 
electronic protocols which all have access to and adherence between paper and electronic protocols, 
contribute to the patient’s record.  It allows for the client data from between December 2010 and March 
screening and registration of each child with 2011 were selected and checked for errors in 
malnutrition. For each visit of the enrolled child, the calculation of the amount of ready-to-use therapeutic 
nurse is prompted to conduct and log the following foods provided (based on body weight), calculation of 
actions: target weight (based on enrollment weight), and to see 
• Screening for status (weighing, etc.); if clients were being discharged in accordance with the 
• Appetite test, as prescribed by the guidelines; national guidelines (showing 15 percent weight gain and 
• Physical examination (e.g. to check for no complications). In each case, the error rates dropped 
complications); from as high as 45 percent to zero percent within the 
• Treatment (e.g., provision of correct amounts first three months of using the phone-based tool. 
of ready-to-use therapeutic foods); Additionally, there were significant increases in cure 
• Counseling of the caregiver; and rates (over 33 percent improvement) comparing before 
• Setting next appointment. and after the phone-based program was implemented. 
  
Entered data is then sent to a server using general Lessons Learned 
packet radio service (GPRS), a packet oriented mobile • When replicating this program, one should 
data service, for backup, storage, and reporting.  From anticipate frequent staff turnover in program 
the server, the MOH, District Health Management planning, train all potential users, and be 
Team (DHMT), and supervisors can view the required prepared to train new users due to frequent 
government reports in a graphical format.   transfers among nurses. 
 • An effective facility based intervention such as 
Evaluation and Results OTC treatment of SAM will benefit from a 
With regard to the feasibility of this solution, the concerted community component for the 
program has demonstrated the following: screening and follow-up of defaulters. 
• Nurses have little problem in learning to use Conclusion 
the software and the device; This project has demonstrated that nurses can use 
• Network coverage and speeds permit nurses decision support tools at the point of care to more 
to synchronize their patient records with a effectively treat children with SAM. Additionally, 
central server located in Dar es Salaam, and supervisors can more effectively monitor and report on 
nurses easily learn how to do this; and the status of program implementation using a mobile-
• Nurses are able to take responsibility for enabled system. 
recharging the phone batteries. 
60 Information was excerpted from:  http://www.d-tree.org/wp-content/uploads/2010/08/D-tree-Excerpt-Innovation-Report-Sept-2011.pdf 
http://www.d-tree.org/our-approach/press/ 
http://www.gsma.com/mobilefordevelopment/treating-malnutrition-in-zanzibar-empowering-health-workers-with-an-mhealth-
solution/ 
 
