Translate
HealthPhone™ Custom	Search Select	Language ​ ▼
Free	Downloads
	Watch	Videos	—	Channels	—	Languages	—	Health	Topics
Topic	Categories
HealthPhone™	 is	 a	video	 reference	 library	 and Videos	by	Language
Share guide	 to	better	health	and	nutrition	practices,	 for
families	 and	 communities,	 including	 the	 illiterate, Mobile	Apps
Connect in	their	language,	distributed	on	mobile	phones.
Internet-in-a-Box
		 		
What	every	health	worker,	family	and	community	has	a	right	to	know
	 Channels
Poshan	|	Nutrition 		•	Over	2,500	videos	in	our	library
	Alive	&	Thrive
		•	Free	Downloads	for	phones,	tablets,	PCs
	Buzz	&	Bite
		•	Customised	apps,	microSD	memory	cards
	DigitalGreen
Laying	the	foundation	for
combating	malnutrition	in
India 	Facts	For	Life
	Food	&	Nutrition
Home
	Global	Health	Media
	Our	Partners
Join	Us! 	Grampari
Why	HealthPhone? 	Hands	to	Hearts
6.9	Million	Reasons
	iheedCrowd
What	is	HealthPhone?
Knowledge 	Medical	Aid	Films
What	We	Know
	Mother	Child
FAQ
HealthPhone	is	a	Winner! 	Mythri
Testimonials
Worldwide	Distribution 	No	Excuses
Help	us	Translate
	Nutrition
Link	to	us
About	us 	Palladium
Watch	the	TEDx	video 	Poshan
Contact HealthPhone:	The	First	Mile	Now	Reachable
Send	us	an	email 	Severe	Malnutrition
	TeachAIDS
©	2019 Connecting	the	Unconnected
HealthPhone™	is	a	project	of 	The	Three	Amigos
The	Mother	and	Child	Health
and	Education	Trust
a	U.S.	501(c)(3)	non	profit 	United	Methodist
organization.
	UNICEF	-	Ammaji
	UNICEF	-	Kyunki...
	WASH	United
Online	example		|		Buy	online
Launch	of	Medical	and	Health	Internet-in-a-Box	-	South	Asia	Edition
	
Wiki	Project	Med	Foundation	in	Collaboration	with	Internet-in-a-Box
and	HealthPhone	has	developed	an	Offline	Distribution	System	for
Medical	and	Other	Content	Geared	Specifically	to	South	Asia
	
	
Bringing	healthcare	information	to	those	who	have	no	Internet
	
	
Access	to	Information
Access	to	Information
Healthcare	information	is	the	essential	starting	point	for	people	seeking	to	care
for	 themselves	and	 their	 families	and	access	 to	 it	 is	particularly	 important	 in
low-resource	settings	where	 there	 is	no,	or	 inadequate,	contact	with	 trained,
well-informed	health	workers.	A	 lack	of	access	 results	 in	 the	 inability	 to	 take
appropriate	 action,	 indecision,	 delay	 or	 incorrect	 treatment,	 all	 of	 which
contribute	 to	 avoidable	 suffering	 and	 death.	 Ensuring	 access	 to	 authoritative
and	 strategic	 information	 on	 matters	 that	 affect	 people's	 health	 remains	 a
challenge	that	so	far	has	eluded	a	solution.
	
Read	more
	
2017	Maternal	Health	campaign
We	 recently	 partnered	 with	 Mediaplanet	 UK	 on	 the	 2017	 Maternal	 Health
campaign	in	The	Guardian	newspaper	and	online.	Read	motivating	insight	from
thought	 leaders	 and	 learn	 more	 about	 what	 it	 takes	 collectively	 to	 reduce
maternal	mortality.	#GlobalMaternalHealth	#MaternalHealth
Bridging	 the	 Knowledge	 Gap:	 Educating	 Mothers	 to	 Help	 Them	 and
Their	Children	Live.
Mobile	phones	are	the	surprising	tool	improving	maternal	health
One	 of	 the	most	 powerful	 relationships	 in	 global	 health	 and	 development	 is
between	a	mother’s	education	and	her	child’s	chances	of	survival.	Simply	put:
“The	 more	 educated	 a	 mother,	 the	 less	 likely	 her	 child	 is	 to	 die.	 …	 Behind
every	 preventable	 child	 death	 is	 a	 disempowered	 mother”	 says	 Leith
Greenslade,	Co-Chair	of	Child	Health,	MDG	Health	Alliance.
HealthPhone™	Launches	 	Poshan	|	Nutrition	Mobile	Apps
Get	in	18	Indian	Languages
Assamese	 •	Bengali	 •	English	 •	Garo	 •	Gujarati	 •	Hindi	 •	Kannada	 •	Khasi	 •
Konkani	 •	Malayalam	•	Manipuri	 •	Marathi	 •	Mizo	 •	Odia	 •	Punjabi	 •	Tamil	 •
Telugu	•	Urdu​
Poshan:	These	apps	address	issues	of	status	of	women,	the	care	of	pregnant
women	 and	 children	 under	 two,	 breastfeeding	 and	 the	 importance	 of	 a
balanced	diet,	health	and	simple	changes	in	nutritional	care	practices	that	can
notably	enhance	nutrition	levels.
They	reinforce	the	following	key	messages:
Expecting	mothers	should	get	the	correct	diet	and	25%	more	than	usual.
Mother’s	first	milk	is	the	best,	do	not	throw	it	away,	make	sure	the	child	gets	it.
For	the	first	6	months	the	child	should	only	be	fed	mother’s	milk	and	nothing	else.
When	the	child	enters	the	7th	month,	balance	mother’s	milk	with	a	nutritious	diet.
HealthPhone™	Launches	 	Food	&	Nutrition	Mobile	Apps
Get	in	18	Indian	Languages
Assamese	 •	Bengali	 •	English	 •	Garo	 •	Gujarati	 •	Hindi	 •	Kannada	 •	Khasi	 •
Konkani	 •	Malayalam	•	Manipuri	 •	Marathi	 •	Mizo	 •	Odia	 •	Punjabi	 •	Tamil	 •
Telugu	•	Urdu​​
Food	&	Nutrition:	These	apps	reinforce	the	following	key	messages:
Adequate	Complementary	Feeding
Anaemia:	Blood	and	Iron	Deficiency
Importance	of	a	Balanced	Diet
Correct	Norms	of	Infant	&	Young	Child	Feeding
Importance	of	Infant	and	Young	Child	Nutrition
Iodine:	The	Importance	of	Iodised	Salt
Nutrition	of	the	Child
Vitamin	A
Navjaat	ki	Suraksha
Diet	During	Pregnancy
Healthcare	during	Pregnancy
HealthPhone™	Launches	 	Nutrition	Handbook	Mobile	Apps
Get	in	11	Indian	Languages
Bengali	•	English	•	Gujarati	•	Hindi	•	Kannada	•	Malayalam	•	Marathi	•	Odia	•
Tamil	•	Telugu	•	Urdu​
Nutrition	Handbook	for	the	Family:	These	apps	reinforce	the	following	key
messages:
Personal	and	household	hygiene
Keeping	food	safe	and	clean
Foods	are	very	important	for	the	body
Iron	makes	the	body	strong
Vitamin	A	keeps	the	body	healthy
Iodine	makes	the	body	function	properly
Food	for	pregnant	women	and	breast-feeding	mothers
Feeding	babies	aged	0-6	months
Feeding	young	children	aged	over	6	months
Feeding	school-age	children	and	youth
Food	and	care	for	older	people
Feeding	sick	people
Preventing	and	managing	malnutrition
Once	installed,	all	these	apps	work	offline;	they	do	not	require	a	connection	to
a	mobile	network.	All	videos	and	files	are	included	within	the	mobile	app.
Mobile	 apps	 developed	 in	 partnership	 with	 HealthPhone	 by	 The	 Centre	 for
Development	 of	 Advanced	 Computing	 (C-DAC),	 Hyderabad,	 a	 research	 and
development	 organization	 under	 the	 Ministry	 of	 Electronics	 and	 Information
Technology,	Government	of	India.
Health	&	Nutrition	Knowledge	in	the	hands	of	those	who	need	it	most
There	is	no	dispute	about	the	importance	of	health	and	nutrition	knowledge	as
a	means	of	preventing	diseases	and	boosting	child	survival.
HealthPhone's	 health	 and	nutrition	 videos	address	 the	main	areas	of	 concern
with	videos	which	are	pre-loaded	on	popular	low-cost	models	of	mobile	phones
and	on	a	microSD	memory	card.	Users	choose	what	 they	want	 to	watch	and
listen	to	and	when,	wherever	they	happen	to	be,	without	a	connection	or	cost.
HealthPhone™	 is	 coming	 soon	 to	 a	 village,	 slum,	 town,	 city,	 block,	 district,
state,	province,	country	near	you!
HealthPhone™	India
IAP	HealthPhone
			Laying	the	Foundation	for	Combating	Malnutrition	in	India
The	importance	of	balanced	nutrition	and	health
An	initiative	of	HealthPhone™,	conducted	under	the	aegis	of	Indian	Academy	of
Pediatrics,	in	partnership	with	the	Ministry	of	Women	and	Child	Development,
UNICEF,	Aamir	Khan	and	with	support	from	Vodafone.
It	 is	 the	World's	 Largest	 Programme	 to	 Battle	Malnutrition	 amongst	Mothers
and	Children.	The	objective	of	this	nationwide	campaign	against	malnutrition	is
to	 address	 issues	 of	 status	 of	 women,	 the	 care	 of	 pregnant	 mothers	 and
children	 under	 two,	 breastfeeding	 and	 the	 importance	 of	 balanced	 nutrition
and	health.	The	focus	is	on	women	between	13	and	35	years	of	age	and	their
family	members.
The	 four	 Poshan	 videos	 are	 hosted	 on	 a	 dedicated	 WAP	 page
iaphealthphone.org	 and	 accessible	 to	 all	 Vodafone	 India	 subscribers	 on	 their
mobile	phones.
Vodafone	 India	 subscribers	 can	 also	 give	 a	missed	 call	 on	 1	 800	 120	 8989
(toll-free)	to	receive	a	link	to	the	WAP	page	via	SMS.
	Watch:	Combating	Malnutrition	in	India	–	Challenges	&	Solutions
Poshan	|	Nutrition	&	Malnutrition	Series
670	Videos	in	Assamese,	Bengali,	English,	Garo,	Gujarati,	Hindi,
Kannada,	Khasi,	Konkani,	Malayalam,	Manipuri,	Marathi,	Mizo,	Oriya,
Punjabi,	Tamil,	Telugu,	Urdu
Food	and	Nutrition	Board
120	Videos	in	Hindi,	English,	Assamese,	Bengali,	Garo,	Gujarati,
Kannada,	Khasi,	Konkani,	Malayalam,	Manipuri,	Marathi,
Nagamese,	Oriya,	Punjabi,	Tamil,	Telugu,	Urdu
	 			Laying	the	Foundation	for	Good	Health	and	Nutrition
Knowledge,	attitudes,	practices	and	beliefs	that	relate	to	the	most	essential
health	and	nutrition	topics
HealthPhone	Essentials
30	Videos	on	Early	and	Exclusive	Breastfeeding,	Hand	Washing	with
Soap	and	Water.	Use	of	Oral	Rehydration	Salts	(ORS)	and	Zinc,
Routine	Immunization,	Initiation	of	Breastfeeding	by	Breast	Crawl,
Ten	Steps	to	Successful	Breastfeeding
in	English,	Hindi,	Marathi,	Gondi,	Kokana,	Korku,	Pawri
Safe	Motherhood	and	Newborn	Health,	Breastfeeding,
Complementary	Feeding	and	Hand	Washing
19	Videos	on	Initiation	of	Breastfeeding,	Early	and	Exclusive
Breastfeeding,	Complementary	Feeding,	Body	Warmth	and	Hand
Washing
in	Bengali,	Gujarati,	Hindi,	Oriya,	Rajasthani
Ammaji	Channel
42	Videos	in	Hindi
Timing	Births	•	Safe	Motherhood	•	Newborn	Care	•	Breastfeeding	•	Malaria	•	HIV
Diarrhoea	•	Nutrition	and	Growth	•	Immunization	•	Polio	•	Hygiene	and	Sanitation
Child	Development	and	Early	Learning	•	Emergencies:	preparedness	&	response
Palladium
56	Videos	on	Menstrual	Hygiene,	Age	at	Marriage,	Delay	First	Child,
Antenatal	Care,	Child	Spacing,	Contraception,	Oral	Contraceptive	Pills,
Condoms,	Intrauterine	Contraceptive	Device	(IUCD),	Oral	Rehydration
Salts	(ORS),	HIV,	Immunization,	...	more
	 	 			Laying	a	path	to	optimal	growth	and	development
both	physically	and	mentally
The	First	1,000	Days
23	videos	to	promote	maternal	welfare	and	child	nutrition
HealthPhone™	International
	HIV	and	AIDS	Prevention
26	Videos	in	Assamese,	English,	Español,	Hindi,	Kannada,
Kinyarwanda,	Mandarin,	Odia,	Setswana,	Swahili,	Tamil,	Telugu
	Ebola:	A	Poem	for	the	Living
in	English,	English	v2,	English	v3,	English	v4,	Français,	Français
Guinéen,	Krio,	Maninka,	Pidgin,	Portuguese,	Soussou/Susu,	Swahili
Childbirth
6	Videos	in	English
	 Newborn	Care
110	Videos	in	English,	Español,	Français,	Khmer,	Nepali,	Swahili
Diarrhoea	-	Hygiene	-	Sanitation	-	Hand	Washing
in	Bengali,	English,	Hindi
Half	a	minute	can	defeat	diarrhoea!
Ending	open	defecation	is	IN	OUR	HANDS!
Safe	Motherhood	and	Newborn	Health
17	Videos	in	Somali
Breastfeeding	—	Nutrition	and	Growth
26	Videos	in	Bangla,	Vietnamese,	Amharic,	Oromiffa,	Tigrinya
Worldwide	Distribution
All	Mobile	Devices	—	All	Mobile	Network	Operators	and	Service	Providers
Join	Us!
What	needs	to	be	done?
How	can	we	do	it	with	your	help?
What	help	can	you	give?
