 
MOBILE PHONE MICROSCOPY FOR THE 
DIAGNOSIS OF PARASITIC WORM 
INFECTIONS 
to test children’s stool samples for roundworm and 
hookworm. The USD$15 microscope was created using 
a strip of double-sided tape and a simple glass lens, 
operating solely from the power of the cell phone 
battery. 
The study was conducted in September and October of 
2012 on Pemba Island in Tanzania. Results were 
published through the American Society of Tropical 
Medicine and Hygiene in 2013. 
ABOUT MOBILE PHONE 
MICROSCOPY 
To construct the mobile phone microscope, a 3 mm ball 
lens was mounted to the camera of an Apple iPhone 4S 
using double-sided tape. A small hole was punctured in 
the tape to emit light from the camera lens through the 
ball lens. Stool sample smear slides were placed less 
than 1 mm from the lens and were covered by a 
cellophane strip to prevent contamination. Lastly, a 
flashlight was used to illuminate the lens while capturing 
the image using the mobile phone’s camera application. 
BRIEF OVERVIEW 
Soil-transmitted parasitic worms, or helminths, affect Researchers randomly selected 199 of the original slides 
two billion people worldwide. People in rural settings in analyzed by conventional light microscopy for analysis 
developing countries with poor sanitation, especially via mobile phone microscopy for the presence or 
children, are disproportionately affected. Children may absence of helminth eggs.  All patients were treated with 
develop chronic infections that manifest as malnutrition 400 mg albendazole at the end of the study.  
or anemia, resulting in poor physical and mental 
development. Traditional helminth diagnosis involves 
examining stool under a microscope; however, new, EVALUATION AND RESULTS 
innovative and cost-effective methods are needed since While not as sensitive as a traditional light microscope, 
many of those infected live in rural areas without access the mobile phone microscope revealed a sensitivity of 
to appropriate diagnostic facilities or care.  69.4% and specificity of 61.5% for detecting soil-
transmitted parasitic worm infections. Sensitivity varied 
To compare the diagnostic accuracy of mobile phone greatly depending on the type of worm and level of 
microscopy to conventional light microscopy, a proof-of infection. Mobile phone microscopy detected 81% of 
-concept study was integrated into a clinical trial giant roundworm infections, 54.4% of roundworm 
assessing the safety and efficacy of different dugs used to infections, and only 14.3% of hookworm infections due 
treat parasitic worm infections in school-aged children. to low infection and fecal egg counts. 
By attaching a lens to an Apple iPhone camera, 
researchers from Toronto General Hospital, The presence of helminth eggs were revealed in 70% of 
Massachusetts General Hospital, the Swiss Tropical and the samples, and while it is not currently sensitive 
Public Health Institute, the University of Basel, and the enough for immediate use, the product is on its way to 
Tanzanian Public Health Laboratory (Pemba) were able being diagnostically effective. 
34 mHEALTH COMPENDIUM   │    VOLUME 2 
 
 DATA COLLECTION 
constrained areas. As with many information and 
communication technology-related innovations, it will 
need to be tested at scale in order to successfully 
transition from lab to field. 
 
 
GEOGRAPHIC COVERAGE 
Tanzania 
IMPLEMENTATION PARTNERS 
Roundworm eggs at 40x magnification by conventional Toronto General Hospital, Massachusetts General 
microscopy (left) and mobile phone microscopy (right). Hospital, the Swiss Tropical and Public Health Institute, 
the University of Basel, and the Public Health Laboratory 
(Pemba) in Tanzania  
LESSONS LEARNED 
 Mobile phone microscopy is successful at detecting 
moderate to heavy intestinal parasitic worm FUNDER 
infections, but less sensitive at detecting mild Medicor Foundation, Swiss National Science Foundation 
infections where the sample contains only a few (SNSF)  
eggs 
CONTACT INFORMATION 
 While this study utilized an iPhone 4S, any phone 
Toronto General Hospital  
equipped with a quality camera and zoom option 
 Issac Bogoch, Divisions of Internal 
can work equally as well 
Medicine and Infectious Disease, Toronto 
 Mobile phone microscopes will be ready for clinical General Hospital  
use when it is sensitive enough to detect at least Email: isaac.bogoch@uhn.ca  
80% of infections Medicor Foundation  
 Fortunat Walther, CEO  
 Newer, next-generation technologies may offer Email: info@medicor.li  
improved diagnostic yield but will need to be field 
tested 
CONCLUSION 
While mobile phone microscopy has been used in a 
laboratory setting, it was important to test its 
functionality in a real-world setting. Improved 
technology that can enhance diagnostic yield may 
function as effective point-of-care tests in resource-
Information was excerpted from:  
Bogoch, Issac, et. al. “Short Report: Mobile Phone Microscopy for the Diagnosis of Soil-Transmitted Helminth Infections:  
A Proof-of-Concept Study” Am J Trop Med Hyg 12.0742 (2013): n.pag. Web. 
Nakkazi, Esther. “Africa: Mobile Phone Microscope Detects Worm Infections.” allAfrica. 12 March 2013. Web.  
“Smartphones Used to Detect Parasitic Worms.” Integrated Regional Information Network. 13 March 2013. Web. 
  MHEALTH COMPENDIUM  |  VOLUME 2 35 
