 
 
 
 
The Economics of eHealth 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
One of a series of discussion papers published by the mHealth Alliance 
  
 
The Economics of eHealth 
Julian Schweitzer 
Christina Synowiec  
Results for Development Institute 
 
INTRODUCTION 
The value of research 
Information and communication technologies (ICTs) are potentially powerful instruments to strengthen 
health systems, with innovations ranging from electronic health records to transmission of clinical data. 
These technologies show great promise in low- and middle-income countries (LMICs) whose health 
systems face severe financial, infrastructural, technical and human resource constraints. This is evident 
in the growing number of health service providers beginning to focus on mobile technologies to improve 
access and quality of health services1.  
At the same time, there is a growing debate about whether the touted potential of ICT benefits and 
savings can be actualized on a large scale, both in OECD countries and LMICs2. Over a decade of efforts 
to implement ICTs in healthcare demonstrate notable successes, but also costly failures2. Furthermore, 
despite a growing global interest in e- and mHealth, relatively little is known about the economics of 
eHealth. In fact, a recent paper notes that the failure to demonstrate the value of eHealth is one of the 
principal challenges to achieving widespread adoption of high-performing ICT initiatives2. However, the 
lack of hard evidence to support eHealth investments should be seen in the context of a rapidly 
developing field; other major economic sectors have embraced modern IT to improve productivity and 
effectiveness, and it is likely that the health sector can also share in many of these benefits. There is, 
however, a real need for economic analysis that can guide public and private investment decisions. 
Given the increasing number of mHealth trials and level of interest in e- and mHealth, this is an 
opportune time to review the available data on the costs and benefits of e- and mHealth and suggest a 
roadmap for future research. This paper is intended to provide an outline of key economic and financial 
questions to pursue in the development of scenarios for in-country eHealth policy and strategy 
investments. 
                                                          
1
 This paper reviews the economics of eHealth (of which mHealth is a part), though as a practical matter mHealth 
has the potential to predominate in LMICs due to the growing ubiquity of wireless, the relative absence of wired 
infrastructure, and the importance of delivering care to people with limited access to clinics and skilled health 
workers. 
2
 OECD. “Improving Health Sector Efficiency: The Role of Information and Communication Technologies.” Paris: 
OECD, 2010. 
2 
 
 
The term mHealth is defined in this paper as the provision of health-related services using mobile 
telecommunication and multimedia technologies3, 4. Mobile technology, general e-infrastructure, and 
eHealth infrastructure are interrelated entities, with mobile technologies serving as a key access 
technology in LMICs. Within ICTs, portable technology through the use of mobile devices (mHealth) is by 
far the fastest growing segment¹. Examples of mobile devices commonly utilized in healthcare today 
include (but are not limited to): 
 Mobile phones and smart phones 
 Laptop computers and netbooks 
 Global Positioning System (GPS) devices 
 Mobile telemedicine/telecare devices 
 Mobile patient monitoring devices 
This paper focuses on technologies that are likely to have high potential to enhance healthcare delivery 
in LMICs. These include technologies that increase patient access to health services and information, 
and improve the way health professionals deliver health services. In most cases, mHealth exists as an 
extension and augmentation of existing IT-based health capability (eHealth), however limited that may 
be. Indeed, it is this combination that is likely to produce the greatest systemic benefits, though there 
are emerging solutions in the areas of patient access to information (e.g. peer-to-peer forums on the 
web), and in supply chain efficiencies (preventing counterfeiting, stock-outs), that are not dependent on 
the national healthcare systems, public and private. 
The promise of e and mHealth in LMICs 
The potential of mHealth and eHealth for resource-constrained environments becomes obvious when 
considering the following facts. 1) The global eHealth market is estimated at $96 billion and growing, 
with many innovations coming from LMICs5, 6. 2) 70% of all mobile phone users are in emerging markets, 
which are also the fastest growing markets7, 8. 3) Almost 90% of the world’s population lives in areas 
with mobile phone coverage, providing a technology platform for mHealth applications7, 9. 4) By 2012, 
                                                          
3 Istepanian, R. and J. Lacal (2003). “Emerging Mobile Communication Technologies for Health: Some Imperative 
notes on m-Health.” Paper presented at the 25th International Conference of the IEEE Engineering in Medicine and 
Biology Society, Cancun,Mexico. 
4
 Mechael, Patricia N. “The Case for mHealth in Developing Countries.” Innovations. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press, 
2009.  
5
 Boston Consulting Group. Understanding the eHealth market. Presented at “Making the eHealth Connection: 
Global Partners, Local Solutions”. Bellagio, Italy: 2008. 
6
 Gerber, Ticia, Veronica Olazabal, Karl Brown, and Ariel Pablos-Mendez. “An Agenda for Action on Global E-
Health.” Health Affairs 29:2 (2010): 235-238. 
7
 International Telecommunications Union Statistics, 2010. 
8
 Lambert, Olivier and Elizabeth Littlefield. “Dial Growth.” Finance & Development 46:3 (2009). 
9
 Vital Wave Consulting. “mHealth in the Global South: Landscape Analysis.” Washington, D.C.: United Nations 
Foundation and Vodafone Foundation, 2008. 
3 
 
 
half of all individuals in remote areas of the world will have mobile phones10. 5) Smartphones 
constituted 14% of all handset sales in 2009, were by far the fastest growing segment (up 24%), and are 
predicted to reach parity with global feature phone sales by 2012, enabling a slew of more advanced 
mHealth applications. The rapidly increasing ubiquity, capability and innovation of mobile technologies 
stands in stark contrast to those of more conventional health technologies and health infrastructures in 
many LMICs, demonstrating the potential of mobile technologies to help a rapid scale up and 
improvement of health services to underserved populations.  
The health care sector in many LMICs is constrained by the high financial and human resource costs, as 
well as lengthy implementation times, of expanding health facilities and training workforces based on 
accepted WHO standards. A recent report from UNICEF11 argues for an equity-based approach to child 
survival as the most practical and cost-effective way of meeting the health Millennium Goals, and it is 
likely that mHealth will be a key tool in the arsenal of policies and programs to reach poor and under-
served populations. Many policymakers are therefore exploring the extent to which ICT, especially 
mobile technologies, can augment or substitute existing health care models by focusing on distributed 
primary care and centralized administration. This approach leverages the limited ICT administrative 
capacity of the healthcare system, while extending health knowledge directly to villages and community 
health workers, using mobile solutions that include data collection, remote diagnostics, treatment 
checklists, decision support, and patient reminders.  
More than 100 countries are now exploring the use of mobile phones to achieve better health. In 
Ghana, for instance, nurse midwives use mobile phones to discuss complex cases with their colleagues 
and supervisors. In India, mDhil12 sends text messages giving information about various rarely discussed 
health topics and supporting prevention and patient self-management efforts. Rwanda uses a system of 
rapid SMS alerts, through which community health workers inform health centers about emergency 
obstetric and infant cases, enabling the centers to offer advice or call for an ambulance if needed13. 
mHealth and eHealth have the potential to overcome many traditional obstacles to the delivery of 
health services to the poor in LMICs, especially those of access, quality, time, and resources4. In 
particular, one obstacle many LMICs face in the delivery of health services is the shortage of health 
workers and poor distribution of existing providers. At present, 57 countries face critical shortages of 
health workers, with estimates ranging from a global deficit of 2.4 million to over 4 million doctors, 
nurses, and midwives14, 15. These problems are exacerbated by deficiencies in the skills, training, and 
                                                          
10
Vital Wave Consulting. “mHealth for Development: The Opportunity of Mobile Technology for Healthcare in the 
Developing World.” Washington, D.C.: United Nations Foundation and Vodafone Foundation, 2009. 
11
 UNICEF. “Narrowing the Gaps to Meet the Goals.” New York: UNICEF, 2010. 
http://www.unicef.org/media/files/Narrowing_the_Gaps_to_Meet_the_Goals_090310_2a.pdf. 
12
 mDhil is an mHealth product that provides basic healthcare information to the Indian consumer via text 
messaging, mobile web browser, and interactive digital content. See http://www.mdhil.com/aboutus 
13
 UN, Global Strategy for Women and Children’s Health, 2010. 
14
 World Health Organization. The World Health Report 2006: Working Together for Health. Geneva: WHO, 2006. 
4 
 
 
distribution of the existing workforce, with the majority of highly skilled health workers located in urban 
centers10.  
Low-cost mobile technologies can overcome some of these barriers through the remote delivery of 
health services and information, thus leveraging existing health service delivery platforms. Low-cost 
mobile technologies can also play an important role in enhancing the effectiveness of health workers, 
while giving rural and periurban populations access to health resources where skilled health workers 
and conventional infrastructure are limited. For example, the government of Rwanda recently 
announced a $32m eHealth plan to coordinate and promote the use of technology to support 
healthcare delivery nationwide, with the ultimate goal of leveraging ICT mechanisms, including mobile 
technologies, to achieve universal health coverage16.   
Perhaps nowhere is there greater potential for mHealth than in accelerating progress towards the 
Maternal and Child Millennium Development Goals (MDGs)17. Poor women and children often have very 
low access to quality health services due to poverty, lack of physical access to health facilities, poorly 
trained health providers, and cultural factors that limit health care accessibility18. Many countries are 
successfully employing community health workers to provide a first line service to these neglected 
groups. e- and mHealth have the potential to enhance these services by providing first-line providers 
with information, low-cost and easy-to-use diagnostic and decision support tools, and access to remote 
diagnostic centers, while giving systems administrators real time, actionable information on their staff, 
supply chains, and emerging patterns. In summary, the e- and mHealth combination has the potential to 
increase progress toward global health goals, ranging from improved disease-specific outcomes such as 
HIV/AIDS and malaria, to strengthened health systems. 
The economic evidence-base for e- and mHealth 
Although there is a growing recognition of the potential benefits of e- and mHealth, the literature shows 
little research to date into the economic impact of such investments in LMICs. First, while many papers 
note the potential benefits of eHealth9, 10, 3, 4, few take this beyond speculation, by measuring outcomes 
directly linked to e- and mHealth solutions. Second, much of the literature takes a micro-view of the 
field, restricted to a case-specific evaluation of existing technologies10, 19, 20. Third, as further discussed in 
the section “LMIC-specific cost analysis”, the limited range of studies on the economics of eHealth is 
                                                                                                                                                                                           
15
 World Health Organization and Global Health Workforce Alliance. The Kampala Declaration and Agenda for 
Global Action. Geneva: WHO, 2008. 
16
 The New Times. “$32M Health Initiative Unveiled.” www.newtimes.co.rw/pdf.php?issue=14315&article=19469. 
1 September 2009. 
17
 MDG 4: Reduce child mortality; MDG 5: Improve maternal health.  
18
 World Health Organization. Countdown to 2015: Tracking Progress in Maternal, Newborn and Child Survival. The 
2008 Report. Geneva: WHO, 2008. 
19
 World Bank. eCapacity Enhancement Project for the Health Sector in Sri Lanka. Geneva: World Bank, 2005. 
20
 eHealth Case Studies. http://www.ehealth-impact.org/case_studies/index_en.htm. 
5 
 
 
mainly confined to OECD countries21, 22, 23, with perhaps rather limited relevance for the very different 
problems that LMICs face (including the continuing brain drain of ICT and healthcare workers to the 
developed world). 
With this in mind, this paper aims to encourage further discussion and research around the economics 
of eHealth in LMICs. Some important questions for consideration include: 1) the costs of eHealth 
infrastructure; 2) regulatory structures which provide incentives at different levels of the health delivery 
system to encourage investment in, and use of, eHealth; and 3) measuring the outcomes of successful 
eHealth utilization, including anticipated return on investment (ROI). The need is not just to add up the 
costs of ICTs, but to compare the costs of a distributed approach to the current health service delivery 
cost structure.  It should also be noted that eHealth and mHealth deployments to date have almost 
invariably been one-off solutions for specific problems, rather than standardized, integrated systems 
connecting and sharing information along the full continuum of care. A siloed approach can result in 1) 
interoperability concerns, and 2) the inability to promote scale. And finally, it is important to evaluate 
how eHealth is applied, as that will also determine its effectiveness. 
In recognition that eHealth is already a rapidly progressing field, answers to these questions can help 
identify: 1) how to best leverage these technologies at lowest cost, and 2) how to prioritize initiatives 
based on need, availability of resources, and anticipated outcomes. Toward this aim, we have divided 
the paper into two main sections focused on the costs and benefits of eHealth. Each section will 
highlight specific questions for further research, setting the roadmap for ongoing research and analysis. 
Within each question, we review the available literature, propose promising areas of inquiry, and offer 
methods to generate economic models for planning and analysis.  
  
                                                          
21
 OECD. Improving Health Sector Efficiency: The Role of Information and Communication Technologies. Paris: 
OECD, 2010. 
22
 RAND Europe and Capgemini Consulting. Business Models for eHealth. Cambridge, United Kingdom: European 
Commission, 2009. 
23
 Dobrev, Alexander, Tom Jones, Karl Stroetmann, Yvonne Vatter, and Kai Peng. Study on the Economic Impact of 
Interoperable Electronic Health Records and ePrescription in Europe. Germany: European Commission, 2009. 
6 
 
 
AN EXAMINATION OF EHEALTH COSTS 
LMIC-specific cost analysis 
The literature on the cost of ICTs in health is largely limited to OECD countries, with a focus on the role 
of information and communication technologies in improving health sector efficiency, deriving value 
from eHealth systems, and assessing the economic impact of eHealth investments. mHealth is not the 
explicit focus of the research. Furthermore, while this analysis is useful as a starting point, it may not be 
entirely relevant for LMICs. First, most OECD countries are heavily urbanized, with generally universal 
access to healthcare. Much of the investment has therefore gone into health management information 
systems and hospital administration, rather than the use of mHealth to increase access for underserved 
populations. Second, the level of training of health workers, the public-private mix of healthcare 
financing and providers, the health and IT regulatory systems, and the capacity of the public sector to 
introduce new technologies may be very different in poorer countries.  
It is therefore important that separate studies are carried out in LMICs. These broad-based studies need 
to focus on LMIC-specific issues, including 1) the introduction of mobile technologies in remote, rural 
areas; and 2) the training of community health workers to use mHealth technologies. Outlined below 
are potential approaches to assessing e- and mHealth costs, including an examination of the impact of 
mHealth on overall healthcare costs, the drivers of cost within mHealth itself, and incentive structures to 
drive down costs of mHealth. This can include cost-effectiveness, cost-benefit, and cost-utility analyses 
as economic evaluations. Regardless of approach, it is important to maintain an LMIC-specific lens 
within each approach in order to address the deficit of research on mHealth costs within LMICs. 
Impact of eHealth on health costs 
Historically, in rich countries, technological innovation has tended to drive healthcare costs upwards24. 
Overall costs rise as new, expensive products are diffused to increasingly broader segments of the 
patient population. It has proved difficult to control demand, even if the efficacy of the new product is 
not yet well demonstrated. For example, within the United States there are many market incentives for 
consumers to overuse new products, in turn driving overall costs up. Information technology may also 
fail to decrease the costs of health administration. Contrary to the overall experience of business and 
government enterprises outside of health, where ICT has increased productivity, a recent HIMSS survey 
showed that while U.S. hospitals have increased their use of IT, there was no indication that it lowered 
costs or streamlined administration25. 
It is a reasonable hypothesis, however, that the introduction of low-cost mobile technologies has the 
potential to reverse this trend, at least as far as delivering health services to poor, underserved 
                                                          
24
 Beever, Charles and Melanie Karbe. The Cost of Medical Technologies: Maximizing the Value of Innovation. 
McLean, Virginia: Booz Allen Hamilton, 2003. 
25
 Healthcare IT News. “Health IT savings estimates are ‘wishful thinking,’ say Harvard researchers.”  
7 
 
 
populations in both rural and urban areas. The cost of mobile phones, other hand-held devices, and 
computers has declined dramatically over the last decade even as capabilities have increased. Similarly, 
mobile bandwidth capacity is increasing as costs decline26. Remote collection and transmission of 
diagnostic data by community health workers to centers with a critical mass of computer programs, 
skilled technicians and doctors (and computers) to interpret the data should be more cost-effective than 
often unsuccessful efforts to train and deploy an adequately skilled workforce in rural areas (and 
develop the requisite rural infrastructure). eHealth can provide transformative alternatives to increase 
the productivity of healthcare. However, since e- and mHealth are still in their relative infancy in LMICs, 
there is little concrete data and research to test hypotheses of this kind. 
Potential methods for evaluating such trends include: 
 Analysis of relevant technology cost trends outside of healthcare. This would allow for the 
extrapolation of trends in general ICT costs to potential cost shifts in health ICTs. While there is 
little direct evidence on the impact of ICTs on the cost of healthcare in LMICs, it is well 
established that ICT unit costs are declining rapidly. For example, according to U.S. Bureau of 
Labor Statistics consumer price data for computer equipment and mobile phones27, the price of 
computers has dropped drastically, with a 20% annual decrease from 1999 to 2003 and an 11-
12% annual decline for the last three years. The evaluation of non-healthcare technology costs 
over time is appealing as an immediate proxy for the lack of readily available data on eHealth-
specific costs globally. 
 Analysis of cost of increased consumption of health services as a result of mHealth. mHealth is 
largely intended to provide increased health access to people that are typically excluded or hard 
to reach. Studies of mHealth’s impact on total health expenditures would compare the cost of 
this increased use with the cost if the same services had been delivered and consumed in the 
traditional manner.   
 Country-specific case study.  As previously noted, available research on costs related to e- and 
mHealth are typically restricted to OECD and EU countries21, 22, 23, and may have limited value for 
policymakers in LMICs (although providing a useful starting point in study design, monitoring, 
and evaluation). Further, most trials of mHealth in LMICs are of single source solutions.  To 
better understand cost trends in LMICs, it will be necessary to carry out a series of case studies 
in countries with a diverse range of development and health challenges. Potential countries for 
research include India, China, Nigeria, Ghana, Rwanda, and South Africa. These studies need to 
be broad and deep enough to reflect a complete system or subsystem, such as maternal care 
within a district. This will allow the full range of costs and benefits to be addressed.    
                                                          
26
 To put this in context, in rural India, mobile phone coverage is 25 per 100 population, with higher costs in rural 
than in urban areas due to power shortages. Only 50m people, largely in urban areas, have broadband access and 
there are serious capacity constraints (evidence provided to author). However, scale up is likely to be rapid. 
27
 U.S. Bureau of Labor Statistics: Consumer Price Index. http://www.bls.gov/cpi/ 
8 
 
 
 Segmentation of the eHealth LMIC market. Understanding segmentation of the consumer 
market is important in understanding product and service functionality, and the potential 
impact on prices. eHealth has yet to be subjected to this discipline as it is still in its early stages 
of development and largely driven by government grants and research donations. The 
Rockefeller Foundation-funded Center for Health Market Innovations database28, housed by 
Results for Development Institute, may reveal useful information that can help identify the level 
of adoption of mobile technologies by market demographics. For example, it appears from 
studies by the Development Fund of the Global Systems for Mobile Communications Association 
(GSMA) that 24x7 health information call centers are a valued and profitable service in a 
number of LMIC countries29. This information can help organizations developing mobile devices 
to focus on the subset of the population most likely to adopt the technology, based on need, 
interest, and rate of return. It can also help organizations identify differences in product 
considerations when defining market segments. 
Drivers of cost within eHealth 
In order for eHealth to fulfill its potential, the likely drivers of cost within the eHealth infrastructure 
should be assessed and, in turn, successful methods to contain costs identified. Such analysis first 
requires the identification and assessment of the individual drivers of cost within e- and mHealth, as 
outlined below. In recognition that an assessment of cost drivers should not be the sole focus of a 
financial analysis of eHealth, the cost drivers outlined below serve as a starting point for future research. 
Potential methods for evaluating key cost drivers include: 
Production process 
 Upfront investment in planning the eHealth infrastructure. This can stand as a fixed or variable 
cost, but is an inherent part of eHealth infrastructure development. This can include the human 
resources, technology development, and initial training costs, as well as the costs of developing 
metrics to measure eHealth performance over time. 
 Assessment of integrated, interoperable systems (platforms) vs. a one-off approach. ICTs have 
proliferated globally because standardization and competition have driven down costs and 
addressed consumer needs very effectively. Thus far, eHealth and mHealth investments have 
often been the opposite: primarily one-off projects to solve specific problems.  A more efficient 
approach is to seek to replicate the scope and scale of the global wireless industry through the 
standardization of the architecture and interfaces of underlying hardware and software. This will 
allow the technology to be interoperable and support the full continuum of care through the 
sharing of platforms and common utilities. While there are certainly country differences in 
                                                          
28
 Center for Health Market Innovations. http://healthmarketinnovations.org 
29
 Ivatury, Gautam, Jesse Moore, and Alison Bloch. A Doctor in Your Pocket: Health Hotlines in Developing 
Countries. London: GSMA Development Fund, 2009. 
9 
 
 
policy, content and infrastructure development, there are many similarities that can be 
leveraged to promote scale and reduce costs. Another example of deployment efficiency is the 
ability to host mHealth applications in large, secure data centers; this can help mitigate the need 
for IT infrastructure and expertise at the local level. It can also promote the sharing and 
implementation of best practices more quickly (due to fewer nodes to upgrade).  
 eHealth’s impact on human resources.  The impact of ICTs on the deployment of health workers, 
such as physicians, is critical to evaluate in determining overall costs. While distributed care 
obviously cannot always substitute for actual practitioner-to-patient care (for example, if 
surgery is required), it can enhance the quality of diagnostic and treatment services and greatly 
increase patient access, especially to initial primary care. For example, a telemedicine link 
between a specialist located in an urban setting and a patient in a rural setting promotes access, 
but may not change the cost structure. However, a distributed health system where functions 
currently designed to be performed by doctors or nurses in a clinic setting are transferred to less 
expensive health workers in the field (or to computers), enabled and monitored with ICT, saving 
only the critical cases for the doctors to review, may significantly impact the cost structure.  
 Cost savings as a result of the existing wireless market infrastructure.  A key issue for mHealth is 
the cost and capabilities of wireless hardware and services. These are generally already shared 
with non-health services, resulting in cost savings. Furthermore, private entities have developed 
such infrastructures with private investment, taking advantage of global economies of scale. 
There is a clear upward trend in capabilities (as evidenced by the introduction of higher capacity 
networks and smart phones), and a clear downward trend in costs of handsets and service.  The 
latter is still relatively high in a number of developing markets. The primary determinant of cost 
of telecommunications to healthcare users will be some combination of competition in the 
overall market and any special arrangements made for health, either by a carrier for marketing 
reasons, or arrangements with the government.   
  Assessment of the cost-impact of sharing services between mHealth and other mServices. The 
growing ubiquity of mobile technologies is resulting in the development of mServices, such as 
mobile banking, with an increasing emphasis on location-based services enabled by GPS. The 
cross-impacts of mPayments and mInsurance with mHealth is particularly interesting, with the 
potential to leverage common identification and registry databases.  Given the overlap between 
mHealth and mServices, it would be useful to analyze the cost saving opportunities of shared 
devices, services and information platforms (e.g. shared promotion and education costs to the 
same users, common support and billing, etc.)   
 An examination of the relationship between cost and mass production.  Increased unit demand 
leads to volume production that pushes down unit costs in electronics. The GSMA led an 
initiative to reduce the cost of mobile handsets, by aggregating demand from a number of 
developing countries, and then developing a handset contract with an assured volume of 40 
million phones30. If the forces of the global market can be brought to bear on mHealth, similar 
                                                          
30
 GSMA Embedded Mobile initiative. See www.gsmworld.com/our-work 
10 
 
 
economies of scale are likely to prove true for mHealth technologies, and, potentially, mHealth 
services. Increased demand for mHealth technologies (resulting in part from the benefits of 
standardization) would allow vendors to reduce prices and increase market share and size. For 
example, a developer of a wireless ultrasound product currently prices an individual unit at 
US$5,000. However, the price would drop below US$1,000 per unit if there were a market for 
100,000 units31. Standardization has other benefits. The mobile industry recently agreed to 
move to a universal power supply design, which, in addition to cost benefits, means any phone 
can use any charger. Further investigation, including discussions with technology manufacturers 
and suppliers will help determine whether such economies of scale in mHealth devices are likely 
to be the norm, or whether a market intervention is needed to aggregate demand (incentive 
structures for economies of scale are discussed below).  
 Impact of competition on product cost. Competition has the potential to increase efficiencies 
and drive down costs amongst competing vendors. As such, it is important to survey the 
landscape of existing and potential competition for the specific eHealth product, in addition to 
opportunities for partnerships and economies of scale. 
Public-private partnerships 
 Cost-impact of public-private partnerships (country case study). It is most likely that eHealth and 
mHealth will be offered in LMICs by a combination of public and private entities, with potential 
implications for costs. For example, wireless carriers may choose to host applications or services 
for free or reduced costs in order to stimulate overall wireless demand. Given that a number of 
these partnerships are already in development in countries like Brazil32 and South Africa33, they 
provide a real-time opportunity to collect and assess data on the cost impact of such 
relationships10. However, they are currently limited in scope. As the health value chain and the 
parallel economic value chain for integrated systems along the continuum of care are developed 
and understood, parties can develop sustainable partnerships where public and private interests 
are both served. In essence, how can each sector best direct the financial, technical, and 
operational responsibilities of developing an mHealth infrastructure in a cost-effective fashion?  
This is a critical area for public and private leaders to advance, creating examples that can be 
studied.     
 Case studies on end-to-end service along the continuum of care. Recent reports have highlighted 
the need for dynamic public-private partnerships to help achieve MDGS 4 and 510, 34, 35, 36.  Trials 
                                                          
31
 Anecdotal evidence provided to authors. 
32
 Nokia Data Gathering system through a partnership between Nokia and the Amazonas State Health Ministry. 
33
 The Dokoza System through a partnership between Dokoza, State Information Technology Agency, Centre for 
Public Service Innovation, Centre for Scientific and Industrial Research and the Meraka Institute, South Africa’s 
National Department of Health. 
34
 Khan, M. Adil. Achieving the Millennium Development Goals: The Public/Private Mix. UN-DESA. 
35
 Feezel, Charlie and Virginia Sopyla. Achieving Millennium Development Goals through Public-Private 
Partnerships. Boston: Harvard University. 
11 
 
 
of end-to-end systems to test the public-private model will provide opportunities to evaluate 
the impact of public-private partnerships on costs. One example is the recently announced 
Maternal mHealth Initiative37. One of its goals is to develop country trials of integrated ICT 
systems in maternal and child health through public-private partnerships.   
 Impact of donors on eHealth costs. A key to driving down costs is standardization. Currently, 
donors are funding a wide range of individual, but siloed e- and mHealth initiatives; this 
approach may inadvertently hinder interoperability and standardization. Agreement between 
donors, LMIC policymakers and industry on architecture, standards and best practices should 
speed deployment, improve interoperability and drive down costs (as has been experienced in 
the computer and wireless industries over the last 25 years.) 
 The role of the public sector. It is reasonable to assume that the private sector and civil society 
will continue to be important drivers of mHealth adoption, with many of the newest mobile 
technologies emerging from medical device and mobile technology companies. The public 
sector in LMICs will play an important role as purchaser and regulator, providing incentives or 
disincentives to increase uptake of mHealth and to reduce cost. It is likely that the overall 
healthcare and telecommunications regulatory structures will heavily influence the costs and 
speed of scale-up of mHealth. An analysis of the regulatory environment will therefore be 
necessary in determining the investment case for eHealth and mHealth. It would need to include 
the following: competition and price regulation; authorization of telecommunication/ICT 
services; universal access and service; radio spectrum management; legal and institutional 
framework; new technologies and impact on regulation38. Other factors, such as the relatively 
higher costs of provision of mobile phone access in rural areas needs to be considered39.  
As an example of the influence of regulatory systems, the global wireless explosion is generally credited 
to the decision by most countries (a) to license several wireless competitors, not just the incumbent 
wireline monopoly, and (b) to not regulate prices or services.  In countries that have liberalized their 
infrastructure markets, some wholesale networks have emerged through the impact of market forces. In 
other countries, mobile operators are required by law to use the incumbent’s network for backbone 
services, which may drive up the cost and/or reduce options for IT users40.  Ethiopia still has a monopoly 
service provider so its wireless coverage lags far behind most other countries. This serves as a valuable 
case study of the downstream costs (and savings) for getting regulation correct.   
In summary, it will be important to carry out case studies of different country regulatory systems to 
determine the healthcare and telecommunications regulatory structures that provide the best 
opportunities for low cost eHealth provision.  
                                                                                                                                                                                           
36
 Taskforce on Innovative Financing for Health Systems, 2009. 
37
 See www.mHealthAlliance.org 
38
 World Bank, infoDev and International Telecommunications Union, ICT Regulation Toolkit, 2010. 
39
 For example, mobile operators may need to provide back-up power generators in areas with unreliable power 
supplies, thus increasing operating costs. 
40
 Broadband for Africa, Developing Backbone Communications Networks, Williams D, World Bank 2010. 
12 
 
 
Potential questions for consideration include:41 
 What are the reforms (e.g. in regulatory and licensing systems) needed to incentivize 
investment in, and utilization of, e- and mHealth services and devices?  
 What incentives can the public sector put in place to drive down costs?  
 What are the incentives for the public sector to support the development of a standards-based 
system, perhaps including a baseline information system platform? 
  
                                                          
41 Potential countries for evaluation against these questions include South Africa, Bangladesh, India and Brazil. 
13 
 
 
AN EXAMINATION OF EHEALTH BENEFITS 
Analysis of downstream savings from investments in standardized mHealth 
platforms 
Interoperability, defined as the ability to exchange and use information from another system or device, 
has proved to be challenging to implement. As systems move to machine-to-machine mode, simple 
connectivity is no longer adequate42. Furthermore, the addition of mobile communication devices adds 
completely new communication systems and rules. Interoperability is key to the scaling up of mobile 
health services in LMIC markets, and to ensuring end user convenience and flexibility in the utilization of 
mHealth devices and programs.  
As such, it is important to build a basic health information platform to coordinate, guide, and support 
resultant individual mHealth initiatives. This will ensure interoperability among individual mobile 
technologies at the data communications layer, while addressing the challenge of scaling up mHealth 
programs. Furthermore, upfront investment has the potential to yield downstream savings, as individual 
mHealth devices will have the capacity from the outset to interface, share data, and leapfrog off one 
another’s services. Through the development of a framework architecture, one can then create specific 
web, software, or mobile services for large-scale deployment in alignment with the existing architecture. 
Potential methods for evaluating such trends include: 
 Case study of an end-to-end, integrated system, such as the Maternal mHealth Initiative of 
PMNCH, the mHealth Alliance and other organizations. The initiative presents an opportunity to 
develop, measure, and analyze data on downstream savings as a result of the development of a 
standardized information system platform. This would also take an area-specific case study 
approach, focused on the use of a common information systems platform and offer the 
opportunity to evaluate the impacts of such a platform on costs. 
 Analysis of downstream savings from investments in information technology platforms outside 
of healthcare. In particular, the development of the mobile phone infrastructure provides 
opportunities to study the benefits of the use of standards.  The single GSM wireless standard 
used by most of the world and the global market buying and deploying it have been major 
drivers of innovation and cost reductions.  
Determining the benefits of mHealth 
As previously noted, there is little research on the benefits accruing from eHealth. Measuring the value-
added of eHealth to global health outputs and outcomes will require cost-effectiveness analysis of such 
investments. Such analysis will help determine the objective value of eHealth investments, as compared 
                                                          
42
 Waegemann, C. Peter. “mHealth: The Next Generation of Telemedicine?” Telemedicine and e-Health 16.1 
(Jan/Feb 2010) : 23-25. Print. 
14 
 
 
with other investments that can improve patient health. Furthermore, it is important to recognize that 
while eHealth may not decrease overall costs (even if unit costs decline, overall costs may rise as usage 
increases), it can still result in decreased unit costs for delivering specific services.  And it can result in 
increased benefits, such as improved patient access to quality healthcare and patient satisfaction.  
Measurement of mHealth costs and benefits can therefore help generate the data necessary to target 
and attract investments in mobile technologies, and prioritize these investments in the face of 
competing demands and resource constraints; in essence, developing an infrastructure that enables, 
first, greater health outcomes, and second, potentially lower costs. The measures described below push 
beyond commonly cited health outcomes, such as morbidity and mortality, and explore other metrics 
for evaluating program success.  
Potential methods for evaluating such trends include: 
 Analysis of potential areas for cost savings and increased efficiency. In evaluating the value of 
eHealth, it is essential to take into consideration the potential benefits to the overall health 
system, as captured below. The table outlines eHealth’s opportunities for reducing costs and 
increasing efficiency as related to the patient and administration, and helps hone in on benefits 
that fall outside of outcomes tied to quality of care (eHealth’s potential benefit to quality of care 
is discussed below). Further analysis should also take into consideration the extent of 
transformational change to business operations. Implementers must think through the layers of 
potential savings and efficiency gains, outlined in the table below, weighed against the level of 
change required for workflow and operations.  
Health Systems: Examples of Potential Areas for Saving Costs and Increasing Efficiency  
Patient Issues Opportunities for Reducing Costs and Increasing Efficiency 
Patient registration  One-time registration 
 Information available on subsequent visits 
 Serves multiple purposes (e.g. vital statistics registries in 
addition to care) 
Creation of persistent record  Improved speed and efficiency of care delivered 
 Information base developed for wide variety of direct care 
and administrative uses 
 Data is entered once  
Payment for services  Streamlined automatic billing, payment system 
 Documentation of billing, payment actions 
Remote diagnostics  Reduction of clinic visits 
 Saves time for patient 
 Improved patient triage 
 More efficient use of time of skilled health workers  
Referrals  Efficient access to closest available resources 
Scheduling follow-ups  Automatic messaging to public and providers 
15 
 
 
Disease surveillance  Enables real-time surveillance, resource allocation 
Public information  More targeted distribution of information 
24x7 call centers  Decreased need for in-person clinic visits 
Administration Issues  
Performance review  Easier and more timely aggregation of data by factors 
including district, region, provider, and disease 
Staff communications  Voice and data communications increase efficiency 
Staff management  Ability to mine data to monitor staff performance through 
various filters, including at the individual or aggregate level 
 Ability to supervise staff in real-time 
Staff training  Combination of physical and eTraining may provide 
efficiencies over traditional model, particularly for  “just-in-
time” training 
Payments  Operations and record keeping efficiency 
 Fraud protection 
Supply chain management  Avoiding stockouts 
 Fraud protection, e.g. fake medicines 
Research  Development of data marts that can be leveraged for 
research 
 Reduce repetitive and costly primary research and data 
collection efforts.  
 
 Cost-effectiveness analysis of eHealth technology investments. An evaluation of the benefits of 
eHealth programs should focus on clinical and social outcomes using reliable conversion 
factors43. The outcomes are focused on benefits to the patient and the provider, the two targets 
of eHealth technologies as discussed in the section on “The promise of eHealth.” It is important, 
however, to translate the metrics to the end user of the specific technology. For example, smart 
phones could be used to help train community health workers in aspects of maternal and child 
health and the metrics should frame specified outcomes for mothers, newborns, and children 
resulting from the training. Further research should focus on the ability of eHealth to improve 
health systems outcomes as well, including but not limited to efficiency gains and strengthened 
service programs. The table below, derived from Dávalos et al43, may serve as a starting point 
for measuring the value of clinical and social outcomes resulting from mHealth. 
 
Representative Monetary Conversion Factors for mHealth Outcomes 
Client/Patient Perspective 
Outcome Measure Unit Monetary Conversion Factor 
                                                          
43
 Dávalos, María E., Michael T. French, Anne E. Burdick, and Scott C. Simmons. “Economic Evaluation of 
Telemedicine: Review of the Literature and Research Guidelines for Benefit-Cost Analysis.” Telemedicine and e-
Health 15.10 (2009) : 933-949. Print. 
16 
 
 
Medical Effectiveness 
Reduced morbidity44 Change in quality-adjusted life- Value of a statistical life-year from 
years (QALYs) the value of a statistical life 
Avoided mortality44 Avoided years of life lost Value of a statistical life-year from 
the value of a statistical life 
Healthcare services and others 
Increased access to healthcare Indirect effect: Change in QALYs Value of a statistical life-year from 
the value of a statistical life 
Increased health knowledge/ Indirect effect: Change in QALYs Value of a statistical life-year from 
ability for self-care the value of a statistical life 
Faster/accurate diagnosis and Indirect effect: Change in QALYs Value of a statistical life-year from 
treatment the value of a statistical life 
Reduced waiting and/or Missed hours/days of Average of minimum context-
consultation time employment, classroom or leisure specific wage rate (hourly or daily) 
time 
Increased adherence to medical Indirect effect: Change in QALYs Value of a statistical life-year from 
regimen the value of a statistical life 
Occupation 
Continuity of income Missed hours/ days of Average of minimum context-
employment avoided specific wage rate (hourly or daily) 
Increased employment/ Missed days or hours of classroom Average or minimum context-
leisure/classroom time time or work absences avoided; specific wage rate (hourly or daily) 
increased available leisure time 
Travel 
Money spent on travel: Distance Mileage allowance rate or airfare 
transportation cost to nearest referral facility 
Money spent on travel: Average cost for accommodations 1.00 
accommodation in referral location 
Money spent on travel: other Money spent on local 1.00 
expenses transportation and meals 
 
Provider Perspective 
Outcome Measure Unit Monetary Conversion Factor 
Healthcare services and others 
Reduced length of stay at Days Context-specific charges per 
medical facility inpatient day in facility 
Avoided medical readmissions Count Context-specific charges per 
inpatient day in facility multiplied 
by the average duration of 
readmissions 
Avoided inpatient visits Count Context-specific charges per 
inpatient day in facility multiplied 
by the average duration of 
                                                          
44
 Potential opportunity to highlight outcomes specific to maternal, newborn, and child health. 
17 
 
 
inpatient visits 
Avoided laboratory tests Count Average context-specific charges 
per emergency room visit 
Avoided patient’s transportation Count Average context-specific charges 
to healthcare facilities per laboratory test 
Reduced length of consultations Minutes or hours Average context-specific physician 
or specialists’ fee (hourly) 
Other outcomes 
Increased medication adherence Indirect effect: avoided use of Average context-specific charges 
healthcare utilization: number of for specific healthcare services 
inpatient visits, referrals, etc. 
Increased knowledge transfer Avoided referrals from knowledge Average context-specific specialist 
among practitioners transfer or hours/ days of training fee (patient avoided costs should 
required to obtain same be included as well or cost per day 
knowledge plus work time lost (in of training plus work loss at 
hours or days) for training average context-specific 
physician’s hourly or daily fee) 
Increased accuracy and faster Indirect effect: avoided use of Average context-specific charges 
diagnosis and treatment healthcare utilization: number of for specific healthcare services 
inpatient visits, referrals, etc. 
Increased patient satisfaction .. 1.00 (willingness to pay for 
mHealth program) 
Decreased travel and/or home visits for staff 
Increased employment time Days or hours Average context-specific wage 
(productivity) rate for nurses, physicians or 
other specialists (hourly or daily) 
Money spent on travel: Distance in kilometers or miles Cost to travel 
transportation 
Money spent on travel: Average cost for overnight stay 1.00 
accommodation 
 
Other Stakeholders Perspective 
Outcome Measure Unit Monetary Conversion Factor 
Healthcare services and others 
Increased productivity of Avoided missed days/hours of Average or minimum context-
workers (less travel, less illness) employment time specific wage rate (hourly or daily) 
More efficient access to health Distance to referral facility and Mileage allowance rate for 
for special groups (informal days/hours of work for staff transportation and average daily 
sector, etc.): transportation or hourly wage rate for staff 
costs, staff costs 
Avoided cases of communicable Cases Average medical costs (health 
diseases resources utilization and staff) per 
case, average avoided loss of 
wages and productivity from 
illness per case 
18 
 
 
 
 Cost-benefit comparison of mHealth technologies and alternative methods of health service 
delivery. One of the key questions in determining cost is the standard against which to compare 
the value. There is now widespread agreement on the interventions, including health worker 
training and health systems infrastructure needed to reach the MDGs and these interventions 
have been costed36. Building on the metrics to measure mHealth benefits, as outlined above, 
further research could investigate mHealth outcomes as compared to traditional service delivery 
methods. For example, what is the difference in timeliness of treatment for a patient utilizing an 
mHealth device vs. a patient traveling in person to a medical facility? What is the difference in 
levels of patient satisfaction? This approach would not only provide a baseline point of 
comparison for program benefits and patient satisfaction, but also explore the potential for 
cost-minimization as a result of mHealth technologies. Additionally, it would highlight areas in 
which mHealth may not provide cost-effective outcomes for health access and service delivery, 
thus providing the factors which determine when mHealth is best leveraged.  
 Maternal, newborn, and child health (MNCH)-specific outcomes analysis. Mobile technologies 
are recognized to have much to offer in improving MNCH, with significant efforts under way 
now through the mHealth Alliance and other public-private partnerships to harness their 
potential. In the utilization of mHealth programs with the MDGs, however, it is important to 
direct efforts towards areas of greatest need. Fig 1 below identifies the gaps in the coverage of 
procedures within the continuum of care related to maternal, newborn, and child health, which 
if met, would significantly impact on the MDGs45. Future mHealth initiatives addressing MDGS 4 
and 5 should target mHealth technology investments to these areas of greatest need. For 
example, could mHealth investments be used to improve coverage of post-natal visits within 
two days, by developing an SMS reminder service for pending appointments? 
Fig 1. Coverage estimates for interventions across the continuum of care in the 68 priority 
countries (2000-2006). 
                                                          
45 Source: Countdown to 2015: Tracking Progress in Maternal, Newborn and Child Survival. The 2008 report. 
 
 
19 
 
 
 
  
20 
 
 
A PRACTICAL APPLICATION 
eHealth and Maternal and Child Health 
This paper proposes two basic lines of enquiry into the economics of eHealth: 1) an examination of the 
drivers of eHealth costs, and 2) an analysis of the benefits – to patients and health workers – which can 
accrue from the introduction of eHealth systems. The paper sets out a basic roadmap for investigation 
which can support sound investment decisions for eHealth in LMICs. The central premise of this paper is 
that systemic investments in m- and eHealth can rapidly expand cost-effective quality health care 
distribution to under-served groups – this is essential if the global community is to reach the MDGs. An 
end-to-end systems approach is necessary to avoid costly and potentially mutually incompatible one-off 
solutions. 
In developing a policy and research program to test this premise, it is essential to avoid one of the 
central problems identified in the literature review: individual studies of independent components. 
These are unlikely to provide the kind of information which policy makers will need to make large-scale 
investment decisions. As such, the proposed next step would be to identify a diverse group of three to 
four leading LMICs in the eHealth arena which could provide the platform for this research, to help 
guide policymaker decisions on eHealth investments. Within those countries, the proposal would be to 
create large scale trials of integrated systems (i.e. supporting the full continuum of care in an area, such 
as maternal care), as opposed to point solutions. These would be designed to produce answers to the 
key financial issues which policymakers face.  The areas outlined suggest a framework for further 
research that can be applied through case studies in a variety of settings and for a range of audiences. 
Further, given the critical importance of women and children’s health, the research should be focused in 
this area. 
The previously cited 2010 UNICEF study Narrowing the Gaps to Meet the Goals, notes that millions of 
lives can be saved by investing first in the most disadvantaged children and communities46. The most 
impoverished child populations are faced with the greatest national burdens of disease, ill health, and 
illiteracy; as such, focusing on these children with the greatest need can greatly accelerate progress 
towards the MDGs and reduce disparities47. Using, for example, the “marginal budgeting for 
bottlenecks” (MMB) approach48, eHealth planners and end users can estimate the costs of leveraging 
technology to leapfrog existing bottlenecks within healthcare delivery, and more specifically, within 
MNCH.  eHealth’s greatest promise for LMICs lies in its potential to leapfrog traditional obstacles to 
healthcare delivery in resource-constrained areas; and the MBB approach can serve as a starting point 
                                                          
46
 UNICEF. “Narrowing the Gaps to Meet the Goals.” New York: UNICEF, 2010. 
http://www.unicef.org/media/files/Narrowing_the_Gaps_to_Meet_the_Goals_090310_2a.pdf. 
47
 UNICEF. “New UNICEF study shows MDGs for children can be reached faster with focus on most disadvantaged.” 
www.unicef.com. 7 Sept 2010. 
48
 A results-based planning and budgeting tool developed by UNICEF, UNFPA and the World Bank that identifies 
system-wide supply and demand bottlenecks to adequate and effective coverage of essential health services. 
21 
 
 
for planning and evaluating e- and mHealth investments.  The UNICEF research needs to be supported 
with a more detailed study of how mHealth and eHealth can help achieve its tactical goals.   
Case studies for the application of eHealth to MNCH in systemic innovation trials need to be developed. 
In these cases, the investigation of the proposed research areas can help to guide analysis and decision-
making from the outset, and in turn develop a framework for assessing ROI scenarios 5-10 years into the 
future. 
  
22 
 
 
CONCLUSION 
Looking forward 
With the rapid increase in the number of e- and mHealth projects, several trends indicate the potential 
for such technologies to overcome some core health obstacles in LMICs, particularly in resource-
constrained areas. In particular, mHealth has the potential to contribute to the achievement of MDGs 4 
and 5, providing mothers and children with increased access to health resources and services. However, 
it is essential to consider and quantify the full range of financial costs and benefits through rigorous 
economic evaluation.  The need is not just to add up the costs of ICTs, but to compare, to the extent 
feasible, the costs of a distributed approach enabled by mHealth to the current health service delivery 
cost structure.  The previously cited “Narrowing the Gap” UNICEF report points the way.  
At present, there is little economic evaluation of eHealth, with existing research at too small a scale to 
reach generalizable conclusions for investment decisions. For eHealth programs to succeed, public and 
private health and IT stakeholders need to develop an investment case to drive scale up and 
sustainability of eHealth infrastructures. The economic models and scenarios provided in this paper will 
help measure, direct, and evaluate eHealth program performance and better target and attract public 
and private investment. Failure to do so could result in missed opportunities to harness the 
transformational power of eHealth networks and devices. 
This paper focuses on promising areas for research to build such an evidence-base, through real-world 
case studies and economic models, and attempts to provide a preliminary framework of questions to 
pursue in the evaluation of the economics of eHealth.  Although eHealth projects are already operating 
in a wide variety of countries around the world, and thus may provide useful data to generate a 
platform for informed decision making on investments in eHealth, we are not aware of any that have 
been designed as integrated systems (i.e. supporting the full continuum of care in an area, such as 
maternal care), as opposed to point solutions.  The research and analysis outlined in this paper can help 
maximize the value added of future eHealth investments.  The next step should be a carefully targeted 
research program across a diverse group of low and middle income countries using integrated systems 
as the subject.   
  
23 
 
 
Acknowledgements 
The authors acknowledge with thanks support from the mHealth Alliance which funded the preparation 
of this paper. We also acknowledge the many helpful suggestions and comments on earlier drafts of the 
paper, and in particular the advice from participants at the expert meeting organized by the mHealth 
Alliance  and World Health Organization in Geneva on September 6th and 7th, 2010. 
  
24 
 
 
BIOGRAPHIES 
Julian Schweitzer 
Julian Schweitzer is Principal at the Results for Development Institute (R4D), a nonprofit organization 
dedicated to accelerating social and economic progress in low and middle income countries. Prior to 
joining R4D, Julian had a distinguished career at the World Bank, with recent positions as Director of the 
Health, Nutrition and Population Department and Acting Vice President, Human Development Network. 
He has over thirty years of development experience with a focus on human development. He holds a 
Ph.D. from the University of London and has authored numerous articles and essays on economic and 
human development.   
Christina Synowiec 
Christina Synowiec is a Program Associate at the Results for Development Institute (R4D), focusing on 
health systems development and the promotion of universal health coverage, in addition to mHealth. 
Prior to joining R4D, Ms. Synowiec was a Senior Research Analyst at the Advisory Board Company, 
where she designed and executed best practice research studies analyzing key economic and political 
trends affecting U.S. hospitals. Ms. Synowiec holds a Bachelors of Philosophy in Interdisciplinary Studies 
(Magna Cum Laude) specializing in international human rights from Miami University in Oxford, Ohio. 
25 
 
