Ending adolescent AIDS through mobile-based 
counselling and polling
Photo by UNICEF / Zambia / Maseka / 2016
68  n  U-REPORT 
U-Report
U-Report has been used as a focused mHealth application, 
specifically providing real-time mobile counselling and conducting 
coordinated polls on HIV/AIDS among adolescents and young 
people. 
Despite incredible progress over the last decade, adolescents aged 10–19 have been largely left behind in the global 
AIDS response. Adolescents are the only age group for which AIDS-related deaths have not decreased—in fact they 
have tripled since 2000.1 AIDS is the leading cause of death for adolescents in Africa, and the second globally.2 Every 
hour 26 new HIV infections occur among older adolescents (aged 15–19), 40% of which happen outside sub-Saharan 
Africa.3 Moreover, risk is high among this age group due to limited knowledge about HIV. In sub-Saharan Africa, 70% of 
boys and girls (15–19) have low comprehensive knowledge on how to protect themselves and access services.4  
To address this critical gap in the HIV/AIDS response, and with youth being the greatest users of mobile devices 
globally, UNICEF has to invest in innovative solutions that can achieve quick wins in service-delivery, while creating 
real, long-lasting change for adolescents. One such innovation is U-Report, a general mobile-enabled youth 
engagement platform. U-Report has been used as a focused mHealth application, specifically providing real-time 
mobile counselling and conducting coordinated polls on HIV/AIDS among adolescents and young people. Objectives 
of the program are to: improve access to sexual reproductive health (SRH) knowledge; increase utilization of HIV 
prevention services; and better understand perceptions on HIV-related issues in order to contribute to reducing new 
HIV infections among adolescents and youth.
About U-Report
Powered by RapidPro—UNICEF’s open-source software By sending the text message, “join,” to a toll-free number platform for international development—U-Report is and answering a few registration questions (e.g. age, gen-
a user-centered tool that empowers young people to speak der, region within a country in which they reside), any 
out on various issues that they care about in their commu- young person with a mobile phone can become a volunteer 
nity, encourages citizen-led response, and magnifies voices “U-Reporter” in their country. Young people join U-Report 
locally, nationally, and globally to create positive change. The through promotions from local nongovernmental organiza-
platform is interoperable with various technology platforms, tions (NGOs), youth groups, and faith-based organizations. 
allowing U-Reporters to communicate with other young Traditional media campaigns are also used to advertise the 
people and communities via SMS, Twitter, smartphone app, service and encourage young people to sign up. Weekly poll 
Facebook Messenger, and Telegram depending on country campaigns are conducted on a wide range of issues, includ-
context. First launched in Uganda in 2011, there are cur- ing poverty, bullying, Ebola, and gender equality.
rently more than 2 million U-Reporters, operating in 23 While U-Report is designed as a multithematic social 
countries: Brazil, Burkina Faso, Burundi, Cameroon, Central messaging tool, some countries, like Zambia, have chosen a 
African Republic, Chile, Democratic Republic of Congo, specific health issue to optimize on the tool’s large user base 
Guinea, Indonesia, Ireland, Liberia, Mali, Mexico, Mozam- and real-time analytics. The platform is utilized in a targeted 
bique, Nigeria, Pakistan, Senegal, Sierra Leone, Swaziland, approach to achieve HIV outcomes among adolescents and 
Uganda, Ukraine, Zambia, and Zimbabwe. young people, particularly to: increase knowledge on HIV 
mHEALTH COMPENDIUM  SPECIAL EDITION 2016  n  69
and SRH; generate demand for and increase uptake of HIV 2012 World AIDS Day. It currently has a national reach 
testing and counselling (HTC) and related health services, of over 98,000 subscribers, 65% of whom are adolescents 
and better understand barriers to HIV-prevention services. (10–19 years) and young adults (20–24 years). U-Report, as 
UNICEF, in partnership with Zambia’s National AIDS an SMS-based intervention, provides confidential, free-of-
Council (NAC), launched U-Report Zambia during the charge, and real-time counselling services on HIV and SRH 
to adolescents and youths. 
Program Design Process
U-Report Zambia is built on the foundation of its Uganda ings. The results inform policy dialogue and programmatic 
counterpart, where the platform was first implemented. It decisions, and establish a baseline on knowledge, access, and 
was further developed through a participatory, consultative utilization of high-impact HIV prevention services.
process including a design workshop that involved young UNICEF provides technical leadership and manages the 
people and program experts from NAC, the ministries of systems’ operations (e.g. Poll/Campaign module, and re-
health, education, youth and sports, local NGOs, represen- porting and analytics), and NAC acts as U-Report’s primary 
tatives from mobile companies, and information technology champion and country-wide coordinator of various partners, 
and software developers. Throughout design and implemen- ensuring that the program aligns with national HIV guide-
tation, the opinions of adolescents and young people from lines and plans. UNICEF negotiated discounted bulk SMS 
both urban and rural areas were continuously sought, either rates with all three mobile phone operators in Zambia—
in person or via U-Report to shape and improve the plat- namely Airtel, MTN, and Zamtel, offering SMS service to 
form’s programming and content, so that messages are locally U-Reporters at no cost. 
adapted to the language and tone of its young users. 
To implement the mHealth counselling component of U-Re-
The mHealth application of U-Report Zambia has two com- port, UNICEF entered into a partnership with CHAMP, a 
ponents: Knowledge Bank and Poll/Campaign. Knowledge local NGO, which already managed the national “990” voice 
Bank is a dynamic repository of up-to-date information on counselling service. CHAMP provides counsellors, manages 
HIV and SRH, which over time has expanded to other re- the Knowledge Bank module, and conducts the day-to-day 
lated issues, such as gender-based violence. SMS-counsellors operations of the “878” SMS-based U-Report counselling 
use this resource to provide correct and consistent informa- service. Integrating and ensuring interoperability of the 
tion to U-Reporters. The weekly Poll/Campaign module phone and SMS services, while challenging, is crucial to the 
obtains and gauges the opinions of adolescents and young program’s goals as it both streamlines operations, and gives 
adults on HIV issues, and promotes national events to create young people options to better access HIV counselling and 
awareness, promote positive behavior change and increase information. The two-way SMS communication between 
utilization of services (e.g. national HIV testing day). Survey young people allows for anonymity, while a voice conversa-
results are disaggregated, analyzed, and displayed on its web- tion allows for more in-depth conversation when necessary.
site in real-time, and integrated in key decision-maker meet-
Growth in Scale
In less than five years, U-Report’s membership has rapidly matic issue/s in their country to ensure local ownership and 
grown to over 2 million users worldwide, going live in 23 long-term investment, while achieving the three U-Report 
countries, with 11 in the pipeline. In addition to its coun- global strategic goals: “scale, engage, and change.” U-Re-
try roll-outs, U-Report has a global roll-out (U-Report port is based on the theory that the strength of its voice is 
Global), which enables adolescents and young people from in its numbers. Using transferable technology developed 
all over the world to voice issues that affect them through in the South, UNICEF is able to launch in a new country 
Facebook Messenger, Twitter, Telegram, and App, regardless within 8-12 weeks, working towards the objective to create 
if they have a national U-Report. U-Report’s digital reach an international community of young people. To ensure 
has expanded to over 40 countries in both developing and sustainability, UNICEF also works with telecommunication 
developed countries. providers to make U-Report a free platform within interop-
U-Report collaborates and builds relationships with multiple erable technologies.
stakeholders, who want to work on a common program-
70  n  U-REPORT 
U-Report’s advantage is that not only is it a multiplatform most pressing to young people. While HIV and health are 
technology, but it is also a multithematic platform that goes important issues, they may not be a primary concern among 
beyond mHealth per se. U-Report can focus on a specific young people, so it’s important to have a flexible platform. 
outcome area (e.g. HIV/AIDS) or population group (e.g. U-Report’s holistic approach constantly engages adolescents to 
adolescent girls and boys) like in the case of Zambia, but it discuss issues that affect them today, while giving them access 
can also concurrently tackle a broad range of issues that is to health information and HIV services. 
Evaluation and Results
Of the over 98,000 Zambian U-Reporters who have volun- Through a 10-day U-Report campaign on HTC, a package of 
tarily signed up, about 62% have asked questions—through SMS messages designed to trigger a two-way interactive SMS 
both poll-based solicited and unsolicited messages—with counselling session was delivered to all registered Zambian 
the counsellors.5 Most respondents are aged 10–24 years U-Reporters in Lusaka and Chongwe districts. SMS coun-
(65% of users), male (60%), and located around the urban sellors addressed questions and referred U-Reporters to the 
areas (55%). The average monthly traffic for 2016 ranges nearest HTC site in their location. The evaluation analyzed 
between 8,000 and 10,000 SMS messages, 90% of which, HTC uptake among U-Reporters at baseline, and measured 
if addressed to counsellors, are responded to within a two- the increase in uptake two weeks after the campaign.6  Out of 
hour window. By capitalizing on the growing use of mobile the 1,139 U-Reporters (10–24 years) who claimed that they 
phones and through reliable and correct information from have not tested for HIV in the past 12 months, 18% reported 
the counsellors, U-Report Zambia contributed to increasing going for HTC during the SMS campaign, most (62%) of 
access to and improving comprehensive HIV knowledge them adolescents (15–19 years). In a short period of time, the 
among adolescents and young people. While it’s crucial to U-Report SMS campaign was able to generate 1 additional 
promote and reinforce information through multiple chan- HIV test for every 5 young people who had not tested for 
nels, U-Report added value by disseminating information in HIV in the previous 12 months. While the results are prom-
real-time to a targeted and particularly vulnerable population ising, the methodology relies on self-reported data on HTC 
at a relatively low cost. uptake, and it would be important to conduct future studies 
that allow such claims to be verified by health facilities.
mHEALTH COMPENDIUM  SPECIAL EDITION 2016  n  71
Photo by Mark Naftalin
Zambian U-Reporter Beatrice Phiri (right) speaks to a fellow youth 
about HIV and AIDS information received on U-Report.
U-Report conducted a polling initiative focused on better cents prioritized the use of incentives and campaigns target-
understanding barriers to HIV prevention in Zambia among ing parents. While all age groups suggested to make condoms 
adolescents and on generating user feedback and solutions more widely available, older adolescents and youth preferred 
for more youth-friendly health services. The main barrier to confidential condom distribution centers managed by other 
HTC, according to analysis of a sample of 15,228 U-Re- young people. These findings were presented by adolescents 
porters aged 10–24 years, was fear of a positive test.7 Lack themselves at the Third National HIV&AIDS Prevention 
of awareness of the importance of HTC was highest among Convention—a national-level forum on HIV, which allowed 
younger adolescents. Older adolescents and youth proposed young people to meaningfully participate in policy and pro-
to increase tailored HTC campaigns, while younger adoles- gram design on HIV and health in their country.
Lessons Learned in Program Implementation and Scaling 
Voluntary medical male circumcision (VMMC) decreases promotion as part of a broader range of behavior change 
the chance of men acquiring HIV by 60%.8 Accordingly, interventions.
U-Report Zambia launched an SMS campaign on VMMC U-Report is committed to providing free access for the user 
as part of an impact evaluation, conducted by IDinsight and anywhere in the world, making negotiations with mobile 
funded by the International Initiative for Impact Evaluation.9 network operators (MNOs) crucial. Negotiations on pack-
The randomized controlled trial, with a sample of 2,312 ages with MNOs vary from country to country. One lesson 
male U-Report subscribers (aged 15–30) in urban Lusaka learned is to work closely with the operators at the onset, and 
and peri-urban Chongwe districts, examined the effects of bring them in as part of the U-Report program. In U-Report 
SMS-based interventions on circumcision uptake. In a span Zambia, the counselling component has an annual fixed 
of five months, participants received 21 SMSs, providing cost of over US$200,000 covered by the Global Fund to 
VMMC information, encouraging them to go for circumci- Fight AIDS, Tuberculosis, and Malaria over the next three 
sion, and engaging them in SMS counselling via U-Report. years. This price provides a dual SMS and voice service 24/7, 
The evaluation found that the SMS campaign did not have with counsellors working out of a call center. However, this 
evidence of impact on uptake of circumcision within six expense can be further reduced with more cost-effective solu-
months. However, the U-Report campaign showed signifi- tions, such as using a telecommuting model (i.e. counsellors 
cant information-seeking behavior on VMMC and spurred work remotely) and automated counselling systems. The low-
high levels of engagement with SMS counsellors. While SMS er the cost, the more scalable and sustainable an innovative 
interventions and counsellor access alone may not lead to solution is in the long-term.
increased circumcision uptake, policy-makers and program 
implementers should consider integrating low-cost SMS 
72  n  U-REPORT 
Photo by UNICEF / Zambia / Maseka / 2016
Future Plans 
During World AIDS Day 2015, more than nine countries and send standard responses, with the goal to provide faster 
engaged over 1.3 million U-Reporters to participate in a and more accurate counselling services.
multicountry dialogue on HIV/AIDS related issues. The Beyond mHealth, U-Report is looking to further diversify 
coordinated poll gauged young people’s perceptions on channels over which young people can communicate. Smart-
common themes, such as testing, treatment, knowledge on phone apps for iOS and Android are being released this year, 
prevention and transmission, and stigma around HIV/AIDS. with the ability to send and receive rich media. This feature will 
While its results should not be taken as statistically accurate, enable U-Reporters to share their experiences and stories in their 
as a crowdsourcing tool U-Report can complement ongoing own voices, and connect with others. U-Report is also launch-
processes and interventions. In 2016, U-Report will conduct ing a web-based registration, which could be applied during a 
a series of questionnaires on HIV throughout the year to humanitarian crisis and/or a health emergency response.  n
amplify the voices of adolescents and young people world-
wide, with quantitative and qualitative responses feeding Snapshot: U-Report
into UNICEF’s biennial “Stocktaking Report on Children 
and AIDS.” This initiative will give adolescents an oppor- Geographic U-Report is live in 23 countries: Brazil, Burkina Faso, Coverage Burundi, Cameroon, Central African Republic, Chile, 
tunity to recommend solutions, influence decision-makers Democratic Republic of Congo, Guinea, Indonesia, 
and government leaders during the 21st International AIDS Ireland, Liberia, Mali, Mexico, Mozambique, Nigeria, 
Conference (AIDS 2016) in Durban, South Africa, and ac- Pakistan, Senegal, Sierra Leone, Swaziland, Uganda, 
Ukraine, Zambia, and Zimbabwe.
tively participate in shaping the future of HIV programming U-Report Global (ureport.in/) has a digital reach in 
in UNICEF. an additional 28 countries.
In the pipeline, UNICEF’s priority is to expand mHealth Implementation 2011 to present
applications of U-Report linked to HIV services and pro- Dates
grammatic results. Several countries are working on linking Zambia  UNICEF
U-Report to help improve antiretroviral treatment adher- Partners National AIDS Council (leadership and coordination)Christian Health Association of Zambia (management 
ence, promote condom use, increase HIV testing, and sup- oversight of counseling service activity funds)
plement country assessments on adolescents and HIV data. CHAMP (management of the national “990” voice 
Nigeria and Zimbabwe have started adopting the Zambian counseling service and operations of the “878” SMS 
model of providing real-time counselling via U-Report. counseling service, promotion activities)
Zambia is looking into optimizing its SMS counselling Zambia Global Fund
Implementation Mobile phone operators (i.e., Airtel, MTN, Zamtel) 
through artificial intelligence. Currently in the testing phase, Donors provide SMS services at discounted rates
the automated version uses machine learning algorithms that Contact James Powell, U-Report Global Coordinator
pick out key words from messages, sort them into categories, Information UNICEF, jpowell@unicef.org
References & Additional Resources
References: 
1. UNAIDS 2014 HIV and AIDS estimates, July 2015.
2. WHO, Health for the World’s Adolescents: A second chance in the second decade, World Health Organization, Geneva, 2014.
3. UNAIDS 2014 HIV and AIDS estimates, July 2015.
4. UNICEF global HIV and AIDS databases (September 2015) based on MICS, DHS, AIS and other nationally representative household surveys, 
2010-2014.
5. As of end of April 2016, there are 98,277 members and 61,108 unique conversations in U-Report Zambia.
6. “Zambia U-Report: Innovative demand creation for HIV testing and counselling using mobile phones.” Abstract was written by authors from 
UNICEF Zambia, CHAMP, National AIDS Council (NAC), and UNICEF Eastern and Southern Africa Regional Office.
7. “Using real-time SMS to understand barriers to HIV prevention services among adolescents in Zambia: Lessons learned and implications 
for adolescent health programming.” Abstract was written by authors from UNICEF Zambia, University of Zambia, National AIDS Council 
(NAC), CHAMP, and UNICEF Eastern and Southern Africa Regional Office.
8. Bailey, RC, et al. Male circumcision for HIV prevention in young men in Kisumu, Kenya: a randomised controlled trial. Lancet, 2007, 369:643–656.
9. IDinsight, Measuring the Impact of SMS Campaigns on Uptake of VMMC in Urban Zambia, Lusaka, Zambia, June 2015.
mHEALTH COMPENDIUM  SPECIAL EDITION 2016  n  73
