The services are free to 
the user, and messages are 
currently available in six 
languages and will shortly be 
available in all eleven official 
South African languages. 
MOMCONNECT
IMPLEMENTATION DATE:  August 2014 
Promoting maternal and child health well-being through 
mobile health messaging
Although there are numerous projects in South Africa seeking to use mobile technology to reach 
pregnant women and mothers, MomConnect is the first large-scale mHealth implementation run by 
the National Department of Health. This is significant in the context of South African mHealth but 
also enormously important for the mHealth community as a whole as it is one of the few instances 
globally where an mHealth initiative has been adopted by a national health department and is being 
implemented nationwide. MomConnect seeks to mitigate the negative outcomes around pregnancy 
and childbirth. In South Africa, 40 out of every 1,000 children die before the age of five and for every 
100,000 births, approximately 140 women die during pregnancy and childbirth. These statistics are 
substantially higher than the Millennium Development Goal targets for South Africa.
About MomConnect
MomConnect seeks to register all pregnant women, ensure based, personalized short message service (SMS) texts to each that they visit an antenatal clinic, and provide them mom in the registry; and 3) Allow women to engage with the 
with information about pregnancy, birth, and care of an health system through help desk tools and feedback services. 
infant. The initiative forms part of the South African national The services are free to the user, and messages are currently 
government’s efforts to promote maternal and child wellbeing available in six languages and will shortly be available in all 
and reduce mortality, as well as efforts to strengthen health 11 official South African languages. MomConnect is a “point 
services. The initiative was fully launched in August 2014 of care” system, meaning that during the interaction between 
in the context of unsatisfactory maternal and child health the woman and the health worker at the clinic, a mobile 
indicators in South Africa.  phone is used to register the pregnancy and subscribe the 
MomConnect has three main objectives: 1) Register each women to the messaging service. 
pregnancy at a government health facility; 2) Send stage-
28  n  BEHAVIOR CHANGE COMMUNICATION
Johnson & Johnson
The registration of the pregnancy and linkage to the SMSs n The need to determine less expensive ways of 
directly feeds into a national database. Women accessing the providing certain services has also been highlighted, 
service before confirming their pregnancy at a government with new alternatives being explored to reduce the costs 
health facility are provided basic information and directed to of SMS-based messages.
a clinic, promoting early antenatal care. A woman registered 
on MomConnect receives regular stage-based health messag-
es during her pregnancy and for the first year of the infant’s Conclusion
life. Messages cover “hard” topics such as diet and nutrition, 
HIV, hypertension, immunization, and breastfeeding, as well MomConnect builds on the lessons learned through 
as “softer” messages aimed at getting the mother to bond the Mobile Alliance for Maternal Action (MAMA), the 
with the baby. MomConnect also enables pregnant women partnership that delivers vital health messages to new 
to get information on frequently asked questions and to give and expectant mothers in developing countries via their 
feedback on the quality of health services they received. The mobile phones. MomConnect also builds on other 
feedback is passed on directly to the clinic involved; health maternal and child mHealth initiatives, but importantly 
workers will receive compliments and complaints, which takes these programs to the next level by integrating them 
they are asked to remedy.   into a national health system at scale. MomConnect is 
the culmination of a massive combined effort between 
government, donors, nonprofit organizations, MNOs, 
Evaluation and Results academics, and various other organizations and individuals. 
The lessons learned will be of enormous value to mHealth 
The Universities of Stellenbosch and the Western Cape initiatives on other content issues in South Africa and for 
are monitoring and evaluating the program for the first 18 other countries attempting to roll out nationwide maternal 
months of implementation. As of March 2015, over 31,000 health mHealth services. n
health workers have been trained to register pregnant women 
on the system from 86 percent of all government health 
facilities in the country. Just over 329,000 women have been 
registered on the system, the vast majority of these by health 
workers at government facilities. Since the launch of Mom-
Connect in August 2014, 229 complaints have been received 
through the feedback system while 1,234 compliments have 
been received, including positive feedback on MomConnect 
specifically, as well as positive feedback on facilities. Geographic Coverage: South Africa
Implementation Partners: South African National Department 
of Health; nine Provincial Health Departments; Praekelt 
Lessons Learned Foundation; Jembi; GMSA; Soul City; HealthEnabled 
(previously mHELP); CSIR; ICF; HISP
n The lessons learned to date include key issues such as Donors: US Government; Johnson & Johnson; ELMA Philanthro-
the enormous importance of partnerships, as well as pies; Discovery Foundation; South African National Depart-
the importance to adopt user-centered design principles ment of Health
from the start, the need for support from mobile Contact Information: Dr Yogan Pillay (Deputy Director-General: 
HIV, TV and MCWH) Tel: +27 12 395 8000; ypillay@intekom.
network operators (MNOs) to ensure sustainability and co.za
the challenge of privacy and security. 
mHEALTH COMPENDIUM  VOLUME 5  n  29
