MOBILISE! 
Mahantesh, Soukhya Project  
Mobile technology provides support services for domestic violence prevention 
and response in India  
SERVICE DELIVERY 
Implementation date: February 2011 to January 2014  
Domestic violence (DV) is highly prevalent in India and surfaces in a multitude of forms. Since the ‘Nirbhaya’ case surrounding 
the 2012 gang rape in Delhi, Indian-led efforts to prevent and respond to DV have been gaining unprecedented momentum. The 
Mobilise! Project builds on DV research and programmatic experiences in Bangalore and other parts of India. Documentation 
shows that women experiencing DV are likely to participate in and seek out health care services, but seldom approach DV 
support services directly. With considerable public and private investments in maternal and child health services, women’s 
utilization of primary health care facilities in India has increased sharply in recent years. These health facilities offer a key entry 
point for DV prevention and response interventions. The Mobilise! Project examines health system-based interventions to address 
DV.  
About Mobilise! 
Jointly implemented by Dimagi, RTI International, St. John’s 1. mTrainer: A mobile-facilitated participatory training 
Research Institute and other local partners in 30 health program to build primary health care providers’ 
 
centers in Bangalore, the Mobilise! Project’s primary goal is knowledge and skills to address DV, using various 
to apply mobile technology innovations towards applications including a checklist, polls and scenario-
s trengthening services in response to and prevention of based games 
gender-based violence (GBV), particularly DV. A core aspect 
of this project is the implementation and evaluation of a 2. mSoukhya: A tool to support primary health care 
primary health care system-led response to DV. Developing providers in their identification of and response to  
recommendations around mobile technology can support women experiencing violence; mSoukhya includes an 
this response in a sustainable and scalable way in Bangalore application that promotes providers’ adherence to a DV 
a nd India at large. The mHealth tools developed under this adherence protocol, provides key messages to women, 
project are built upon Dimagi’s open source mobile and supports documentation of service provision 
technology platform, CommCare, which is specifically 3. mShakti: A tool for community outreach workers to 
d esigned for supporting frontline service delivery in low- raise awareness about DV and its adverse health 
resource settings.  impacts, as well as services available through the primary 
M obilise! has developed four specific mHealth tools:  health care system 
  76  |  mHealth Compendium Volume 4 
4. mSupervise: A tool for health care workers 
engaged in the supervision of the health systems’ 
responses to DV 
Additionally, a mobile-based survey tool using the 
CommCare platform has been developed to 
evaluate the impact of the health systems’ 
intervention on providers’ knowledge, attitudes and 
practices, as well as women’s perceptions and use 
of DV-related services in the community. 
Based on initial findings, the project has been 
awarded an additional $500,000 grant from USAID 
to scale-up the program. This involves creating 
standard GBV training mobile apps for primary 
health care providers, improving supervision and 
performance of mobile users, providing self-learning 
modules for mobile users, and building a GBV 
CommCare app library.  
Evaluation and Results 
A proof of concept (POC) study conducted in Bangalore showed that using CommCare as an mHealth tool is feasible, 
acceptable and potentially effective in supporting the implementation, monitoring, evaluation and scale-up of a health 
systems’ response to DV. Specifically, the study found that the CommCare mHealth tools can be effective interventions in 
enhancing case management and the quality of care offered to women who have experienced DV. As part of the Mobilise! 
Project’s scale-up activities, a more rigorous evaluation of the role of mHealth tools in promoting a response to DV is 
currently being implemented. 
As part of the initial proof of concept, the intervention was conducted in 18 centers (nine each in intervention and control 
arms). The intervention arm involved 10 nursing staff using the CommCare app. In all, 38 cases were identified during the 
course of the year-long POC, of which 28 belonged to intervention sites and ten to the control. Most of the cases were 
identified in the immunization clinics. During general clinics, probing for injury marks also revealed violence. Cases were also 
identified in the field during door-to-door visits, with few women calling the Soukhya project counselors directly after 
attending the community outreach programs.  
Lessons Learned 
 Although mHealth tools are acceptable and feasible in the context of Geographic Coverage: Urban Bangalore, 
a public primary health care system, intensive advocacy is needed to India 
promote broader adoption and sustained use 
Implementation Partners: Dimagi Inc., RTI 
 Political commitment and administrative leadership are essential to 
International, St John’s Research Institute, 
ensure adoption, consistent and wide scale implementation, and 
Bruhat Bengaluru Mahanagara Palike (BBMP)  
sustained use of mHealth tools for DV response and prevention 
 mHealth tools need to be developed and evaluated to disseminate Funder: USAID 
prevention messages to women in the community served by primary 
health care centers  Contact Information 
Dimagi  Inc. | Stella Luk, Country Director, India 
Conclusion (sluk@dimagi.com) 
Initial results from the Mobilise! Project indicate that there is a role for RTI International | Suneeta Krishnan, Senior 
mHealth tools in DV prevention and response initiatives. Development Epidemiologist and Mobilise! GBV Technical 
and testing of a menu of applications to promote the implementation, Lead (+91-9036955233, skrishnan@rti.org) 
monitoring, supervision and scale-up of programs addressing DV is a USAID | Sharmila G Neogi, Maternal Health 
priority in India. Furthermore, advocacy for greater political commitment Specialist (91-11-2419-8217, sneogi@usaid.gov) 
and policy change to advance DV prevention and response are urgently 
needed in order to ensure that evidence-based mHealth tools are See References on page 89. 
adopted and used in a sustainable fashion.  
 
mHealth Compendium Volume 4  |  77 
