 
ENAT MESSENGER FOR MATERNAL 
HEALTH IN ETHIOPIA  
confirmation and transmission services via an automated 
BRIEF OVERVIEW message manager. The system consists of a server, a 
The  maternal mortality ratio in Ethiopia is among the modem, Nokia 2700 mobile phones with solar chargers 
highest in the world with a rate of 676 deaths per and a web-based application with a database. A system 
100,000 live births in 2011. According to the same data, document, user manual, and handbook for health 
only 34% of pregnant women received antenatal care extension workers (HEW) were developed to support 
(ANC) from a skilled health care provider, while only implementation.  
10% of deliveries occurred at a health facility. Each week, HEWs sent ANC data from their health post 
In order to reach the goal of 60% of deliveries taking to the nearest health center. The health center entered 
place in health facilities and attended by skilled health the data (sent from the health posts and the ANC data 
care workers, the Clinton Health Access Initiative, in for pregnant women following ANC at  the health 
partnership with Addis Ababa University School of centre level) into the Enat system manually. Based on 
Information Science and in consultation with the the data entered, which includes last menstrual period 
Ethiopian Federal Ministry of Health, has developed an or gestational age, the system automatically calculated 
mHealth application that facilitates tracking and referrals the expected delivery date (EDD) and sent text message 
at the community level. The system, Enat Messenger, reminders to the respective HEWs one month and one 
works to increase the retention of women in ANC care week before a pregnant woman’s EDD. The reminder 
to ensure delivery at a health center.  served as a prompt for the HEW to visit the mother to 
assess her status. 
Enat Messenger was piloted from January 2011 to 
September 2012 in 56 health posts and 10 health After each visit, the HEW was expected to send an SMS 
centers in two regions (Tigray and Oromia).  confirmation back to the system to confirm the visit. 
The responses were monitored by health care workers 
at the health center. 
ABOUT ENAT The system could also be used to prompt transport of a 
The Enat Messenger System runs text-based mother in labor to a health facility. Selected Health 
50 mHEALTH COMPENDIUM   │    VOLUME 2 
 
 LOGISTICS 
Development Army (HDA) volunteers were equipped  User related challenges: The limited computer 
with mobile phones and would make a missed call to an literacy of health workers was a challenge. Some 
HEW to alert her of the onset of labor. The HEW were unable to fix minor problems with the system. 
would send an SMS message to the system and the In addition, some HEWs lost their mobile phones or 
system sent a message to the operator/midwife at the did not return them when they left the area (i.e. for 
health center.  further education, transfer). Other HEW failed to 
visit mothers on time and as a result, confirmation 
In total, 59 personnel including midwives, nurses, and IT/ messages were delayed. 
data experts at 10 health centers, 124 HEWs at 62 
health posts, and 64 HDA community volunteers  Other challenges: Poor mobile network coverage 
received training. Each health center was provided with and electric power outages in some of the sites 
a desktop computer with a modem, one mobile affected the functioning of the system. 
apparatus and a post-paid SIM. Mobile phones and solar 
chargers were given to HEWs and HDA volunteers, and 
mobile airtime was refilled on a monthly basis. CONCLUSION 
The Enat pilot demonstrated the applicability of mHealth 
technology for addressing skilled delivery attendance. 
EVALUATION AND RESULTS The increase in deliveries in health facilities as well as 
The pilot has demonstrated improved communication the improved collection and tracking of data on 
between health centers and health posts/communities as pregnant women supports the argument for scale up of 
a result of the Enat Messenger System. This improved the system to other regions in Ethiopia. 
link led to the timely identification of term pregnant 
women and improved the frequency of visits by HEWs 
to pregnant women before delivery. The increased GEOGRAPHIC COVERAGE 
encounters between HEWS and pregnant women and 
Ethiopia, Tigray and Oromia regions  
their families allowed for greater opportunity to discuss 
the need for institutional delivery or to discuss and 
address potential barriers such as transportation, and IMPLEMENTATION PARTNERS 
consequently institutional deliveries increased at each Clinton Health Access Initiative | Ethiopia Federal Minis-
pilot site. Moreover, the system improved the storing try of Health | Addis Ababa University School of Infor-
and tracking of data on pregnant women.  mation Science  
FUNDER 
LESSONS LEARNED Clinton Health Access Initiative  
 System related challenges: In the beginning of 
the pilot, there were minor interruptions to the CONTACT INFORMATION 
system which were later fixed. These included the Clinton Health Access Initiative  
inability to send messages in some sites,  Yigeremu Abebe Asemere, Ethiopia    
transmission of only a first or second message (but Country Director  
not both), and duplicate messages about the same Email: yasemere@clintonhealthaccess.org  
mother. 
Information was excerpted from:  
“mobile Health: Technology to Increase Skilled Deliveries in Rural Communities in Ethiopia” Federal Ministry of Health  
and Clinton Health Access Initiative. 2012. Web. 
  MHEALTH COMPENDIUM  |  VOLUME 2 51 
