PreParing the next 
generation of community 
health workers:
the Power of technology     
for training
may 2012
commissioned by the iheed institute, the Barr foundation, the 
mhealth alliance, and the mDg health alliance.
Produced by Dalberg global Development advisors
graphics by almedia

contents
Acknowledgements And 04
Authorship
introduction 05
summAry Findings 08
chApter 1:  the importAnce oF 11
community heAlth workers
 chApter 2:  the lAndscApe oF 15
trAining
chApter 3:  current 21
ApproAches to chw trAining 
And content creAtion
chApter 4:  emerging evidence 32
on the potentiAl oF blended 
leArning
chApter 5:  opportunity For 43
disruptive innovAtion
conclusion 45
Annex 49
3
acknowleDgements anD authorshiP
This study builds on the momentum and excitement generated by the launch of mHealth 
Education at the 2011 Mobile Health Summit in Cape Town regarding the use of mobile 
technology to support health education and training in developing countries.    The findings 
and analysis presented in the chapters that follow would not have been possible without the 
individuals from more than 30 organizations who shared their insights, data and perspectives, 
as well as the peer reviewers, who provided valuable feedback and refinements.   
The authors would also like to acknowledge and thank the sponsors of this work: the iheed 
Institute, the Barr Foundation, MDG Health Alliance and the mHealth Alliance.   Specifically, 
we would like to acknowledge and thank Dr. Tom O’Callaghan, CEO and Founder of the iheed 
Institute; Heiner Baumann, Director of Global Programs and Tanya Jones, Global Programs 
Senior Associate of the Barr Foundation; Jeffrey Walker, Chairman, Austin Hearst, Vice-Chair, 
Brad Palmer, Vice-Chair, and Bill Rigler, Chief of Staff of the Community Health Worker Pillar 
of the MDG Health Alliance; and Patricia Mechael, Executive Director, and Madhura Bhat, 
Deputy Director of the mHealth Alliance. Their generosity – in terms of finances, time, direc-
tion and energy – has been vital to the success of this initiative.   
This study was authored by Rocio Funes, Vicky Hausman and Angela Rastegar of Dalberg 
Global Development Advisors, in collaboration with journalist, Pooja Bhatia, who provided 
editorial expertise.  
THIS REPORT IS DEDICATED TO THE COMMUNITY HEALTH WORKERS OF 
SUB-SAHARAN AFRICA.
4
“a generation ago, few would have dreamed that mobile technology would create five 
billion points of contact around the world 
or that nine out of 10 internet users in sub-
saharan africa would access the internet 
through mobile devices. they could not have 
imagined how innovative technologies such as 
skype, facebook, and african-born solutions 
like m-Pesa would transform spheres of 
business, politics, and society. 
what if these same, disruptive technologies 
could be applied to transform global health 
for the next generation?”
5
IntroductIon
could technology 
be harnessed in 
transformative ways 
to address critical 
gaps in community 
health worker 
training in sub-
saharan africa?
For several years, stakeholders across the global health sector have recognized and expressed 
enthusiasm about the potential of mobile technology to improve health outcomes. That story is not 
new. Today, there are many mobile health (mHealth) deployments. Most remain small scale, but efforts 
are underway to understand their specific operational and health impacts, and to scale applications 
that work.
However, while mHealth applications proliferate, technology has not been greatly deployed in the 
training of community health workers, whose work is essential to reaching Millennium Development 
Goals (MDGs) 4, 5, and 6 as well as to reducing the associated burdens of child and maternal mortality 
and HIV/AIDS.  
Thus, this report began with a simple question:  
Could technology be harnessed in transformative ways to address critical gaps in community health 
worker training in Sub-Saharan Africa? 
6
community health workers, who provide essential access to inexpensive, 
basic, life-saving health care, are indispensable to improving global health 
outcomes and thus the focus of this report. 
Developing countries face an acute shortage of health workers, as there is a global 
shortfall of 2.3 million physicians, nurses and midwives, and a shortage of more than 
4 million health workers overall. In the absence of medical professionals, millions of 
people rely on community health workers (CHWs) as their only point of contact with the 
health system. CHWs deliver low-cost, life-saving interventions in areas such as child 
and maternal health, vaccinations, and basic health education. Overcoming persistent 
health challenges will require scaling the number of CHWs and improving the effective-
ness of existing CHWs. 
sub-saharan africa needs at least one million more chws to address its 
health needs. 
Expanding the number and effectiveness of CHWs globally requires improving and 
scaling CHW training. Although formal training is but one aspect in the broad ecosys-
tem in which CHWs function, it is critical to their success. Recognizing the importance 
of training, numerous organizations, agencies, and governments have redoubled their 
efforts. These organizations have expanded the scope of training programs and the 
resources allocated to them – for example, USAID aims to increase by at least 100,000 
the number of CHWs serving in priority countries by 2013. 
technology can improve training and widen its scope. 
This study identifies opportunities to train CHWs more cost-effectively through technol-
ogy-enabled multimedia content that leverages visuals, videos, or audio.  Additionally, it 
highlights the potential to create open, easily sharable digital content that could act as 
a crucial ingredient for new approaches to training and learning in the future. The key 
findings are summarized below.
This report walks through existing approaches to CHW training and content develop-
ment, current uses of mobile technology, and emerging evidence on effective approach-
es to training, and highlights advantages of digital and multimedia content for scale and 
disruption.
 
7
Summary FIndIngS
 
multimedia applications with digital content could enable the training of one million 
new chws at less than a quarter of the cost of disseminating conventional training.
Broadly disseminating digital training content could lower the marginal cost of a million new CHWs 
in Sub-Saharan Africa from an estimated $65 per person to $15 per person.  Digital training 
materials are easier and significantly cheaper to transfer and localize than conventional training 
materials. These calculations are based on the costs of content development and required train-
ers, and rely on assumptions derived from research and interviews with over thirty stakeholders 
and experts. The higher upfront costs of producing digital training content could be overcome by 
innovative approaches, such as running global competitions for digital designers.
multimedia applications can enable more effective training. 
The most effective training includes the use of several pedagogies. “Blended” approaches that 
combine live training with multimedia applications align with the most effective pedagogical tech-
niques: They foster interaction, repetitive learning, and supervision and monitoring. Digital content, 
including videos, animations, and other multimedia applications, is useful for engaging CHWs, who 
have received limited if any education and have limited levels of literacy. Multimedia can also en-
able faster and better training, according to studies cited in this report.  In turn, mobile training and 
resources provide a link for repetition of training, supervision, and monitoring remotely.
Despite the advantages, fewer than 10 percent of chws trained by surveyed  
organizations are being trained with multimedia applications. 
Multimedia content can enable faster, better training. Although both CHWs and the organizations 
that train them are hungry for technological applications, including new media and methods such 
as video and animation, 90 percent of organizations studied in this report continue to use paper-
based training content, cumulatively training 341,800 CHWs with materials such as flipcharts, 
handouts and textbooks. In contrast, 7 percent of the CHWs trained by surveyed organizations, or 
27,000 CHWs, were trained using multimedia content as part of a blended approach. The remain-
ing 3 percent, or 10,000 CHWs, were trained with electronic content.
experts estimate that up to 80 percent of training content could be standardized and 
shared.  open source, digital content which supports “blended” approaches to  
training could facilitate this sharing.  
Content must be locally customized, which includes translation into local languages, cultural 
sensitivity, and locally relevant examples, so that the materials can be comprehended, used and 
adopted. However, a large share of content remains consistent and can be standardized, includ-
ing treatment protocols and clinical guidelines such as proper administration of oral rehydration 
tablets.
however, today, more than half of the organizations surveyed create their own  
content from the ground up.  
This is the result of a number of factors.  First, donors tend to fund creation of outputs, which 
incentivizes production rather than collaboration.  Second, local customization is essential and al-
lows for engagement of stakeholders in the creation of content.  While this is true, as noted above, 
there is the potential to standardize and share large portions of content, which can be adopted for 
8
local use.  Third, there is a timing and legacy dimension, as the expansion of mobile technology 
and possibilities of digital sharing of content is fairly new and continues to evolve.   Beyond these 
factors, organizations interviewed expressed a desire for more sharing and collaboration in content 
development.
with mobile phone access as high as 80 percent among chws in some countries, 
mobile technology could do much more for training and informal learning. 
There are more than 40 mHealth deployments supported by organizations such as Dimagi, the 
Grameen Foundation, D-Tree International and others, which are used by more than 2000 CHWs 
for support and training. Many of these training programs use mobile devices. But mobile technol-
ogy’s power for CHWs transcends specific mHealth applications. Every CHW with a mobile phone 
can use it to solve problems and seek advice from peers and supervisors—with just a phone call or 
SMS. 
widely available digital training content could dramatically alter formal chw train-
ing and fuel entrepreneurial innovation and models that support continuous learning. 
Africa is increasingly driving and appropriating technology to its own ends.  Examples include 
M-PESA, a locally-developed mobile money service in Kenya that transformed access to financial 
services in Kenya, and Ushahidi, an open-source software used by citizens for crisis mapping in 
post-election violence in Kenya and post-earthquake Haiti. The “disruptive technology” trend could 
portend dramatic improvements in formal training and beyond, as entrepreneurs in the developing 
world leverage digital content in models that support both formal training and informal learning. 
there are challenges to be overcome. 
The use of multimedia technology and digital content enables exciting possibilities for disruption. 
But not much digital training content exists in readily sharable, open-source form. Sharing content 
will require adjusting donor’s incentives in grant proposals, decoupling existing content from the 
underlying technology, as well as promoting platforms that aggregate and ease the sharing of open, 
digital content. There is limited experimentation with training approaches that incorporate multime-
dia and technology for CHWs specifically, and limited comprehensive and comparative effective-
ness evaluation of such training approaches to inform ongoing learning and improvement.
capturing the opportunities unleashed by technology will require 
a variety of stakeholders to consider and invest in the following:  
•	 digital content development that focuses on addressing the needs of chws      
and the gaps in their performance in fresh, engaging ways. such content might 
include, for instance, videos that demonstrate clinical procedures or educate  
patients on sensitive topics. one way to generate this content is to crowd 
source through competitions that engage digital designers. 
9
•	 greater collaboration in content creation and training implementation, 
supported by funders who commission open, sharable content, and incentives 
which promote sharing and collaboration on content development and use, 
rather than focusing on content generation alone.  mhealth developers should 
endeavor to disaggregate content from the underlying technology to speed the 
ease of sharing digital content.  And, the global health community should invest 
in, promote and use platforms that facilitate the sharing of content, knowledge, 
and tools.   this includes funders backing the development and maintenance of 
such platforms and implementers sharing and utilizing available resources.
•	 experimentation with blended approaches and recommended pedagogies that 
leverage digital content for instruction, and mobile technology for continuous 
learning, building on what has been shown to be effective with other cadres of 
health workers.  
•	 more, and more comprehensive, evaluation of blended approaches used 
with chws to inform training strategies going forward.  this could be part 
of a community-wide learning agenda across funders, policy-makers and 
implementers	to	fill	knowledge	and	evidence	gaps.
•	 innovation that supports continuous learning and uses the widening sweep 
of mobile technology and increasing volume of digital content to create new 
models that support informal chw learning. this could include opportunities 
for impact investors to work with entrepreneurs to seed novel solutions.
•	 continued advocacy and support for the overall enabling environment to 
improve the effectiveness of community health workers, recognizing that 
training is one component of the complex ecosystem in which chws operate.
10
the Importance oF 
chapter 1:  communIty health 
workerS
 
this introductory chapter describes the critical role chws play in 
providing access to health care to low-income populations. 
The findings presented here are based on interviews with experts from more than 30 organiza-
tions, including leaders in the field of mobile health (mHealth), experts in technology and media, 
ministries of health and training implementers who, collectively, have trained more than 378,000 
CHWs1  across Sub-Saharan Africa. The report also draws from a literature review of CHW training 
programs, mostly in Sub-Saharan Africa, with a focus on the use of mobile and multimedia applica-
tions. 
Developing countries have pressing health needs and a shortage of physicians and 
nurses to meet them. 
According to the World Health Organization, there is a global shortfall of 2.3 million physicians, 
nurses and midwives, and a shortage of more than 4 million health workers overall. Most of this 
shortfall is in developing countries.2  One billion of the world’s seven billion people will never visit a 
health worker for care. Of them, 350 million are children.3
 
chws help fill the global health worker gap by providing access to basic health care 
in a cost-efficient manner. 
Around the world, CHWs play a profound role in filling the global health worker gap by providing 
basic, low-cost health care, social services and health information to individuals and groups that 
lack access to professional health care. For millions of people in the developing world, CHWs are 
the first and often only point of contact with the formal health system. In regions with limited re-
sources, CHWs cost comparatively little to train and offer low-cost interventions that save millions 
of lives. Training a CHW for one year costs 2.5 percent as much as training a doctor,4  takes less 
than one-fifth the time, and allows the delivery of simple solutions that cost $3.50 per person to 
supply annually.5  A typical CHW provides care for 100 households.6 
In particular, CHWs can contribute greatly to the 
achievement of Millennium Development Goals 4, 
5 and 6, improving child and maternal health. Each 
year, 8.8 million children die before the age of five, 
and 350,000 women die from complications related 
to pregnancy or childbirth. Many of those deaths 
could be prevented by access to the basic health 
care that CHWs provide. 
there are not enough chws. Sub-Saharan 
Africa bears the brunt of the global health worker 
shortage. In Europe, 173,000 doctors are trained 
each year.7 In Africa, just 5,100 are trained each 
year.   In 2009, the High Level Taskforce on In-
novative International Financing for Health Sys-
tems estimated that developing countries need an 
additional 2.6 to 3.5 million CHWs to achieve the 
Millennium Development Goals by 2015.8 
11
sub-saharan africa needs more than a 
million additional community health workers.
Figure 1: estimated community health worker Shortage in Sub-Saharan africa
The number of CHWs working in Sub-Saharan 
Africa is difficult to ascertain, as the cumulative 
number of CHWs trained is not comprehensively 
tracked. Based on limited statistics currently 
available, this report estimates that 500,000 
CHWs work in Sub-Saharan Africa today.9 As ad-
vocated in a 2011 Earth Institute Technical Task 
Force report,10 at least a million more are needed 
to meet basic maternal and child health needs.11
community health workers deliver cost-effective, high-impact inter-
ventions in a variety of areas, including hygiene, sanitation, reproduc-
tive health, first aid, and, in some cases, vaccinations and rudimen-
tary interventions such as oral rehydration therapy for infants. most 
of them are women. their functions differ from country to country, 
and the term “community health worker” can refer to workers with 
a variety of local titles: community health-education worker, commu-
nity health aide, family health worker, lady health visitor, and health 
extension worker, among others. 
 
chws display similar variation in their skill sets and levels of train-
ing, but all are trained for shorter periods of time than professional 
physicians, nurses and midwives—from just a few hours to one to 
two years. chws are a type of frontline health worker, but the term 
“frontline health worker” is broader, as it also includes nurses and 
midwives. for the purposes of this report, chws are defined as hav-
ing some formal health training not exceeding two years. 
(Sources: WHO, McKinsey Quarterly)
12
Table 1 shows the wide variation among CHWs in terms of training length, integration and status 
within the national health system, tasks, remune-ration, required education, and accreditation. 
table 1: types of chws and interventions they deliver 
*Remune-ration is performance-based
** CHWs will be formally recognized as part of the health system in Mozambique under planned program revisions
Source: Singh and Sullivan, “One Million Community Health Workers”, The Earth Institute, 2011; Bhutta, Lassi, Pariyo and Huicho, “Global 
Experience of Community Health Workers for Delivery of Health Related Millennium Development Goals”, GHWA, 2010; Conway, Michael D., 
Gupta, Srishti, and Khajavi, Kamiar, “Addressing Africa’s health workforce crisis,” McKinsey Quarterly, November 2007. 
The most informal CHWs are unpaid, receive a week or less of training, and are neither accredited 
nor formally integrated into national health systems. Typically, they visit patients’ dwellings, gather-
ing community health information and perform few actual health services. 
On the other end of the spectrum are CHWs that provide primary care, including diagnosis, treat-
ment of common illnesses such as pneumonia, vaccinations, and referrals to clinics. These CHWs 
are typically required to have at least a high school education, a year or more of training and 
accreditation. They are paid and occupy a formal role in the national health system. These highly 
trained CHWs are less common, but play a vital role in countries such as Ethiopia and Nigeria.
A wide range of CHWs falls between these two extremes. These CHWs may provide services such 
as vaccination, growth monitoring and community education. 
renewed global attention makes this a unique and promising moment to capitalize 
on the power of community health workers. 
Although the global health community has long recognized CHWs’ importance for improving 
public health, the past few years have seen renewed international attention to CHWs. The run-
up to the 2015 target date of the Millennium Development Goals and the UN Secretary General’s 
13
Every Woman, Every Child movement have spotlighted maternal and child health in the develop-
ing world, along with the potential of CHWs to improve it. The Frontline Health Workers Coali-
tion advocates for additional US spending on CHWs.12  Ongoing efforts by the Health Workforce 
Taskforce, the Global Health Workforce Alliance, Human Resources for Health and CORE Group 
continue to focus on expanding the number of CHWs. Last year saw the formation of the MDG 
Health Alliance, which intends to leverage the private sector to support increased public financing 
for CHWs.
To be sure, this is not the first time global attention has focused on CHWs. The 1970s and 1980s 
saw a wave of community health worker programs. But many were implemented on a small scale, 
and others failed to thrive.13 Thirty years later, the possibilities for CHW effectiveness have ex-
panded, in part because of the rapid spread of technology, including mobile technology, and the 
potential use of multimedia and digital content. Technology presents opportunities to improve CHW 
training, to make it more cost effective, and to scale training interventions more easily. 
14
chapter 2:  the lanDscaPe
of training
this chapter describes training as a vital part of the ecosystem in 
which chws operate, and documents the various types of training 
and players involved in training across sub-saharan Africa. 
the value oF traInIng
among the many factors that support or detract from a chw’s effectiveness, training 
plays a preeminent role.
Formal training, whether initial pre-service education or continuing in-service training, has a demon-
strably positive effect on CHW performance: The better trained a CHW is, the more empowered he 
or she is to deliver health care in his or her community.14 Though less studied, informal training (on-
the-job, through peer networks) also plays an important role in a health worker’s knowledge base.
All CHWs in Sub-Saharan Africa as defined by this report have received some type of formal train-
ing, which ideally occurs throughout a CHW’s career.i  After being recruited within his or her com-
munity, usually by local officials or community leaders, CHWs undergo pre-service training. Pre-
service training communicates baseline knowledge, theory and practice, and is typically conducted 
by the national ministry of health, an NGO or a partnership between the two. 
A number of studies have found that continued training is as important as initial training because it 
prevents the loss of acquired skills and knowledge.15  While practicing, a CHW can add to his or her 
competencies through in-service training on new content. Often this is conducted by a different 
NGO than the one that led his or her pre-service training. To keep his or her knowledge up-to-date, 
a CHW can receive periodic in-service refreshers. Refreshers are typically conducted by the 
entity that provided the pre-service training. 
Figure 2: training overview
Training landscape based on Dalberg analysis 
i As defined by this report, a CHW is someone who has received formal training - from several hours to 2 years.
15
Another aspect of CHW training is informal training, which includes lessons learned on 
the job, peer-to-peer knowledge transfer and informal links to mentors and medical profes-
sionals. 
Although the role of informal training has been less documented and is, by its nature, 
difficult to measure or quantify, it undoubtedly contributes to performance, retention and 
overall effectiveness. 16  
It is important to remember that training is one factor in the complex ecosystem in which 
CHWs operate. According to research by the Earth Institute and GHWA, six additional fac-
tors in this ecosystem can contribute to her effectiveness and retention: 17
  
•	 remuneration and recognition: Financial and non-monetary incentives, 
such as recognition and acknowledgement, foster loyalty and 
commitment, and improve retention rates.
•	 equipment and supplies: Access to an appropriate toolbox, such as oral 
rehydration salts and zinc for diarrhea, allows chws to treat patients 
effectively. equipment also increases chw motivation and enhances 
their credibility within the communities they serve.
•	 supervision: supervision improves effectiveness and helps chws 
feel connected and valued within a national health system. it is often 
provided by local ngos, private contractors, or more senior chws, 
and can include direct communication with physicians and nurses and 
systems and tools.
•	 opportunities for advancement and recognition:	Certification	and	
promotion up a career ladder provide incentives that keep chws active 
and engaged. 
•	 Accreditation: Formal acknowledgment within a health system 
empowers chws and improves retention rates. 
•	 integration within the national health system: links to clinics, formal 
health centers and medical professionals provide crucial health 
information and support for chws, increasing their retention rates and 
effectiveness. the ability to seek assistance in emergencies and/or refer 
someone who needs care enables effectiveness.
the traInIng landScape
As the resources devoted to global health have grown over the past two decades, an 
increasing number of NGOs, agencies and governments have engaged in CHW training. 
From 1990 to 2007, assistance for global health grew from $5.6 billion to $21.8 billion.18  Of 
this, World Vision International has estimated that $5 to $6 billion per year goes to basic 
health programs, part of which – albeit a small part – includes CHW training.19  USAID 
has been a leader in this endeavor, partnering with non-governmental organizations and 
national governments to train some 300,000 CHWs in Sub-Saharan Africa.
16
the role of governments in chw training
  
National ministries of health play a role in training CHWs, either on their own or with the support of 
NGOs. NGOs support approximately 30 percent of the government training programs reviewed for 
this report. For example, CHAI supports the Zambian Ministry of Health to implement its national 
CHW strategy in recruitment, training and deployment. In addition, ministries of health work with 
NGOs to coordinate in-service training, which is often conducted by outside organizations interest-
ed in a particular issue, such as CARE’s training on maternal and child health. Overall, more than 
50 percent of the CHWs in Sub-Saharan Africa represented in this study were trained directly by 
NGOs or by NGOs supporting governments. These NGOs play a vital role in training. 
more than 20 non-governmental organizations train chws in sub-saharan africa. 
This study compiled a non-exhaustive list of organizations involved in CHW training in Sub-Sa-
haran Africa, ranging from World Vision (involved in supporting the training of more than 73,000 
CHWs)20  to the Zambian Ministry of Health (involved in a pilot training program with more than 300 
CHWs).21 Ten of the organizations listed below train fewer than 10,000 CHWs each. 
Figure 3:  Illustrative organizations involved in chw training
this is a non-exhaustive list with overlap.  Some of the organizations listed here provide CHW training with the United States Govern-
ment’s (USGs) PEPFAR or other sources of USG funding. Organizations such as UNICEF often work in partnership with or fund other organi-
zations to implement training. World Vision represents a cumulative figure for HIV related volunteers. Zambia’s Ministry of Health is scaling up 
its program to more than 5000 CHWs. 
Source: Dalberg analysis and expert interviews.
17
there is overlap between these numbers, particularly between ministries of health and the 
NGOs operating in country. For example, in Ethiopia, the Ministry of Health, HEAT, and AMREF 
are all working together on different elements of an integrated training approach.
in order to scale the number of chws, additional pre-service training for new chws 
is needed. however, efforts tend to focus on in-service training, perhaps because of 
donor incentives. 
Despite the recognized shortage of CHWs, interviews revealed that NGOs tend to focus their 
efforts on in-service training of existing CHWs rather than on selection and pre-service training 
of new workers. All of the 18 organizations profiled above implement in-service training, but only 
slightly more than half implement pre-service training. Noting the lack of investment in expanding 
pre-service training capacity, public health experts Marko Vujicic et al. surmise, “One likely rea-
son behind the heavy emphasis on in-service training—particularly for the Global Fund and GAVI 
grants—is the nature of proposal evaluation criteria.”22  In-service training produces more visible 
results in a shorter time frame than recruitment and pre-service training, which also require larger 
investments of time and money.
Figure 4: overview of chw training by life-cycle stage
Source: Dalberg analysis and expert interviews
18
often, many players are involved in chw training within a single country. In regions 
such as east africa, multiple organizations operate in the same country. 
In Uganda and Kenya, for instance, at least 10 organizations are involved in training CHWs, either 
independently or in partnership with the government. More than a dozen organizations play a role 
in training CHWs in Ethiopia. While the number of organizations quickly adds up, in many coun-
tries, organizations have divided areas of geographic focus. Despite their efforts, the significant 
gaps and needs in CHW training persist due in part to limited overall resources and historical priori-
ties of the global health community.  
with many players present, coordination among implementing organizations and 
ministries of health can be challenging. 
As illustrated in several case studies, lack of coordination among implementing NGOs leads to vari-
ability and, at times, duplication of efforts. 
Figure 5: training efforts by country
Note: Map based on interviews with 19 implementers and is non-exhaustive
Source: Dalberg research and analysis, government websites
19
many chw touch Points in uganDa.  at 
least 11 organizations train chws in uganda, at 
times operating in the same districts. this can 
lead to duplication in training efforts, which runs 
the risk that some chws are trained by multiple 
organizations. it’s not necessarily sustainable, 
either. “each organization takes on additional health issues, and 
after a while, the chws end up doing work far outside their standard 
program and in some cases practically take on full-time health care 
responsibilities,” says sean Blaschke of unicef’s alive Program in 
uganda. “this is a huge problem because it diverts attention from 
the core health package, and is largely unsustainable because as 
soon as the ngo funding ends, so does much of this additional 
work.” 
 
 
imProVing coorDination in ZamBia. in Zambia, 
the ministry of health conducted a study on its 
country’s chws.  it reported wide variation in 
training received by chws with similar duties.23    
the ministry has since created a strategy to formalize and 
standardize chw training, recruitment and deployment. the resulting 
program lasts one year and comprises an integrated curriculum 
of theoretical and practical training. coordination between the 
ministry and implementing partners has improved. according to 
an implementing organization interviewed for this report, there is 
now a clearer division of partners. “when we enter an area, we 
spend a year doing an ‘assessment’ with other district partners, the 
government, and ngos…. for example, there are four ngos in our 
district. During the year assessment, boundaries are developed….we 
divide the district so we know how far each organization goes. there 
is no duplication of resources.” 
 
20
current approacheS
chapter 3:  to chw traInIng and 
content creatIon
this chapter describes the techniques, topics, and curricula used 
to train chws, and how various types of technology, including 
mobile and video, could be leveraged within them. 
the design of training programs: pedagogy and instruction components
Designing formal training programs involves a series of choices in two broad areas: pedagogy, or 
the way the material is taught, and instruction components, or material. Underlying these 
components is the content and program development theory upon which the training program 
is based. Formal training is one aspect of CHW support, and the success of any training program 
depends on non-curricular “enablers” such as remuneration, recognition, equipment and supplies, 
supervision, accreditation and integration into the health system, and informal training. 
Figure 6: overview of training components, foundation and enablers
21
a. pedagogy
there are many techniques, time frames, locations, and modes of teaching a 
training program can use.
Trainers can employ two main types of educational techniques.24  didactic techniques, 
based on lectures or readings, result in a passive educational experience. interactive 
techniques, on the other hand, are premised on interaction and dialogue between learn-
ers and facilitators and may feature simulations, role play, or case-based learning. Train-
ers must also decide how frequently to present the material. They can present information 
once in its entirety, or repetitively, reiterating the information over time. The location of 
the training has pedagogical consequences. offsite training takes place in a classroom 
or at a central location, while on-site training occurs at the health facility or within the 
community where CHWs will work. The teaching mode includes a range of technological 
options, including visuals, audio and multimedia.
technology-aided training is currently 
limited.
A literature review by Jhpiego of 69 studies focused on health worker education and re-
vealed that among these pedagogies, certain ones are most effective: 25  
  
•	 interactive pedagogies
•	 repetitive learning
•	 on-site learning
•	 the incorporation of multimedia materials
22
table 2: training pedagogies 26   
currently most training pedagogies rely on paper. 
Although implementers recognize the appeal of multimedia-based pedagogies, the vast major-
ity of CHW training organizations surveyed for this report rely on paper-based modes, teaching 
some 341,800 (or 90 percent) of CHWs represented in our survey, in this way. Significantly fewer 
CHWs, approximately 27,000 (or 7 percent), received multimedia-based training. Only 10,000 (or 3 
percent) received electronic training. 
23
Figure 7: training by delivery mechanism
B. InStructIon componentS
Most CHW training programs prepare health workers in a particular competency, such as diagnos-
ing malaria, basic maternal and child-care, or explaining birth control. In teaching those competen-
cies, training organizations emphasize some degree of knowledge transfer and skills develop-
ment.
instruction based on knowledge transfer consists of conventional instruction, similar to the 
instruction of physicians and nurses. A knowledge-transfer program on reproductive health, for ex-
ample, would describe how the reproductive process works before it dived into birth control options. 
The CHWs who attend such training usually have a more formal role in the health system and can 
undergo long periods of instruction. skills-based instruction, in contrast, takes a pragmatic, non-
theoretical approach. Such programs are shorter and more appropriate for CHWs, who often have 
low levels of education.27  A skills-based program on reproductive health would focus on how to 
teach others to use birth control and how to follow up with patients. 
content creators are now emphasizing skills development over knowledge transfer. 
“There is a big shift now to skills based training,” explains Anne Liu of the Millennium Villages 
Project. “with technology, it’s easier to follow up, monitor, and support after training, so the 
pre-service training can be shorter.”  Technology can facilitate skills-based instruction through 
job aids and innovations such as mobile clinical decision-making algorithms. The majority of organi-
zations surveyed in this study use skills-based instruction rather than knowledge-based instruction. 
24
c. content and program development
training organizations tend to focus on the same core topics: 
These include HIV/AIDS and tuberculosis, malaria, reproductive health, and maternal and child 
health. Topics such as sanitation, hygiene, and nutrition have received less attention. 
The graph below shows that in a sample of 25 organizations, 21 covered HIV/AIDS and tubercu-
losis; 16 covered malaria and reproductive health; and 15 covered maternal and child health.  The 
HIV/AIDS examples included in this section reflect historical patterns of funding mobilized to fight 
this epidemic.
Figure 8: estimated number of organizations training chws by topic*
* Sample of 25 organizations, majority focused on more than one topic
MCH refers to Maternal and Child Health
Source: Organizations website
Despite topical overlap, many organizations develop their curricula independently.
More than 50 percent the organizations surveyed generated their own training components and 
curricula, suggesting that a great deal of time and resources are spent duplicating existing materi-
als. For instance, there are more than a dozen manuals for training CHWs on HIV/AIDS interven-
tions. A review of the contents of each revealed that the majority includes the same four topics: 
how HIV is introduced, medication for HIV, birth and nursing with HIV, and reducing HIV risk. 
Figure 9: Sample of hIv/aIdS training manuals which may be used
for chw training
25
Figure 10: Illustrative table of contents for hIv/aIdS training materials
the extent of topical overlap suggests untapped opportunities for collaboration and 
sharing in content development. 
Training content and implementation must be tailored to local needs and parameters, but given a 
core set of clinically recognized content and globally recognized training techniques, there may be 
missed opportunities for standardization and sharing via open source platforms. Training imple-
menters and content developers alike agreed during the survey that some content can be stand-
ardized, as described in the section below.  
opportunity for increased sharing
Figure 11: training standardization
Figure 11 depicts the training components 
that could be standardized and those that 
should be localized, according to experts 
interviewed in this study.28  The graph’s 
inner layer of standardizable training 
includes “clinical health messages” – 
globally recognized, medical content on 
practices and behavior that apply across 
countries. Hygiene protocols, for instance, 
are universal. Encouraging breast-feeding 
is a globally recognized priority. The signs 
of post-delivery hemorrhage do not vary 
from country to country. 
26
Though implementation is much more influenced by local context, some teaching techniques can 
also apply across countries and localities. Across a variety of contexts, for instance, role-play is 
useful in training CHWs to conduct sensitive conversations about HIV/AIDS transmission, and 
photos illustrate common symptoms better than verbal or textual descriptions alone. 
The graph’s outer layer of training reflects content and implementation factors that must be local-
ized. Effective content development is sensitive to factors such as:
•	 languages
•	 cultural norms, which are especially important to take into account when         
developing visual aids
•	 Availability of local foods and medicines
•	 local behaviors and customs
•	 local health priorities and challenges
•	 the role of chws in the country
•	 national guidelines and health system requirements
In addition to the factors above, effective implementation must take into account additional local 
context, particularly:
•	 infrastructure and access to technology
•	 the local landscape of ngos 
“as much as 80 percent of chw clinical health messages in training, 
especially around child and maternal health, could be transferable” 
- Lesley Anne Long, Deputy Director of the Open University’s International Development Office. 
Content is more easily transferred to other contexts when it was “written from the outset to be as 
generic as possible,” notes Lesley Anne Long, deputy director of the Open University. If written to 
be generic, as much as 80 percent of CHW clinical health messages, especially regarding child 
and maternal health, could be transferable, says Ms. Long. From there, the content could be cus-
tomized to specific local contexts. Other content developers, such as the NGO Hesperian Health 
Guides, also aim to create broadly generalizable content; some of Hesperian’s training materials 
have been translated into 80 languages.
Health educators in six Sub-Saharan African countries and from two areas in India have contacted 
the Open University’s program in Ethiopia, HEAT, and reported that they are using HEAT materials 
in their training programs. These far-flung trainers use HEAT materials for training CHWs and for 
refresher training for nurses, midwives, paramedics and, in one case, medics.
Transferring actual programs is a different matter, in part because national governments have dif-
ferent approaches to CHW training. For example, health extension workers in Ethiopia are enrolled 
in one-year programs with comprehensive curricula, while in Rwanda, many CHWs are trained in 
specific areas, such as water and sanitation or nutrition. 
27
costs of content development
many organizations do not use standardized content and instead develop content 
with “bottom-up” approaches. 
The dominant mode of curriculum development is “bottom-up,” highly tailored to specific locales. 
Bottom-up approaches begin with detailed consideration of local needs, culture and context, 
parameters at the district or national-level, and roles of CHWs. Partners in Health, for example, 
develops unique training programs based on extensive review of local conditions, culture and CHW 
roles. Although they require the heaviest investments of time and money, as illustrated below, 
bottom-up approaches have become the dominant mode of curriculum development.29    
Figure 12: curriculum development methods 30  
bottom-up curriculum development is expensive, with organizations reporting the cost of 
developing content for a new CHW training curriculum as at least $500,000 (the World Health 
Organization) and as much as $1 million to $1.5 million (anonymous NGO implementing training in 
Sub-Saharan Africa). This includes only the cost of content development, not the additional costs of 
materials, printing and conducting the training. 
Other less expensive sources for curricula can inform curriculum development. Some developers 
rely on international standards, such as WHO guidelines on Integrated Management of Child-
hood Illness, and adapt them to local needs and parameters in partnership with the local govern-
ment. A decreasing number rely on national guidelines for nurses and physicians, which had 
been a traditional source for curricula but are now seen as too complex or technical for CHWs. 
28
Figure 13: cost ranges for content development for a new
chw training curriculum (uSd millions)
 
Source: Expert interviews, March to April 2012
while developing new training materials is expensive, adapting existing content to 
local needs costs less.
Given the comparative costs of content creation and content transfer, it is anywhere from two to 
ten times more expensive for an organization to create content from the bottom-up, than to trans-
fer generic content.
The cost of adapting a basic CHW manual or curriculum to a different country, for instance, ranges 
from $25,000 to $300,000, according to content developers such as HEAT, Dimagi, and Hesperian 
Health Guides.31  That cost includes translation, adapting images to accord with cultural norms, 
printing and distribution. In the case of Dimagi, it can also include application creation and itera-
tion, field implementation support, and new feature or report development.32
  
Digital content is estimated to be less costly to transfer than conventional content.
Transferring digital content between countries costs $25,000 or less, while transferring, printing 
and distributing paper-based content can cost up to $300,000, according to experts interviewed for 
this report. 
i  Costs of HEAT content development involved working with 57 health experts within Ethiopia to develop content (which also allows building 
capacity in Ethiopia), developing 450 hours of high quality materials, writing all of the assessments, providing model answers and marking 
guidance for the tutors, training tutors and writing a tutor training manual. Tutor training is estimated to be a small portion of the total cost.
29
Figure 14:  cost of transferring content across countries
experts and implementers agree that there is opportunity to collaborate on CHW training con-
tent and to standardize portions of it. Despite NGO and national government interest in doing so, 
the dominant mode of curriculum development has become more bottom-up and localized. There 
are several reasons for this. 
the structure of global health financing may discourage collaboration among chw 
curriculum developers. 
Aid donors need to measure results—a standard metric is how many CHWs have been trained—
and collaboration is difficult to measure. “The problem is the way in which donors write project 
guidelines,” said a source interviewed for this report. “They don’t discuss collaboration. They dis-
cuss production. Recipients need to create a certain number of programs and meet certain guide-
lines.” This leaves the role of collaboration up to organizations themselves or to national govern-
ments, which may not have the resources to drive collaboration or recognize areas of duplication. 
Even when donors do fund collaboration among project partners, the project partners may not nec-
essarily be working in the same field or country, or with similar goals, notes Dr. Margaret Usher-Pa-
tel, World Health Organization scientist (retired June 2011). “Some donor supported proposals are 
so time-bound and number-driven that collaboration to develop one national curriculum and training 
process—which is always more complex and time consuming than developing your own—may not 
be viable or appealing,” she says. 
some governments are leading efforts to standardize training and curricula.
In Kenya, “a multiplicity of organizations and entities involved in CHW training developed different 
training manuals,” says an interviewee of the Kenyan Ministry of Public Health. “We need a better 
way to manage our partners.” The Ministry is working with various international agencies to create 
one document that will standardize CHW training in terms of content, technical approaches and 
guidelines. “We want the Ministry of Public Health to control that content so we can standardize it,” 
says the interviewee. These efforts require government resources.
30
recognizing the costs of duplication in developing training content, 
some organizations and national governments have tried to over-
come fragmentation and collaborate. for example, the Partnership 
for maternal, newborn and child health, in partnership with aga 
khan university, aimed to create consensus on the content for repro-
ductive, maternal, newborn and child health care. 
the output of their work lists interventions that should be made avail-
able to women and children, and includes information on how to 
deliver the interventions: what types of health workers should provide 
them, the commodities required for delivery, and applicable health 
guidelines. these guidelines, available online, could be used to in-
form content development for broader chw training. however, such 
examples are rare.
Source: http://www.who.int/pmnch/en/
the use of sharable, digital content can help overcome duplication in developing 
conventional training content.
Developing interoperable platforms for content would facilitate sharing. Increasing the creation of 
open source, demand driven, digital content that is written from the outset to be generic and easily 
transferable would ease collaboration across countries.  
31
emergIng evIdence on 
chapter 4:  the potentIal oF 
Blended learnIng
this chapter explores emerging evidence on the use of 
technology, especially multimedia applications, in chw training. 
teaching approaches that blend multimedia with live training 
present an opportunity to increase training effectiveness. to 
the extent these “blended approaches” complement preferred 
pedagogical techniques, they are at least as effective—and 
possibly more effective—than conventional approaches. Further, 
they	are	appropriate	for	CHWs,	highly	cost	efficient,	and	scalable.
 
Blended learning, as defined by this report, anchors CHW training to live, in-person training but 
incorporates multimedia technology either in the classroom or remotely. Multimedia technology 
leverages visuals, videos or audio. The deployment of multimedia applications and digital content 
at this time primarily occurs within classroom settings—for instance, through videos shown in 
class. Over time, with the expansion of smartphones, computers and broadband, multimedia may 
extend to the palm of each CHW’s hand. 
32
advantageS oF Blended learnIng
Blended	learning	has	three	main	benefits	for	the	training	of	community	health	workers,	
which this chapter describes:
1. it can be effective. evidence shows that some pedagogies work better than 
others. multimedia can complement and facilitate these pedagogies. the live 
component of blended learning is important for skill practice and feedback. 
2. it is appropriate for chws, because many of them have low levels of literacy. 
even basic technologies that can be used in low-connectivity environments, 
such as pre-recorded audio training on mobile phones, can increase support 
and learning. 
3.	It	is	cost-efficient,	because	blended	learning	offers	opportunities	for	remote	
training and low-cost supervision and follow-up. 
eFFectIve
Blended learning can be effective, because it can complement and facilitate 
preferred pedagogies.
Jhpiego’s 2012 literature review on 69 studies of training health workers (Table 2),33  surveys teach-
ing pedagogies and identifies those that are interactive, repetitive, and delivered on-site or in an 
environment as similar to the workplace as possible, as the most effective overall.  On-site learning 
can also be more efficient and provide for more practice and feedback, critical for skill develop-
ment.  Excerpts from this evidence base on interactive and repetitive techniques leading to im-
proved scores are highlighted in the figure below.
Figure 15: effects of interactive and repetitive teaching methods
To the extent that multimedia enables interaction, repetition, and on-site training, it can be a highly 
33
effective training tool.  Studies with health workers show that, indeed, multimedia can facilitate 
interactive, repetitive, and on-site pedagogies. For instance, audiovisual content, images, and 
animation can facilitate and provide fodder for simulations, case-based learning, and role-play. 
One study that compared types of media utilized for case-based learning, found similar outcomes 
with cases of live standardized patient and computer-based virtual patient.34  Another showed that 
nursing students in the United Kingdom learned the theory and practice of handwashing at least as 
well with computer-assisted learning modules as with live methods.35
Multimedia content enables repetitive learning, allowing learners to access information to be 
presented and repeated over time, and is shown to be more effective than single media learn-
ing among health workers.36  Under certain circumstances, multimedia can also facilitate on-site 
learning, favored by experts who believe that learning should take place in a setting similar to the 
practice setting. Additionally, audiovisual and multimedia teaching materials engage CHWs better 
than words alone.37    
Building on the data points and evidence emerging in the use of blended approaches used in train-
ing of various types of health workers, there is reason to believe that it could be comparably effec-
tive for CHWs.  There is not yet data on the effectiveness of blended approaches for CHW training 
specifically, as this concept is relatively new and has not been broadly evaluated in CHW contexts. 
there is also emerging evidence on the ability of mobile applications to improve 
chw effectiveness through in-service education.   
mHealth applications are already being used to train and support CHWs, as illustrated in Figure 
16.  Further, although not specific to blended learning, there is emerging evidence on the ability 
of mobile applications to improve effectiveness of CHWs through in-service education, as noted 
below in studies which use SMS and rich media job aids, as illustrated in Figure 17.
Figure 16: mobile applications are being used to train and support chws
Source: Expert Interviews, March- April 2012. Literature review and company websites 
Note: a full catalogue of mHealth training and support tools for CHWs will be hosted in the Content Library of the mHealth Alliance’s Health 
Unbound (HUB).
34
Figure 17: mobile applications have proven to be effective for health workers 
use of blended approaches will require baseline infrastructure, equipment and  
maintenance.
The success of blended learning will require enabling factors, such as equipment, technology, ICT 
support and national infrastructure report for the program. As with any new initiative, there are 
costs, although scale could allow such programs to be cost-effective. Costs include initial equip-
ment, such as computers, mobile phones or tablets to deliver multimedia content, and repairs.
approprIate
Blended learning is appropriate for many chws for three reasons. 
First, many CHWs, especially in remote areas, may have better access to mobile phones than 
to libraries, textbooks and other physical resources. As mobile phones widen their sweep and 
sophistication in Sub-Saharan Africa, they provide an opportunity to distribute content to people 
who couldn’t otherwise access it. Second, blended learning allows for CHWs to do more learning 
on-site, with immediate opportunities for practice and feedback, critical for skill development. Third, 
multimedia, audio and visual content engage most learners, as described above. This is especially 
true for CHWs, who often have low levels of literacy and are learning skills rather than theory. 
access to mobile technology and broadband has rapidly expanded in sub-saharan 
africa.
Per-capita mobile phone subscriptions have risen dramatically in recent years, from 12.4 in 2005 
to 53 in 2011.  There are some 700 million cellular connections in Africa—the number has been 
growing at an annual rate of 19 percent—and mobile networks cover 66 percent of the continent. 
Twelve percent of the market has 3G subscriptions.38  The reach and capabilities of smartphones 
are increasing: 98 percent of the internet connections in Kenya, for example, are via smartphone.39 
35
Figure 18: mobile cellular penetration
1 Refers to the use of portable telephones subscribing to a public mobile telephone service and provides access to Public Switched 
Telephone Network (PSTN) using cellular technology. This can include analogue and digital cellular systems 
Data on mobile-phone access among CHWs in Africa is scarce, and likely varies from country to 
country. In Uganda, 80 percent of CHWs own a mobile phone, according to the United Nations 
Children’s Fund (UNICEF), and an additional 10 percent can access a mobile phone through their 
families.40
 
in 2010, nine out of ten internet users in sub-saharan africa accessed 
the internet through mobile devices.
Source: ICT Facts and Figures
multimedia applications can engage chws, who often have low levels of literacy.
Whether or not they can read, most people learn better from a combination of visuals and text than 
from words alone.41 But multimedia content has special power for CHWs, who often may have low 
levels of literacy. Low-literate CHWs can easily engage with material presented visually or audibly. 
Although there is no data on the literacy rates of CHWs specifically, overall literacy on the conti-
nent is 62 percent.42 Literacy rates in rural areas, where most CHWs live and work, are lower, im-
plying that the CHW literacy rate is lower than 62 percent. Countries such as Nigeria and Senegal 
do not require CHWs to be able to read and write.
Animation and other multimedia tools are particularly popular. Firdaus Kharas at Chocolate Moose 
Media and the iheed Institute have described other benefits of animated videos:
•	 Animation tends to resonate with audiences across cultures and contexts, in              
part because diverse populations can identify with “generic”-looking animated 
characters
•	 Animation	does	not	necessitate	on-site	filming,	travel,	or	other	costs
•	 Animation allows for greater creativity in illustrating skills and conveying 
health messages 
36
•	 Animated characters can easily be dubbed into many languages and look like 
they are speaking that language
•	 popularity among chws
Kharas’ animated videos have been translated into 73 languages and shown in 100 countries. 
the global health media Project
“we develop new media to reach 
health workers where they are, 
with what they need to know, in an understandable and memorable 
way,” explains global health media Project director Deborah Van 
Dyke.
the group creates videos that bring to life health care skills and con-
cepts in a way that is both engaging and accessible. they are pilot-
ing a series of clinical videos on newborn care that demonstrate 
best practices for frontline health workers. the videos are filmed in 
the developing world, shot for the small screens of mobile devices, 
and voiced over to enable translation in many languages. the vid-
eos feature some animation to highlight key teaching points, rely on 
international standards of care, and are carefully reviewed by global 
content experts. they are easily scalable, open source, and provide a 
cost-effective solution for end-to-end training.
global health media Project has also produced an award-winning 
animated film, the story of cholera, which was developed in response 
to the cholera outbreak in haiti in 2010. this video provides health 
workers around the world with a teaching aid to help their commu-
nities better understand how cholera is spread and the basic steps 
people can take to prevent it. By making the invisible cholera germs 
visible, this simple animated narrative brings alive the key teach-
ing points of cholera transmission and prevention. the film has been 
viewed in 150 countries and is currently being translated into several 
languages. 
implementers are hungry for multimedia content. 
Implementers interviewed for this report expressed a desire for more multimedia content. A survey 
of eight major training implementers shows that CHW consider multimedia aids more “fun” and 
“interactive” than conventional aids.43  One CHW noted, “If you want to hide something, put it in a 
book.”44  The audio and visual content enabled by technology, ranging from images to multimedia 
animations, can enhance engagement and retention, and gives CHWs access to visuals they could 
never see outside a hospital. 
37
multimedia, particularly mobile, provides new platforms for informal training, a vital 
aspect of continuing education and support.
Audio and SMS on simple phones allow CHWs to ask questions of supervisors and to tap into 
peer networks easily. This is a critical advantage in rural settings, which are often so isolated 
from cities that supervisors conduct site visits only once a year. Phones with video capabilities go 
further, allowing CHWs to engage with photos and videos, to provide more efficient counseling 
sessions, and to obtain diagnostic information.45
in addition, new uses of technology can improve feedback and evaluation of chws.
 
According to Dr. Prabhjot Singh, Director of Systems Design at the Earth Institute and assistant 
professor at Columbia University’s School of International and Public Affairs, mHealth develop-
ers for CHWs must improve the integration of their products to bridge the divide between training, 
operational functions and performance. New applications for training should be linked to CHW 
performance, which would allow CHWs to receive real-time feedback and adjust training or pay-
ment accordingly. Such feedback could also be used in real time to rapidly analyze large amounts 
of data and make management decisions. Dr. Singh notes these functionalities are actively being 
developed in the Millennium Villages Projects.
into the distance: remote learning for chws 
under certain circumstances, distance learning can be as effective as live 
training, according to emerging research by Jhpiego.46
in the future, distance learning could play an important role in chw train-
ing for five reasons:
•	 Implementers	could	more	easily	reach	CHWs	who	live	in	remote,	difficult-to-
access areas. 
•	 by permitting chws to learn within their communities, distance learning could 
support continuity of care.
•	 distance learning would obviate the burdens of travel for chws and reduce 
time spent away from household management or employment. 
•	 CHWs	could	learn	at	a	flexible	pace,	to	refresh	their	knowledge	in	short	
modules, and to learn continuously.
•	 by relying on communications technology, it could facilitate supervisor support 
and peer networks. 
the potential of technology to facilitate distance learning is real, but new in 
the context of chw training. it faces some obstacles in sub-saharan africa. 
low-literate chws cannot learn effectively from text messages and other 
written materials, and smartphones that enable multimedia content are not 
yet widely available. Volunteer chws may resist distance learning because 
they rely on the per diems and stipends associated with travel as income. 
most implementers maintain that distance learning must be coupled 
with live, face-to-face training. live training creates communities and, 
among chws, fosters a sense of integration within health systems. 
38
coSt-eFFectIve
There are three potential cost advantages of using blended approaches in CHW training. First, 
multimedia can shorten the amount of time required to train CHWs. Second, digital content reduces 
the number of trainers required to teach CHWs. Third, as noted in Chapter 3, multimedia content 
is easier and cheaper to standardize and disseminate. Taken together, these advantages imply 
drastic reductions in the cost of training the one million new CHWs that Sub-Saharan Africa needs. 
However, further analysis must be conducted to evaluate the cost of infrastructure, equipment and 
program design on a country-by-country basis.
  
Blended approaches to training are more cost-effective than conventional 
approaches because they require less time and personnel. 
Multiple studies show technology can reduce the time and number of health professionals needed 
to convey content to CHWs, thereby invoking lower overhead costs. One particularly relevant study 
compared the costs of a computer-based training (CBT) program on Integrated Management of 
Childhood Illness (IMCI) with a paper-based program. It found that CBT required fewer training 
days (six compared to 11), fewer facilitators (four compared to six), and lower costs than paper-
based training ($565 per trainee compared to $793), but resulted in equivalent test scores.47  
Figure 19:  Case study – evaluation of a computer-based training program in Kenya
39
multimedia content can be shared widely and customized cost-effectively to local 
contexts. 
Chapter 3 noted the potential for much more standardization and sharing of content for local cus-
tomization. Multimedia content lends itself to sharing. For example, live-action instructional videos 
and animation can be dubbed into local languages if the content is appropriate, but creating a new 
video requires writing a script, writing a story board, securing an appropriate location, and shooting 
and editing the film—all of which entail significant amounts of time and funds. The iheed Institute 
argues that there is a need for thousands of training films and animations for CHWs, but just a 
handful exist today.
ScalaBle
organizations, institutions and technology experts are eager to leverage multimedia 
content to scale chw training.
They cite its usefulness both for actual training and for developing and sharing training content. 
Organizations report that videos, animations, images and other multimedia applications are popu-
lar among CHWs, while implementers appreciate their cost effectiveness. “We use some video 
and plan to incorporate more. It’s cost-effective and scalable,” says Molly Christiansen, of Living 
Goods, which trains CHWs in Uganda. “And if there were an open content repository [with multi-
media training materials], we would use it.” 
Blended approaches could facilitate the achievement of scale.
Demand-driven, digital content used in blended approaches can be widely shared and integrated 
into pre-service, in-service and informal training. As programs achieve scale, blended learning 
could permit dramatic savings. The model below, developed for this study, explains how. 
Figure 20: Scaling blended learning is cost effective and can save millions of 
dollars48
40
Figure 21: Scaling blended learning is cost effective and can save millions of 
dollars48
Blended learning entails higher upfront costs than 
conventional training, because it requires the crea-
tion of digital content. But it costs much less to 
adapt blended learning materials to new countries. 
Over time, as training programs reach more CHWs 
in more countries, the average marginal cost of 
blended programs decreases dramatically, even 
when accounting for the costs of local customiza-
tion. With scale, blended training can be 50 percent 
more cost-effective than conventional training. Up-
front initial costs could be overcome by innovative 
approaches such as crowd sourcing programs from 
global digital designers. 
Sub-Saharan Africa has an estimated shortage of 
one million CHWs. The broad deployment of tech-
nology-based blended approaches could achieve 
dramatic savings in training them. The model above 
suggests that conventional training of the new 
CHWs would cost $65 million (excluding the cost 
of printing and supplies). In comparison, a blended 
training program would cost $15 million (excluding 
the cost of technological equipment, supplies, and 
ongoing maintenance/repair)—less than a quarter 
of the cost of conventional content and instruction. 
The model relies on a battery of assumptions, derived from research, that are explained in detail in 
the Annex. It includes only the costs of content development and required trainers, not the costs of 
equipment, technological devices and printing. Based on interviews and literature research, it posits 
that the upfront cost of conventional program development is about 20 percent less than the cost 
of developing a blended learning program; and that the cost of transferring conventional training to 
other countries is four times the cost of transferring blended training. The model further assumes 
that conventional curricula are developed from the ground-up 50 percent of the time, and scaled at 
a low cost 50 percent of the time, while blended curricula is always scaled to other countries. 
Multiple costs associated with conventional and blended training are not factored into this model, 
and should be analyzed on a country-by-country basis. These include:
•	 cost of equipment and repairs
•	 type and cost of technology used (computers, smartphones, simple phones)
•	 cost and importance of training trainers
•	 per diem and stipend for training
•	 materials, printing, and other variable costs
41
to further realize, replicate and scale up the use of mhealth and blended 
approaches, some challenges must be addressed.
Although technology has spread rapidly throughout Sub-Saharan Africa, countries may not yet 
have the human resources, funds or broadband infrastructure to support sophisticated mHealth 
applications, such as those that require smartphones or 3G. Illiteracy may constrain CHWs’ ability 
to use technology with electronic text, as may gender: Some female CHWs have access to cell 
phones only through their husbands. 
Many African countries recognize the great potential of Information and Communication Technol-
ogy (ICT) for a range of development initiatives, including improving public health. Most have 
adopted national ICT policies or plans.49  Ensuring the security of health data and addressing pri-
vacy concerns should also be an area of focus. Countries may have different protocols that make 
data-sharing difficult. 
Businesses and NGOs have a role to play in overcoming these challenges. As the penetration 
of mobile phones, internet and technology expands in Sub-Saharan Africa, there is a growing 
opportunity for businesses to tap into this growth. Advocacy and support for better physical and 
policy infrastructure could enable the deployment of more sophisticated applications. More than 
40 percent of the Sub-Saharan African population is still not covered by mobile cellular networks,50 
and although two billion people around the world use the internet, only 9.6 percent of Africans use 
the internet.51  
42
opportunIty
chapter 5:  For dISruptIve 
InnovatIon
current approaches to chw training are ripe for disruption. 
As this report outlines, a number of strong currents are shaping CHW training in Sub-Saharan 
Africa. They include increasing focus on CHWs to address child and maternal mortality; expanding 
use of mobile technology; inefficiencies within current approaches to CHW training; and emerging 
evidence on the value of blended training that uses multimedia and digital content. These shifts 
create urgency and opportunity, and could lead to transformative training and teaching that better 
leverages blended approaches. 
Beyond the benefits of effectiveness, appropriateness and cost efficiency, blended 
approaches to training create an important byproduct: digital content.
While there is limited digital content for training CHWs, there is demand for more of it and for plat-
forms that facilitate sharing. 
Both implementers and ict experts alike are keen on the possibility of content 
repositories that would allow content to be collaboratively developed and openly 
shared—and some are already working on them.
“In South Africa, we are building a mobile network library [with electronic text] to be shared,” 
reports Berhane Gebru, director of programs at FHI 360 SATELLIFE Center. “While localization is 
important, the system can be used in other countries.” A representative from another NGO agrees: 
“Across Sub-Saharan Africa, and in other regions, there is a huge opportunity to roll out [new 
content] broadly. We want our content to be freely accessible.” A non-profit technology provider 
explains their ambitious goals for the use of ICT in CHW training: “We want to provide CHWs with 
multimedia training upfront, a phone and decision support, and ongoing training and monitoring—
an end-to-end solution.” 
greater access to digital content could fuel innovation and the creation of new 
models. 
There are a number of recent examples of homegrown, African innovations, such as M-PESA, 
a mobile money platform that transformed financial services and expanded financial inclusion in 
Kenya, and Ushahidi, an open source tool that can be used to mobilize citizens and drive account-
ability, as evidenced in post-election Kenya and post-earthquake Haiti. If inspired by the unmet 
needs of CHWs and the availability of digital content, the same types of innovation and entrepre-
neurship could fuel further disruption, bringing to market new models to train and support CHWs.
new technology is quickly adopted and appropriated across african countries.
Facebook’s penetration in Africa grew by nearly 50 percent in one year, from 27 million users in 
March 2011 to 40 million users in March 2012,52  and Skype is available in 29 languages and is 
used in almost every country around the world,53  with annualized growth in the Europe, Middle 
East, and Africa region of 40 percent from 2007 to 2009. 54 In addition to these statistics, the power 
of social networks is being applied to health professionals support and learning in Africa, such as 
the OneTouch physician-focused network established in Ghana.55  The platforms for interaction 
created by mobile phones and the internet could revolutionize many areas of global health, includ-
ing the training of CHWs. 
43
  
the Digital learning exPlosion  
Digital learning has gained great momentum and influential 
proponents, and as the trend accelerates, it could have great effect 
in the developing world. President hennessey of stanford university 
believes “online learning can be as revolutionary to education 
as digital downloads were to the music business.”56  this past fall, 
stanford introduced three, free online engineering lectures used by 
students in 190 countries. organizations such as the washington Post’s 
kaplan university, the new york times knowledge network, and khan 
academy are all leveraging digital content for online learning, and 
the programs are noticed in the developing world. khan academy, 
which broadcasts basic education videos over youtube, has more than 
2 million users per month in more than 20 countries.57  
44
concluSIon
The moment is now. the rapid spread of technology in the developing world has opened 
up exciting opportunities to help millions of people lead longer, healthier lives. Deploying 
technology in the training of community health workers could lead to a dramatic expansion in the 
numbers and effectiveness of these frontline health providers. Sub-Saharan Africa needs such a 
dramatic expansion in CHWs to meet its pressing health needs, and technology could truly revolu-
tionize their training. 
Harnessing the power of technology for community health workers will require multiple stakehold-
ers to invest their time, attention, and other resources in six broad areas:
• Creation of digital content, in line with CHW needs
• Greater collaboration in content creation and training implementation
• Experimentation with blended learning models and recommended pedagogies
• Evaluation of blending training models
• Innovation that supports continuous learning
• Advocacy and support for enabling environments
create digital content for training of chws: 
Training approaches that incorporate elements such as multimedia and animation have proven tre-
mendously popular and effective with CHWs. Implementers and trainees express a great desire for 
better digital training materials. Digital content must begin with the needs and demands of CHWs 
and the populations they serve. By building digital training aligned with CHW needs, and building it 
in a transferable way, stakeholders will improve the efficacy of training content and interventions. 
share and collaborate on content:
The present structure of financing for CHW training programs does not encourage collaboration 
or sharing, contributing to duplication of efforts and waste. Against this backdrop, content devel-
opers and other stakeholders must redouble their efforts to collaborate. They should ensure their 
platforms facilitate the sharing of knowledge, tools and content. Funders who commission content, 
meanwhile, should mandate that it is open and sharable. 
recognizing the need for global collaboration in chw training, the 
mhealth alliance is launching a content library that will serve as 
a central platform for chw mhealth training materials, tools and 
studies. implementers will be able to access a wide variety of existing 
training materials and tools, and to contribute their own to the 
library. the library will be housed on health unbound (huB) and will 
launch in may 2012. 
45
iheed will be launching its first crowd-sourced competition in may 
2012 for digital, animated content to demonstrate the potential for 
scalable, effective content. the content will be tailored to the unique 
needs of chws through demand-driven pathways, and geared for 
global distribution through many channels, including the huB content 
library. 
experiment with blended learning approaches and recommended pedagogies: 
Given the emerging evidence on the use of blended approaches to learning which enable the most 
effective pedagogies, there is a need for more experimentation in CHW contexts.  This could build 
upon the work being done by many governments, NGO implementers, and mHealth developers to 
integrate blended learning into their current efforts, and to incorporate greater use of multimedia 
applications.  Leveraging recommended pedagogies, such as interactive learning, more fully in 
training also presents an opportunity to improve efficacy. All stakeholders should exploit the possi-
bilities of public-private partnerships. 
evaluate blended approaches and the use of technology in training:
Robust evaluation must accompany experimentation, not just to gauge effectiveness and oppor-
tunities, but also because hard evidence can convince otherwise reluctant donors and funders to 
invest in scaling up. There is ample room for improvement in the development of metrics, which 
should evaluate training programs “end-to-end,” instead of focusing on discrete interventions, such 
as the effectiveness of SMS reminders.  Additionally, as digital content is crowd-sourced via digital 
designers, this approach should be evaluated to assess its costs, benefits and potential appropri-
ateness for other areas in the development sector. 
innovate to support continuous learning:  
The widening sweep of mobile technology and increasing volume of digital content should inspire 
innovators to create new models to support informal CHW learning. Impact investors should work 
with entrepreneurs to seed novel solutions, which could provide CHWs products and services they 
need for ongoing learning and skills improvement.   For example, cutting-edge applications like 
gaming, which target CHWs, could be an enormous business opportunity for social entrepreneurs 
and commercial enterprises, but they have not been significantly explored.
advocate and support enabling environments: 
Recognizing that CHWs are part of a complex ecosystem, there is the need for additional advocacy 
and investment to support factors which contribute to CHW effectiveness, including but not limited 
to supervision, remuneration, recognition, linkages to facilities, and access to supplies.   Similarly, 
despite the rapid spread of technology throughout Sub-Saharan Africa, poor infrastructure con-
tinues to impede progress. Implementers, policymakers, funders, and other stakeholders should 
continue to advocate for and support environmental enablers. Better physical infrastructure would 
increase access to technology and speed the deployment of powerful technological applications. 
Although many countries in Sub-Saharan Africa have ICT policies and plans, there is a need to 
carefully consider legal and regulatory systems—especially with regards to the security of sensitive 
health data.   Additionally, there is an ongoing need for greater alignment on and adoption of stand-
ards to enable greater integration of data and interoperability across mobile applications.
46
global opportunity
Deploying technology for CHWs could transform the landscape of health in developing countries. 
By improving training effectiveness and allowing low-cost scaling of successful programs, technol-
ogy could dramatically expand the number of CHWs in Sub-Saharan Africa. And innovation could 
retool the training landscape in ways we can’t yet fathom. In turn, more and better-trained CHWs 
could help countries make dramatic gains in child and maternal health—and lead to the establish-
ment of sustainable health systems that respond to the pressing needs of the future. 
47
48
annex
 
Assumptions for Figure 20: cost effectiveness of scaling blended 
learning 
Assumptions and sources:
• Initial cost
Development cost of conventional training is $0.85M (Expert interviews, 2012)
Development cost of blended training is $1.0M (Expert interviews, 2012)
• Adoption cost (per country)
Adaptation cost of conventional training is $300,000 (Expert interviews, 2012)
Adaptation cost of blended training is $75,000 (Expert interviews, 2012)
• Training cost (per CHW)
conventional training cost of 50 chws is $1,980:
Cost of one trainer per day: $30  (Singh et al., 2011, Dalberg analysis)
Number of days per training: 11 (Quality assurance project, 2006)
Number of trainers per training: 6 (Quality assurance project, 2006)
Cost of flipcharts, booklets and other materials not  included
Blended training cost of 50 CHWS is $600
Cost of one trainer per day: $25 (Singh et al., 2011, Dalberg analysis)
Number of days per training: 8 (Quality assurance project, 2006, 
Dalberg analysis)
Number of trainers per training: 3 (Quality assurance project, 2006, 
Dalberg analysis)
Cost of equipment not included as CHWs will leverage existing mobile phones and 
devices
• Scale up
Assume scale to 41 countries with at least 200 CHWs per country (Singh et al., 2011)
Conventional training transferred in 50% of countries (Expert interviews, 2012)
Blended training transferred in 100% of countries (Expert interviews, 2012)
49
expert interviews, conducted march – April 2012
• Kaosar Afsana, Program Coordinator, BRAC 
• Ann Band, Manager and Health coordinator, World Vision International
• Dr. Heli Bathija, Area Manager for the African and Eastern Mediterranean Regions, 
Department of Reproductive Health and Research, World Health Organization 
• Sean Blaschke, Uganda, Alive Program, UNICEF 
• Julia Bluestone, Sr. Technical Advisor, Global Learning Office, Jhpiego
• Bob Bollinger, PHD; Henry Perry, Senior Associate, PHD, MD, MPH, Johns Hopkins 
University International Health Department 
• James BonTempo, Thought Leader, ICT4D, Jhpiego 
• Peter Breitenbach, Business Development Manager: Africa, mHealth solutions, 
Vodafone 
• Sara Chamberlain, Head of ICT, BBC Media Action 
• Francis Chimpangu, Manager and Health coordinator, World Vision 
• Molly Christiansen, Director, Research & Development, Living Goods 
• Priyanka Dutt, Project Director, Shaping Demand and Practice, BBC Media Action 
• Paul Ellingstad, Global Health Director, Hewlett Packard 
• Robert Fabricant, Healthcare, Frog Design  
• Mary Francia, Head of Marketing, Strategy & Communications, Alcatel Lucent 
• Diana Frymus, Health Systems Strengthening Advisor, USAID
• Berhane Gebru, Director of Programs, FHI 360 Satellife Center 
• Jill Hackett, Director of Training, Partners in Health 
• Martin Harris , Program Director, GSMA 
• Zena Herman, Content Development, Hesperian Health Guides 
• Jonathan Jackson, CEO and Neal Lesh, Chief of Strategy, Dimagi-CommCare 
• Peter Johnson, Director of Global Learning, Jhpiego 
50
• Nadi Kaonga, Research and Evaluation Coordinator for eHealth Program, Millennium 
Villages Project 
• Firdaus Kharas, Founder, Chocolate Moose Media
• Anne Liu, Health Systems Manager for eHealth Program, Millennium Villages Project 
• Lesley-Anne Long, Deputy director of the OU’s International Development Office, 
HEAT (Open University) 
• David Marsh, Senior Child Survivor Advisor, Save the Children  
• Caroline Mbindyo, eLearning Programme Manager, AMREF 
• Marc Mitchell, President, D-tree International 
• Jacqueline Moller-Larsen, Ghana Country Director, Grameen Foundation 
• Ruth Mutua, Ministry of Public Health, Kenya
• Dr. Muhammed Pate, State Minister of Health, Nigerian Government 
• Charmaine Pattinson, Director of Human Resources for Health, Clinton Health Access 
Initiative 
• Jonathan Payne, Maternal Concept Lab, Partners in Health
• Estelle Quain, Senior Technical Advisor for Human Resources for Health, US 
Government (USAID) 
• Sandhya Rao, Senior Advisor for Private Sector Partnerships, USAID Bureau of 
Global Health (Global) 
• Melitta Remington, Global Manager, Health Care, Intel 
• Sarah Sanders, Vodafone Group, Vodafone 
• Benjamin Schwartz, Training and Operations, CARE 
• Barbara Stilwell, Director of Technical Leadership, IntraHealth 
• Mary Taylor, Senior Program Officer, the Bill & Melinda Gates Foundation
• Margaret Usher, Scientist/IBP Secretariat WHO/RHR (retired June 2011), World 
Health Organization 
• Deborah Van Dyke, Director, Global Health Media Project 
• Aliya Walji, Chief Operating Officer, Jacaranda Healthcare
 
51
bibliography
• Auletta, Ken, “Annals of Higher Education: Get Rich U.” The New Yorker, April 30, 
2012
• Bernard, Robert M., Abrami, Philip C., Lou, Yiping, Borokhovsk, Evgueni, Wade, 
Anne, Wozney, Lori, Wallet, Peter Andrew, Fiset, Manon, Huang, Binru, “How Does 
Distance Education Compare with Classroom Instruction? A Meta-Analysis of the 
Empirical Literature,” American Educational Research Association, 2004
• Bhutta, Zulfiqar, Lassi, Zohra, Pariyo George and Huicho, Luis, “Global experience of 
CHWs for delivery of health related MDGs,” GHWA, WHO, 2010
• Bloom, BS, “Effects of continuing medical education on improving physician clinical 
care and patient health: a review of systematic reviews,” International Journal of 
Technology Assessment in Health Care, 2005
• Bloomfield, J, Roberts J, While A, “The effect of computer-assisted learning versus 
conventional teaching methods on the acquisition and retention of handwashing 
theory and skills in prequalification nursing students: a randomized controlled trial,” 
International Journal of Nursing Studies, 2010
• Bruppacher HR, Alam SK, LeBlanc VR, Latter D, Naik VN, Savoldelli GL, Mazer CD, 
Kurrek MM, Joo HS, “Simulation-based training improves physicians’ performance in 
patient care in high-stakes clinical setting of cardiac surgery”, Anesthesiology, 2010
• Chetley, Andrew, “Improving Health, Connecting People: The Role of ICTs in the 
Health Sector of Developing Countries,” InfoDev 2007 
• Choa M, Park I, Chung HS, Yoo SK, Shim H, Kim S, “The effectiveness of 
cardiopulmonary resuscitation instruction: animation versus dispatcher through a 
cellular phone,” Resuscitation, 2008
• Conway, Michael D, Gupta, Srishti, and Khajavi, Kamiar, “Addressing Africa’s health 
workforce crisis,” McKinsey Quarterly, November 2007
• “CommCare HQ,” Date accessed: April 2012, http://www.commcarehq.org/plans/
• Darmstadt, Gary L, Bhutta, Zulfiqar A, Cousens, Simon, Adam, Taghreed, Walker, 
Neff and De Bernis, Luc, “Evidence-based, cost-effective interventions: how many 
newborn babies can we save?” The Lancet, 2005
• De Lorenzo, Robert A and Abbott, Cynthia A, “Effectiveness of an adult-learning, self-
directed model compared with traditional lecture-based teaching methods in out-of-
hospital training’, Academic Emergency Medicine, 2004
• Florez-Arango, Jose F, Iyengar, M Sriram, Dunn, Kim, Zhang, Jiajie, “Performance 
factors of mobile rich media job aids for community health workers,” Journal of the 
American Medical Informatics Association, 2011
• “Frontline health workers coalition,” Date accessed: April 2012, http://
frontlinehealthworkers.org/
52
• Gilroy, Kate and Winch, Peter, “Management of Sick Children by Community Health 
Workers: Intervention Models and Programme Examples,” UNICEF, WHO, 2006
• Hadi, Abdullahel, “Management of acute respiratory infections by community health 
volunteers: experience of Bangladesh Rural Advancement Committee (BRAC),” WHO, 
2003
• Hadley J, Kulier R, Zamora J, Coppus SF, Weinbrenner S, Meyerrose B, Decsi T, 
Horvath AR, Nagy E, Emparanza JI, Arvanitis TN, Burls A, Cabello JB, Kaczor M, 
Zanrei G, Pierer K, Kunz R, Wilkie V, Wall D, Mol BW, Khan KS, “Effectiveness of an 
e-learning course in evidence-based medicine for foundation (internship) training,” 
Journal of the Royal Society of Medicine, 2010
• Harrington, S.S. and Walker, B.L., “The effects of computer-based training on 
immediate and residual learning of nursing facility staff,” The Journal of Continuing 
Education in Nursing, 2004
• Hash, “Infographic: Kenya Mobile Subscribers, Penetration & Internet,” 2011, http://
whiteafrican.com/2011/09/27/infographic-mobile-subscribers-penetration-internet/
• Iheed Institute and Dalberg Global Development Advisors, “mHealth Education: 
Harnessing the Mobile Revolution to Bridge the Health Education and Training Gap in 
Developing Countries,” June 2011
• “iHub Research,” Date accessed: April 2012, http://www.ihub.co.ke/blog/wp-content/
uploads/2011/09/R@iHub-Infographic-Converted.png
• ICT Facts and Figures, “The World in 2010”
• “International Telecommunication Union,” Date accessed: April 2012, http://www.itu.int/
ITU-D/icteye/
• International Telecommunication Union (ITU), “The World in 2010,” Telecommunication 
Development Bureau, International Telecommunication Union, 2010
• Jhpiego, “In-Service Training Techniques, Timing, Setting and Media: Findings from a 
Systematic Review of the Literature,” Jhpiego Corporation, Baltimore, MD: 2012
• Kerfoot BP, “Learning benefits of online spaced education persist for two years,” The 
Journal of Urology, 2009
• Kerfoot BP, DeWolf WC, Masser BA, Church PA, Federman DD, “Spaced education 
improves the retention of clinical knowledge by medical students: randomized 
controlled trial,” Medical Education, 2007
• Kerfoot BP, Kearney MC, Connelly D, Ritchey ML, “Interactive spaced education to 
assess and improve knowledge of clinical practice guidelines: a randomized controlled 
trial,” Annals of Surgery, 2009
• Landis Lewis Z, Mello-Thoms C, Gadabu OJ, Gillespie EM, Douglas GP, Crowley 
RS, “The feasibility of automating audit and feedback for ART guideline adherence in 
Malawi,” Journal of the American Medical Informatics Association, 2011
53
• Lehmann, Uta and Sanders, David,” Community health workers: What do we know 
about them? The state of the evidence on programmes, activities, costs and impact 
on health outcomes of using community health workers,” WHO, 2007
• Lesh, Neal and Treatman, Derek, “Strengthening community health systems with 
localized multimedia,” Dimagi, 2011
• Leung, Gabriel M, Johnston, Janice M, Tin, Keith Y K, Wong, Irene O L, Ho, Lai-Ming, 
Lam, Wendy W T and Lam, Tai-Hing, “Randomized controlled trial of clinical decision 
support tools to improve learning of evidence based medicine in medical students,” 
BMJ, 2003
• Lewin SA, Babigumira SM, Bosch-Capblanch X, Aja G, van Wyk B, Glenton C, 
Scheel I, Zwarenstein M, Daniels K, “Lay health workers in primary and community 
health care: A systematic review of trials,” NORAD, 2006
• McCann, David, “A Ugandan mHealth Moratorium Is a Good Thing,” ICT Works, 2012
• Marinopoulos SS, Dorman T, Ratanawongsa N, Wilson LM, Ashar BH, Magaziner 
JL, Miller RG, Thomas PA, Prokopowicz GP, Qayyum R, Bass EB, ”Effectiveness of 
Continuing Medical Education. Evidence Report/Technology Assessment” No. 149 
(Prepared by the Johns Hopkins Evidence-based Practice Center, under Contract No. 
290-02-0018.) AHRQ Publication No. 07-E006. Rockville, MD: Agency for Healthcare 
Research and Quality. January 2007
• Mayer, Richard, “Applying the science of learning to medical education,” Department 
of Psychology, University of California, Santa Barbara, 2010
• Quality Assurance Project, “Evaluation of an IMCI Computer-based Training Course in 
Kenya. Operations Research Results’, Published for the U.S. Agency for International 
Development (USAID) by the Quality Assurance Project (QAP), 2006
• Ravishankar, Nirmala, Gubbins, Paul, Cooley, Rebecca J, Leach-Kemon, Katherine, 
Michaud, Catherine M,  Jamison, Dean T, Murray, Christopher JL, “Financing of global 
health: tracking development assistance for health from 1990 to 2007,” The Lancet, 
2009
• Rosenberg, Tina, “What Makes Community Health Care Work?” 2011, http://
opinionator.blogs.nytimes.com/2011/02/18/what-makes-community-health-care-work/
• Rowe, Alexander K., Rowe, Samantha Y., Vujicic, Marko, Ross-Degnan, Dennis, 
Chalker, John, Holloway, Kathleen A. and Peters, David H., “Review of Strategies to 
Improve Health Care Provider Performance,” World Bank, 2009
• Sharp, Imogen, “Scaling up, saving lives,” GHWA, WHO, 2008
• Singh, Prabhjot, “One Million Community Health Workers”, New York: The Earth 
Institute, Columbia University, 2011Skype Form S-1/A, United States Securities and 
Exchange Commission, March 2011
• Sylla A, Sarr CS, Gueye EH, Ndiaye D, Sall MG, Kuakuvi N, “Assessment of 
management training for low-level community health workers providing care for 
children with acute respiratory infections in four districts of Senegal,” Revue d 
Épidémiologie et de Santé Publique, 2004
54
• “The World Bank,” Date accessed: April 2012, http://data.worldbank.org/indicator
• Triola M, Feldman H, Kalet AL, Zabar S, Kachur EK, Gillespie C, Anderson M, 
Griesser C and Lipkin M, “A Randomized Trial of Teaching Clinical Skills Using Virtual 
and Live Standardized Patients,” The Journal of General Internal Medicine, 2006
• U.S. Department of Education, Office of Planning, Evaluation, and Policy 
Development, “Evaluation of Evidence-Based Practices in Online Learning: A Meta-
Analysis and Review of Online Learning Studies,” Washington, D.C., 2010
• Vujicic, Marko, Weber, Stephanie E, Nikolic, Irina A, Atun, Rifat and Kumar, Ranjana, 
“GAVI, The Global Fund and World Bank support for human resources for health in 
developing countries,” The World Bank, 2011
• Winch PJ, Bagayoko A, Diawara A, Kané M, Thiéro F, Gilroy K, Daou Z, Berthé 
Z, Swedberg E, “Increases in Correct Administration of Chloroquine in the Home 
and Referral of Sick Children to Health Facilities Through a Community-Based 
Intervention in Bougouni District, Mali,” Transactions of the Royal Society of Tropical 
Medicine and Hygiene, 2003
• World Bank, “The Little Data Book on Information and Communication Technology,” 
2011
• World Bank, UNICEF, UNFPA & PMNCH, “Health Systems for the Millennium 
Development Goals: Country Needs and Financing Gaps: Background document 
for the Taskforce on Innovative International Financing for Health Systems Working 
Group 1: Constraints to Scaling Up and Costs,” Final Draft, 2009
• World Vision International, “Who’s counting? 9.2 million children – the cost of inaction 
on child health,” 2009
• Zurovac D, Rowe AK, Ochola SA, Noor AM,  Midia B, English M and Snow RW, 
“Predictors of the quality of health worker treatment practices for uncomplicated 
malaria at government health facilities in Kenya,” International Journal of 
Epidemiology, 2004
• Zurovac D, Sudoi RK, Akhwale WS, Ndiritu M, Hamer DH, Rowe AK, Snow RW, “The 
effect of mobile phone text-message reminders on Kenyan health workers’ adherence 
to malaria treatment guidelines: a cluster randomized trial,” Lancet, 2011
55
endnotes
1 Excludes United States Government’s (USGs) PEPFAR which has supported multiple interviewed organizations in training
2 World Health Organization, 2010
3 WHO, 2010, Global Health Workforce Alliance
4 Michael D. Conway, Srishti Gupta, and Kamiar Khajavi, “Addressing Africa’s health workforce crisis,” McKinsey Quarterly, 
2007
5 Earth Institute, 2011
6 WHO Human Resources for Health
7 Action for Global Health, 2010
8 World Bank, UNICEF, UNFPA & PMNCH, Health Systems for the Millennium Development Goals: Country Needs and 
Financing Gaps: Background document for the Taskforce on Innovative International Financing for Health Systems Working 
Group 1: Constraints to Scaling Up and Costs, Final Draft (Oct. 2009), at 70-71
9 Based on the number of CHWs per capita in Ethiopia, Malawi, Nigeria, and Rwanda, there are approximately 500,000 
CHWs in Sub Saharan Africa today. Estimations from expert interviews confirm this estimation 
10 Singh, Prabhjot, “One Million Community Health Workers”, New York: The Earth Institute, Columbia University, 2011
11 Iheed Institute, 2012
12 http://frontlinehealthworkers.org/
13 http://opinionator.blogs.nytimes.com/2011/02/18/what-makes-community-health-care-work/
14 Alexander K. Rowe, Samantha Y. Rowe, Marko, Vujicic, Dennis Ross-Degnan, John Chalker, Kathleen A. Holloway, and 
David H. Peters, Review of Strategies to Improve Health Care Provider Performance, World Bank, 2009
15 Uta Lehmann and David Sanders,” Community health workers: What do we know about them? The state of the evidence 
on programmes, activities, costs and impact on health outcomes of using community health workers”, WHO, 2007. (Citing 
Ashwell & Freeman 1995)
16 Live interview, April 2012. Robert Fabricant, FrogDesign
17 Singh, Prabhjot, “One Million Community Health Workers”, New York: The Earth Institute, Columbia University, 2011; 
Bhutta, Lassi, Pariyo and Huicho, “Global Experience of Community Health Workers for Delivery of Health Related Millen-
nium Development Goals”, GHWA, 2010
18 The Lancet, Vol. 373 Issue 9681. “Financing of global health: tracking development assistance for health from 1990 to 
2007.”  June 2009
19 World Vision International, “Who’s counting? 9.2 million children – the cost of inaction on child health,” 2009.  Figure over 
one year time span in 2006
20 World Vision “Health Care Workers,” Dec. 2011
21 Expert interview, April 2012
22 Marko Vujicic, Stephanie E. Weber, Irina A. Nikolic, Rifat Atun and Ranjana Kumar, “GAVI, The Global Fund and World 
Bank support for human resources for health in developing countries”, The World Bank, 2011
23 “Zambia’s National Community Health Worker Strategy”, http://www.who.int/workforcealliance/forum/2011/hrhawardscs29/
en/index.html, Date accessed: April, 2012
24 Jhpiego. “In-Service Training Techniques, Timing, Setting and Media: Findings from a Systematic Review of the Litera-
ture”, Jhpiego Corporation, Baltimore, MD: 2012
25 Jhpiego’s literature review covered 69 studies published in the English language between 2010 and 2011 and focused on 
health worker education
26 Jhpiego. “In-Service Training Techniques, Timing, Setting and Media: Findings from a Systematic Review of the Litera-
ture”, Jhpiego Corporation, Baltimore, MD: 2012
27 Expert interviews, March – April 2012
28 Expert interviews, March – April 2012
29 Expert interviews, March – April 2012
30 Expert interviews, March – April 2012
31 Expert interviews, conducted March – April 2012. Includes translation, other cultural adaptation, revising images, layout, 
printing (for paper based) and distribution
32 http://www.commcarehq.org/plans/
33 Jhpiego, “In-Service Training Techniques, Timing, Setting and Media: Findings from a Systematic Review of the Litera-
ture”, Jhpiego Corporation, Baltimore, MD: 2012
56
34 Triola M, Feldman H, Kalet AL, Zabar S, Kachur EK, Gillespie C, Anderson M, Griesser C and Lipkin M, “A Randomized 
Trial of Teaching Clinical Skills Using Virtual and Live Standardized Patients,” The Journal of General Internal Medicine, 
2006
35 Bloomfield J, Roberts J, While A, “The effect of computer-assisted learning versus conventional teaching methods on the 
acquisition and retention of handwashing theory and skills in pre-qualification nursing students: a randomized controlled 
trial”, International Journal of nursing studies, 2010
36 Marinopoulos SS, Dorman T, Ratanawongsa N, Wilson LM, Ashar BH, Magaziner JL, Miller RG, Thomas PA, Prokopo-
wicz GP, Qayyum R, Bass EB, ”Effectiveness of Continuing Medical Education. Evidence Report/Technology Assessment” 
No. 149 (Prepared by the Johns Hopkins Evidence-based Practice Center, under Contract No. 290-02-0018.) AHRQ Publi-
cation No. 07-E006. Rockville, MD: Agency for Healthcare Research and Quality. January 2007
37Lesh, Neal and Treatman, Derek, “Strengthening community health systems with localized multimedia”, Dimagi, 2011
38 Wireless intelligence dashboard, Q1, 2012
39 iHub Mobile. http://www.ihub.co.ke/blog/wp-content/uploads/2011/09/R@iHub-Infographic-Converted.png 
40 Sean Blaschke, UNICEF, Uganda Alive Program. Live Interview March 2012
41 Mayer, Richard, “Applying the science of learning to medical education”, Department of Psychology, University of Califor-
nia, Santa Barbara, 2010
42 World Bank, 2009 Data. http://data.worldbank.org/indicator
43 Lesh, Neal and Treatman, Derek, “Strengthening community health systems with localized multimedia”, Dimagi, 2011
44 Focus group in Rural Rwanda, 2010. Provided by iheed Institute
45 Lesh, Neal and Treatman, Derek, “Strengthening community health systems with localized multimedia”, Dimagi, 2011
46 Jhpiego. “In-Service Training Techniques, Timing, Setting and Media: Findings from a Systematic Review of the Litera-
ture”, Jhpiego Corporation, Baltimore, MD: 2012
47 Quality Assurance Project, “Evaluation of an IMCI Computer-based Training Course in Kenya. Operations Research Re-
sults’, Published for the U.S. Agency for International Development (USAID) by the Quality Assurance Project (QAP), 2006
48 Figure based on literature review, expert interviews and Dalberg analysis 
49 http://www.itu.int/ITU-D/icteye/; ITU World Telecommunication Regulatory Database. Exceptions are Benin, Cape Verde, 
DRC, Equatorial Guinea, Lesotho, Mali, Seychelles, Swaziland, Togo, Zambia
50 World Bank, The Little Data Book on Information and Communication Technology 2011
51 ICT Facts and Figures, “The World in 2010”
52 Internet World Usage and Population Statistics, “Facebook Usage and Facebook Growth Statistics
By World Geographic Regions.”  March 31, 2012
53 Malik, Om, “Skype By the Numbers,” April 2010
54 Skype website, 2011
55 When a Doctor is Just a Cell Phone Call Away.  www.mobileactive.org, accessed May 7, 2012.
56 Auletta, Ken. “Annals of Higher Education: Get Rich U.” The New Yorker, April 30, 2012 
57 KhanAcademy.org 
57
Sub-Saharan africa needs more 
than a million additional community 
health workers
sub-saharan africa needs more than 
a million additional community health 
workers
58

traIn a 
mIllIon 
communIty health workerS
t +353 25 52200
f +353 25 86885
e info@iheed.org
www.iheed.org
iheed Institute, Cork, Ireland.
60
