TC411:	Tech	for	Data	Visualization	(In	Person
Workshop)
Share	this:
 Tweet  Share 0  Share 0
> TC411:	Tech	for	Data	Visualization	(In	Person
All	courses Workshop)
 	$395.00
 	1	day
Do	you	want	to	get	better	at	visualizing	your	program	data?	This	one-day	workshop	is	designed	to	teach	you	the
basic	techniques	and	tools	of	data	visualization	through	a	series	of	interactive	activities	and	hands-on	demos.
Workshop	Methodology
The	workshop	is	divided	into	three	parts:
Part	1:	Building	a	foundation:	Participants	will	begin	by	exploring	popular	theorists	and	approaches	data
visualization	like	Edward	Tufte,	Jonathan	Schwabish,	JunkCharts	and	more.	We	will	learn	how	to	identify	elements
of	successful	(and	unsuccessful)	visualizations	and	share	tips	and	best	practices	for	designing	effective	products.
Part	2:	Telling	your	story:		Participants	will	then	engage	in	a	guided	design	workshop	using	their	existing
datasets	&	visualization	ideas.	Building	a	dashboard?	Working	on	a	donor	report?	Need	to	convince	an	audience	of
something?	This	90-minute	interactive	exercise	will	help	refine	and	stage	the	story	you	want	to	tell.
Part	3:	Learning	new	tech	skills:	In	the	final	phase	of	the	workshop,	participants	will	learn	how	to	visualize	their
data	in	three	different	platforms:	Excel,	Canva,	and	Infogr.am.	Facilitators	will	stage	a	series	of	mini	demos	and
exercises	to	do	everything	from	cleaning	and	formatting	data	to	building	both	static	and	interactive	visualizations.
We	will	also	provide	basic	exposure	to	additional	set	of	tools	like	Tableau,	Google	Data	Studio,	CartoDB,	PowerBI,
and	Slemma	for	further	exploration.		
Case	studies	and	exercises	will	focus	explicitly	on	examples	like	public	health,	water	&	sanitation,	climate	change,
financial	services	for	the	poor,	human	disaster	response	and	more.
Workshop	Objectives
At	the	conclusion	of	this	workshop,	participants	will	be	able	to:
Understand	key	data	visualization	theories,	principles,	and	best	practices
Refine	and	articulate	stories	and	narratives	behind	datasets
Build	basic	skills	for	cleaning	and	formatting	data	effectively	for	data	visualizations
Create	static	and	interactive	data	visualizations	using	excel,	canva	and	infogr.am.
​Space	is	limited	to	10	people	so	reserve	your	spot	today!
Pricing
$395	for	one	day	workshop,	including	lunch	and	happy	hour
$995	for	individual	one-on-one	workshop	tailored	to	your	needs	and	built	around	your	schedule
Group	discount	rates	available.	For	more	details,	please	contact	us	at	social	[at]	techchange.org.	If	you	are	not
happy	with	your	course	experience	for	any	reason,	TechChange	is	happy	to	discuss	refunds.
Next	Session
None	upcoming...
Change
Upcoming	Sessions
Friday	April	28,	2017
Friday	May	26,	2017
Friday	June	16,	2017
Details
Workshop	Location:	2001	13th	St	NW,	Washington,	DC	20009
Tech	requirements:	Bring	your	laptop.	You	can	also	use	one	of	ours	if	you	need	to.
Prerequisites:	No	previous	experience	or	graphic	design	skills	needed!
Food:	Lunch	is	included	and	we	will	host	a	small	happy	hour	after	workshop.
Dates	don’t	work?	Email	us	about	scheduling	a	one-on-one	workshop	at	social@techchange.org
On-site	or	online	team	training:	Want	us	to	train	your	team?	We	provide	a	range	of	options	for	custom	in-person
and	online	training.	Email	us	to	start	the	conversation	at	social@techchange.org.
Contact:	techsupport	[at]	techchange.org
Terms	of	Use
Privacy	Policy
Policies
©	2012-2019	TechChange

