  
  
The Malawi K4Health Mobile Learning Pilot 
Brief Overview 
Providing health workers with access to current 
health information can help to improve the quality of 
health services. However, health managers and 
providers working at all levels to provide HIV and 
family planning services frequently lack up-to-date and 
relevant information. Existing information is often 
scattered, too technical, and difficult to access.  
Health workers tend to rely on outdated information, 
even when new guidelines or protocols have been 
introduced at higher levels of the health system.  
 
The Knowledge for Health (K4Health) Malawi Pilot 
Project was funded by USAID and implemented by 
Management Sciences for Health (MSH) as part of the Global K4Health project led by Johns Hopkins University 
Center for Communication Programs in partnership with MSH and FHI 360.   
 
The K4Health Malawi Pilot Project was designed in 2009 as a small Mobile Learning  project, designed to 
improve access to and use of information by health care providers at the district all level of the health system in 
Malawi.  The project aimed to show that providing health workers with access to current, relevant family 
planning, reproductive health, and HIV/AIDS information improves the quality of health services.  The project 
worked with health managers and service providers at the national, district and community levels and ended in 
December 2011.  
 
 Geographic Coverage: 
 Nationwide; Salima and Nkhotakota districts, Malawi 
 
 Implementation Partners: 
The Global K4Health project led by Johns Hopkins University Center for 
Communication Programs (JHU-CCP) in partnership with Management Sciences for 
Health (MSH) and FHI360 
 
 Funder: 
 USAID  
 
 For More Information Contact: 
USAID 
 Madeleine Short Fabic; 
1300 Pennsyvania Ave NW, Washington, DC 20523; 
Tel: +1-202-712-5904; email: mshort@usaid.gov 
MSH  
 Natalie Campbell, K4Health Malawi Manager; 
 ncampbell@msh.org 75 
 
Service Delivery 
 
 
The Malawi K4Health Mobile Learning Pilot 
About Malawi Mobile Learning Pilot • Improved both the reliability of clinical 
In order to provide up-to-date information in a more information and  the detection and prevention 
efficient manner, a system was developed at the district of stock-outs; 
level to provide information to community-based health • Increased CHW self-confidence and client 
workers.   trust; 
 • More efficient referrals and widened coverage;  
This distance learning program included four key • Reduced costs of reporting to supervisors from 
components. $3.06 using public transport to $0.48 using 
• A six-month Leadership Development for SMS; and 
Knowledge Management (LD for KM) program: • Prompt responses to outbreaks; the average 
developed for participants from the national time went from 523 minutes to three minutes.  
and district levels to align and mobilize them  
around the need for improved knowledge Lessons Learned 
exchange. • Developing a limited number of new features, 
• A national taskforce: formed to manage and such as automated responses for frequently 
disseminate technical information on family asked questions by CHWs, might improve the 
planning, reproductive health, and HIV/AIDS.   use of the SMS network.  
• District Learning Centers (DLC): established in • In addition to expanding access to health 
the district health offices of Salima and information, the SMS network facilitates 
Nkhotakota.   knowledge exchange between CHWs and 
• A pilot mobile health program in Salima and higher levels in the health system.  
Nkhotakota districts using SMS was • Since measuring the effect of using SMS 
implemented. 
network on quality of care was a challenge, the 
 project team should consider tracking how the 
In collaboration with Frontline SMS, an SMS-based SMS network affects the inputs into quality of 
mobile telephone network was established that allows care (e.g., stockouts and quick resolution of 
community health workers to send text messages problems) and health service indicators (e.g.,  
between cell phones and other devices. Through the contraceptive use) as proxy indicators of 
mobile network, the program alerts these health quality.  
workers to new resources, training opportunities,  
changes in protocols, and other relevant knowledge Conclusion 
exchange and public health activities in their district. 
 Most importantly, a final project evaluation found that 
Evaluation and Results the pilot project demonstrated immediate benefits to 
front line health workers in the areas of increased 
Since the launch of the project in May 2010, K4Health knowledge, greater self-confidence, cost and time 
project has achieved the following: savings, and widened service coverage. 
• 663 cell phones and solar chargers distributed  
to Community Health Workers, serving a In the context of sustainability, strengthening the 
catchment area of 652,326 Malawians; Malawian health system at district level is an important 
• 1,059 SMS messages on RH/FP and HIV sent to investment of resources to provide timely and informed 
the hub; services to clients. The K4Health project provides a 
• Faster feedback from supervisors; with the good platform for data collection and information 
phones the average time to receive feedback dissemiation via text messages in low income countries. 
was nine minutes as opposed to over one day; 
Information was excerpted from:  
K4Health Malawi Project Overview; http://www.k4health.org/malawi#toolkit 
mHealth in Malawi: Improving Access to Family Planning and Reproductive Health Information – Thozani Bema K4Health Network Coordinator 
K4Health Malawi Project Overview; : http://www.k4health.org/sites/default/files/Malawi%20Fact%20Sheet_1-pager.pdf 
76 Nancy Vollmer Lemay, Tara Sullivan, Brian Jumbe & Cary Peabody Perry (2012): Reaching Remote Health Workers in Malawi: Baseline Assessment of  a Pilot mHealth Intervention, Journal of Health Communication: International Perspectives, 17:sup1, 105-117. Available at 
http://dx.doi.org/10.1080/10810730.2011.649106 
 
 
