  
  
 
CycleTel™ 
 
B rief Overview 
 
CycleTel™ is a mHealth application that offers a family planning 
method directly on a user’s mobile phone via SMS. Based on the 
Standard Days Method® (SDM), CycleTel is a fertility awareness-
based method that helps a woman know which days during her 
menstrual cycle she is most likely to become pregnant. SDM has 
been proven to be more than 95 percent effective in preventing 
pregnancy when used correctly. 
 
CycleTel helps a woman determine if she is eligible to use SDM by 
asking a series of screening questions via SMS. If eligible, she then 
receives personalized messages about her fertility status, in 
addition to messages that support correct use of SDM and the 
service. CycleTel depends on sustained interaction between the 
user and technology for as long as the woman chooses to use the 
service. 
 
Georgetown University’s Institute for Reproductive Health (IRH), 
in partnership with others, has followed a step-wise, systematic 
approach to CycleTel development. IRH conducted a rigorous 
proof of concept testing from 2009 to 2011 and pilot testing from July 2011 to January 2012, to develop and 
evaluate the service. IRH is currently exploring partnerships to launch CycleTel in India and other countries 
worldwide. 
 
 
  Geographic Coverage: 
Lucknow and New Delhi, India 
 
 Implementation Partners: 
Georgetown University’s Institute for Reproductive Health led a team of partners that 
included: ThoughtWorks Inc.| Unicel | Indian Society of Healthcare Professionals | 
FrontlineSMS. Partnerships for service launch are in development.  
 
 Funder: 
USAID 
 
 For More Information Contact: 
USAID  
 Mihira Karra, AOR PROGRESS Project;  
Tel: +1-202-712-5934; email: mkarra@usaid.gov 
IRH  
 Victoria Jennings, Director, IRH DC;  
             4301 Connecticut Avenue, NW, Washington, DC – 20008;  
             Tel: +1-202-687-1392; email: jenningv@georgetown.edu  
Project  
 Priya Jha, Country Representative, IRH India; 
268, Vasant Enclave Vasant Vihar, New Delhi – 110057; 
    Tel: +91-11-46113415/162000; email: pjha@irh.in 11 
 
 
Behavior Change Communication 
 CycleTel™ 
 
About CycleTel  
A woman opts in and joins the CycleTel service by IRH is testing the feasibility of offering the service on an 
sending an SMS to a designated number. Then, via SMS, interactive voice recording (IVR) variant of the service. If 
she is screened for method use. If she meets two test results are positive (i.e., if women are able to use 
conditions (her periods usually come once a month, and the IVR version, which requires them to listen to 
she and her partner can avoid unprotected sex several messages and enter numeric responses), this could make 
days each month) she sends the date of her last period CycleTel appropriate and accessible for millions of 
to the service and begins using CycleTel. The service women and couples at the base of the pyramid who 
alerts her of her fertile days during each cycle. have an unmet need for family planning but for whom 
Additional messages support correct use of the method, texting can be challenging. 
help her monitor her cycle length, and offer information  
on other reproductive health issues, such as the Lessons Learned 
importance of optimal birth spacing. Additionally, a • Proof of concept testing, with low-cost 
helpline number is available for one-on-one consultation technology solutions, is a critical first step to 
over the phone. testing a mHealth concept.  
 • Proof of concept testing informed the 
FrontlineSMS was used to mimic the service during development of a “technology functionality” 
proof of concept testing. Since an IRH staff member had scope that was integral for helping to identify 
to send and track all messages via FrontlineSMS, this an appropriate technology partner.  
technology platform was only appropriate to support a 
small number of CycleTel users. With successful proof- • Business plan analysis serves as a reality check 
of-concept results, IRH worked with ThoughtWorks to as to what level of investment is needed to 
develop a customized software to automate the service.  reach a defined level of scale.  
 • An ecosystem of partnerships is required to 
Once the CycleTel technology platform was built, IRH operate and sustain a mHealth service. 
recruited 715 women in the Delhi region to test the • IRH’s systematic and rigorous approach to 
automated version of CycleTel for two menstrual CycleTel development is a model in the 
cycles. The purpose of the pilot test was to:  mHealth field that other organizations can 
• Ensure that the automated technology apply to plan for the scale and sustainability of 
functioned properly with a higher volume of other mobile services. 
users;  
• Evaluate user experiences with the service and Conclusion 
integrate user feedback before scaling the Strong interest in CycleTel has been expressed by 
technology; and  mobile network operators, telecom aggregators, 
• Test the feasibility of integrating the CycleTel donors, technical assistance organizations, and others. 
helpline into a fully-functioning family planning Discussions are underway with potential go-to-market 
call center.  partners. IRH aims to launch CycleTel in India and 
 expand the service to other countries. CycleTel is now 
Evaluation and Results well-positioned to expand access to family planning by 
Over 95 percent of users interviewed at exit reported offering an effective family planning method directly via 
that they received messages at an appropriate time and mobile phones. As with any innovation, to be taken to 
in an appropriate quantity, indicating that the technology sustainable scale, continuous investment is required for 
worked as designed.  When asked what they liked most research and development, as is the development of 
about CycleTel, more than 80 percent of users reported sustained partnerships and a strong client base. 
appreciating its ease-of-use and the timely reminders. 
Nearly 90 percent of women and 80 percent of men 
interviewed said that they would recommend this 
service to others.  
12  Information was excerpted from: 
http://mobileactive.org/case-studies/family-planning 
http://www.frontlinesms.com/wp-content/uploads/2011/10/FrontlineSMS_IRH_CycleTel_2011.pdf 
http://www.slideshare.net/IRHgeorgetown/family-planning-via-mobile-phones-proofofconcept-testing-in-india-cycletel 
 
