MOBILE-BASED EARLY DETECTION AND 
PREVENTION OF ORAL CANCER 
(mEPOC) 
Mobile telemedicine model for early detection and prevention of oral cancer in 
India  
SERVICE DELIVERY 
Implementation date: June 2012 
Oral cancer in India is mainly due to the widespread use of tobacco. Oral cancer is preceded by a pre-cancerous stage which is 
detectable by simple oral examination. Pre-cancerous lesions are asymptomatic, and often patients do not seek intervention 
during early stages of disease. Moreover, over 60 percent of patients present with advanced stage of disease.  
Delay in diagnosis is due to numerous factors. At the patient level, there is a limited knowledge of risk factors, low health literacy, 
and economics and social barriers in seeking health care. Providers have a limited knowledge of and training in screening and 
diagnosis, and sometimes offer inadequate services. Lastly, at the health systems level, there is a poor infrastructure and a weak 
system in place. These gaps present a critical opportunity for early diagnosis of oral cancer. 
Evidence shows that direct visual examination of the oral cavity is a cost-effective method for oral cancer screening in resource-
constrained settings. However, conventional oral cancer screening programs have several limitations, including poor patient follow-
up after screening, lack of permanent portable record of medical data after screening, lack of record of visual and tactile 
examination data after screening, slow rates of information transfer, poor communication between primary provider and 
specialist, false positive referrals, and limited facilities for follow up and diagnosis. Therefore, Biocon Foundation and partners has 
developed a mobile telemedicine model to address some of these challenges of oral cancer screening programs for early detection 
of the disease. The basic principle of this model is to empower and assist primary care providers to enable early disease 
detection. 
About  mEPOC 
The project used mobile phone applications, which individuals and reduce cost burden on the healthcare system. 
incorporate clinical decision algorithms to assist community In order to implement the OCS program, Biocon first 
 
health workers (CHWs) and primary care providers to conducts a baseline survey using mobile technology to 
assess risk and diagnose oral cancer at an early stage.  They collect data. Information collected in the mobile phones is 
c an also communicate with the specialists through open uploaded to open MRS on the Biocon server. A specialist in 
Medical Record System (OpenMRS) and refer patients for remote locations sends the recommendation through SMS. 
treatment in a timely manner. Lastly, the CHW informs the patient and completes the 
 referral. 
The Oral Cancer Screening (OCS) program is implemented 
with the help of mobile technology to reach out to 
 
72  |  mHealth Compendium Volume 4 
Evaluation and Results 
The pilot study aimed to test the feasibility of using 
mobile technology to detect and prevent oral cancer.  
The study was conducted in four nodal primary care 
centers representing different health delivery 
systems in rural and suburban areas in the state of 
Karnataka: a dental school, government public 
hospital, a rural private dental clinic and a non-profit 
community hospital. Opportunistic screening of 
individuals was performed in the dental school, 
government hospital and the rural dental practice, 
whereas, targeted screening of high-risk frontline 
health care workers did individuals in a community 
setting.  
The oral cancer screening application on an Android 
based mobile phone was integrated with openMRS 
for portability and used by primary providers to 
collect data during screening. This application enabled capture of text and image data of oral lesions during the screening. 
The primary providers or health workers uploaded all data obtained during screening from the phone to open MRS, which 
could be accessed at a remote site by an oral medicine specialist. The specialist made recommendations for further follow-up 
or biopsy.  
Compliance rate for follow-up, biopsy and definitive treatment at a cancer center was monitored through openMRS. A total 
of 1,680 individuals were examined, 1,440 through opportunistic screening in the dental clinic and dental school and 240 by 
front line community health workers.  
Approximately 129/1,680 individuals were identified with oral lesions and recommended for further follow up or biopsy. 
Among those screened, 62 individuals (48 percent) followed up and underwent biopsy of oral lesions. Of those who 
underwent a biopsy, 54 patients (87 percent) had a positive result of a premalignant or malignant lesion, and the remaining 
eight patients were normal.  
Our experience suggests that using mobile technology for a cancer-screening program in resource-constrained settings is 
feasible. 
The total number of people screened in the population-based screening (3,179), camp model (626) and work place model 
(1,757) was 5,562. 
Lessons Learned 
Geographic Coverage: South Karnataka and 
 This application provided clinical decision support, which Bangalore, India 
strengthens health care provider in proper screening and 
Implementation Partners: Biocon Foundation, 
diagnosis of oral cancer 
Bangalore, KLE Institute of Dental Sciences, 
 Frontline health care providers can be utilized for early oral 
Bangalore, Axxonet System Technologies Pvt Ltd. 
cancer detection program 
Bangalore  
 Electronic Data Capture is reliable modes to improve the 
compliance for follow up Funder: Biocon Foundation  
 Intra-oral photographs serve as a good tool to create awareness 
and educate on importance self examination of the mouth  Contact Information: 
Biocon Foundation | Rani Desai, Head, Strategy & 
Conclusion Operations (tel: +91-80-2808-2178, mobile: +91-
98-45-548528) 
mHealth approach for oral cancer early detection is feasible. Using 
front line health care providers will be one of the best approaches to See References on page 89. 
down stage oral cancer.  
 
mHealth Compendium Volume 4  |  73 
