 
 
 
 
 
Research Agenda 
2015 
  
Acknowledgements 
On behalf of the entire Mobile Alliance for Maternal Action (MAMA) family, we want to thank the MAMA founding 
partners for their visionary leadership and support for the evaluation and research efforts undertaken with the 
MAMA Country Programs. We would especially like to thank the U.S. Agency for International Development, 
Johnson & Johnson, the Translating Research into Action Project, the World Health Organization’s Innovations 
Working Group as well as the Johns Hopkins Bloomberg School of Public Health for their financial and/or advisory 
support of these research studies. 
Recognition is due to all of the MAMA research and evaluation partners for their tireless efforts in carrying out 
these studies, including International Centre for Diarrhoeal Disease Research, Bangladesh (icddr,b) Wits 
Reproductive Health and HIV Research Institute (South Africa) and The Foundation for Research in Health Systems 
(India). Special gratitude also goes to Dr. Patricia Mechael at the United Nations Foundation for her vision and 
guidance in the research study designs and in the development of this research agenda.  
We would also like to acknowledge the lead implementing partners of the MAMA Country Programs, who have 
worked closely with the research partners to ensure that the design and methodologies used are in line with the 
program strategies and goals. They are: Dnet in Bangladesh, Praekelt Foundation in South Africa and Advancing 
Reduction in Mortality and Morbidity of Mothers, Children and Neonates (ARMMAN) in India. 
 
Founding partners: 
 
Implementing partners: 
 
 
Research partners: 
  
MAMA Research Agenda, March 2015  i | P a g e  
 
Contents 
 
Introduction .......................................................................................................................................................... 1 
MAMA Levels of Change and Priority Outcomes ............................................................................................. 1 
Current Evidence .............................................................................................................................................. 3 
Early Evidence from MAMA .............................................................................................................................. 5 
MAMA Outcome-Level Research .......................................................................................................................... 7 
Contribution vs. Attribution ............................................................................................................................. 8 
Domains and Data Sources ............................................................................................................................... 8 
Cost Utility ...................................................................................................................................................... 10 
Conclusion ........................................................................................................................................................... 11 
Annex 1: Evidence Hierarchy …………………………………………………………………………………………………………………….... 12 
 
 
  
MAMA Research Agenda, March 2015  ii | P a g e  
 
 
List of Acronyms 
ANC Antenatal Care 
ARV Antiretrovirals 
Hb Hemoglobin 
HH Household 
IVR Interactive Voice Response 
KABP Knowledge, Attitude, Behaviors and Practices 
LiST Lives Saved Tool 
MAMA Mobile Alliance for Maternal Action 
MNCH Maternal, Neonatal and Child Health 
PMTCT Prevention of Mother-to-Child Transmission 
PNC Post-natal Care 
RCT Randomized Control Trial 
SMS Short Message Service/Text Message Service 
Tx Treatment 
 
MAMA Research Agenda, March 2015  iii | P a g e  
 
Introduction 
The Mobile Alliance for Maternal Action (MAMA) aims to improve the health and well-being of pregnant 
women and their newborns and infants through age- and stage-based messages delivered via mobile phones.  
The MAMA model is based on the expectation that women’s and families’ increased access to targeted 
health information will lead to improved knowledge, behaviors and practices, and in turn, those 
improvements will lead to improved health outcomes. Each of MAMA’s three current country programs – 
Bangladesh, South Africa and India – has identified priority intermediate-level health outcomes related to 
change in knowledge, at-home preventive behaviors and seeking of health services that are measurable, 
relevant and within the realm of influence of each MAMA program.   
In order to provide evidence of change through MAMA’s programs, the MAMA Global team has been 
working with research partners in each country to develop rigorous study designs to evaluate MAMA’s 
impact on priority health and behavior outcomes. The socio-cultural and health system contexts vary greatly 
throughout Bangladesh, South Africa, and India, resulting in distinct messaging content and implementation 
approaches. Relevant health and behavior outcomes have been prioritized and serve as the basis for setting 
the research agenda for each country program.   
In this effort, local research institutions have been supported to design and lead independent impact studies.  
While initial formative research focused on usability, feasibility and user satisfaction, MAMA now has on-
going and planned trials measuring targeted behavior and health outcomes in each country.   
 
MAMA Levels of Change and Priority Outcomes 
The MAMA program components and strategies in Bangladesh, South Africa, and India are maturing and the 
number of subscribers continue to grow. These programs offer optimal conditions to explore research 
questions on effectiveness in fostering behavior change. MAMA research teams have prioritized local health 
issues, domains and levels of change to be tested and explored by research partners. Figure 1 below maps 
the levels of change intended from a MAMA program along with the corresponding health issues and 
domains prioritized for research. It is a compilation of measurable health inputs, outputs, outcomes, and 
impact measures. 
The base of the framework illustrates inputs and outputs related to increasing women’s access to 
information. Research questions along this level rely on operational data collected through the delivery of 
the messaging program. Most formative research studies focus on this level, exploring questions of customer 
acquisition strategies, cultural appropriateness, trust, satisfaction, comprehension of messages, and peer 
promotion of the service. Most of the early MAMA research focused on this level of change and progress.  
Many additional questions on this level have not yet been explored but remain important to the mHealth 
sector, including: What do best practices look like for linking or integrating with national health systems? 
What effect does subscribership in mHealth messaging programs have on mobile phone literacy and use of 
other mobile services, including mobile money? 
 
MAMA Research Agenda, March 2015  1 | P a g e  
 
Figure 1: Levels of Change and Priority Outcomes 
 
 
 
Formative research findings indicate that MAMA subscribers feel more confident and aware of health issues, 
needs and related services. However, the middle level of our framework has informed more questions that 
new in-depth studies seek to answer by linking knowledge, behaviors and actions. MAMA research teams 
have designed and are currently implementing studies to assess whether MAMA mobile messaging programs 
are affecting the health-related actions of new and expecting mothers. Emerging questions include: Does 
increased awareness translate into improved self-efficacy? How are the messages used to support household-
level discussions on health-related planning and actions? How are the messages affecting discourse on 
parental gender roles? 
The ultimate goal of any health behavior change effort is to improve behaviors known to reduce conditions 
and risks linked to death or a compromised quality of life. The top level of our framework highlights biological 
markers related to country-specific health priorities that each MAMA Country Program is designed to 
address. For South Africa, prioritized health outcomes primarily focus on the prevention of mother to child 
transmission of HIV (PMTCT). In India, the health priorities are related to anemia as well as child nutrition and 
growth. For Bangladesh, the health outcomes of interest cut across the maternal, newborn, and child health 
continuum of care. The research studies will track and compare changes in biological markers as key 
outcomes to assess effectiveness of the MAMA programs. All studies are designed to include statistically 
significant samples, scientific comparators and high confidence levels. Findings from MAMA Bangladesh and 
MAMA South Africa are planned to be shared in 2015, and India will follow in 2016. 
MAMA Research Agenda, March 2015  2 | P a g e  
 
 
Current Evidence 
While there is general consensus on the potential of mobile messaging programs to improve MNCH and focus 
groups and one-on-one interviews show positive impacts, the mHealth sector still lacks rigorous, quantitative 
evidence linking mobile messaging programs to significant changes in behavioral, and more importantly, 
health outcomes. Among other things, this evidence gap limits the integration or mainstreaming of mobile 
messaging strategies into national health systems.1 
In 2013, the US Government and UNICEF convened a summit of health communication experts to review 
evidence associated with population-level behavior changes necessary to advance child survival and healthy 
development in children under 5 years of age in low- and middle-income countries. A discussion paper 
followed in the Journal of Health Communication posits that there is evidence to demonstrate effectiveness 
in changing cognitive abilities, knowledge, and attitudes, but the evidence remains minimal for behaviors 
linked to child survival2.  Below are the experts’ recommendations based on their review of the evidence: 
1.) Mobile messaging programs should be integrated with broader health systems programs; and 
2.) Studies on program effectiveness and implementation science for optimal scaling should be 
prioritized for research.3  
To track the evolving evidence on the effects of mobile messaging on MNCH, the MAMA Global team maps 
and ranks the evidence along a hierarchy of scientific rigor (See Table 1).    
                                                             
1 Jo Y, Labrique AB, Lefevre AE, Mehl G, Pfaff T, et al. (2014) Using the Lives Saved Tool (LiST) to Model mHealth Impact on 
Neonatal Survival in Resource-Limited Settings. PLoS ONE 9 (7): e102224. 
2 Higgs ES, Goldberg AB, Labrique AB, Cook SH, Schmid C, Cole CF, Obregon R. Understanding the Role of mHealth and Other 
Media Interventions for Behavior Change to Enhance Child Survival and Development in Low- and Middle-Income Countries: An 
Evidence Review. Journal of Health Communication. 2014;19:164-189. 
3 Ibid. 
MAMA Research Agenda, March 2015  3 | P a g e  
 
 
Table 1: Evidence Hierarchy of Mobile Messaging for MNCH 
 
   
MAMA Research Agenda, March 2015     4 | P a g e  
 
 
This hierarchy illustrates several important studies revealing significantly improved care-seeking by mothers 
enrolled in mobile messaging programs. Most notable are the randomized controlled trials carried out to 
examine effects of mobile messaging programs in Malawi and Zanzibar. In Malawi, an external evaluation 
study of the Chipatala Cha Pa Foni project demonstrated increased uptake of proven home- and facility-
based practices among the intervention group, using a sample size of more than 6,000 women.4 In Zanzibar, a 
pilot study conducted on the Wired Mothers intervention by researchers from the University of Copenhagen 
found that the mobile service significantly increased the proportion of women receiving recommended 
antenatal care and delivering with a skilled birth attendant, with more women receiving preventive health 
services, and more women with antepartum complications identified and referred.5 
This evidence, however limited, can be used to inform governments, donors, implementers and other 
industry partners as they invest in further mobile messaging interventions and additional rigorous research 
studies.6  There are increasing signs of maturity as mHealth strategies are considered more seriously for low- 
and middle-income country contexts, e.g., donors are providing support for more robust studies to measure 
effectiveness and costs and academic institutions and other global health agencies are increasingly 
conducting reviews of the latest evidence.7 
 
Early Evidence from MAMA 
MAMA’s early findings from formative research where small numbers of subscribers were sampled and the 
research objectives focused on satisfaction, acceptability and usability of the service, the technology and the 
messaging content. Enrollment data continues to be analyzed to understand the extent to which subscribers 
belong to the population groups targeted in each country. The early MAMA findings have been positive and 
encouraging regarding subscribers’ satisfaction and trust in the service; however, the findings remain at the 
lower-level types of scientific rigor. While structured and systematic, survey methods used lacked significant 
sample sizes as well as scientific comparators (i.e., a baseline or a control group) at the outcome level. 
The Evidence Hierarchy document (Annex 1) details primary data gathered and released thus far by MAMA 
Country Program research teams in Bangladesh and South Africa.   
                                                             
4  Watkins, Susan Cotts; Robinson, Amanda and Dalious, Michael. "Evaluation of the Information and Communications 
Technology for Maternal, Newborn and Child Health Project" Invest in Knowledge Initiative, December 2013. 
5 Lund et al, "Mobile phones improve antenatal care attendance in Zanzibar: a cluster randomized controlled trial" BMC 
Pregnancy and Childbirth 2014, 14:29 (17 January 2014) 
Lund S, Hemed M, Nielsen B, Said A, Said K, Makungu M, Rasch V. “Mobile phones as a health communication tool to improve 
skilled attendance at delivery in Zanzibar: a cluster-randomised controlled trial.” BJOG 2012;119:1256–1264. 
6 Philbrick, W.C., “mHealth and MNCH, State of the Evidence”, mHealth Alliance and United Nations Foundation, January 2013, 
page 6. 
7 Agarwal S, Labrique A. Newborn Health on the Line; the Potential mHealth Applications. Journal of American Medical 
Association. 2014;312(3):229-230. 
MAMA Research Agenda, March 2015  5 | P a g e  
 
 
Table 2: Hierarchy of MAMA Evidence
 
 
MAMA Research Agenda, March 2015     6 | P a g e  
 
 
MAMA Outcome-Level Research 
MAMA has entered a new phase of research where research partners are exploring the effectiveness of the 
MAMA programs in improving knowledge, behavior, and practices that are linked to improved health status. 
In India and South Africa, this research also includes questions around the cost utility of the MAMA program. 
The table below provides an overview of the studies currently underway in Bangladesh, South Africa and 
India. 
Table 3: MAMA’s Current Outcome-level Studies 
 Research Questions Methodology Timeframe 
1) Does the messaging program have a positive Qualitative studies using semi- 2012 – 2015 
impact on a mother’s antenatal and postnatal care structured interviews, focus groups, and 
practices? key informant interviews. 
2) For those women who adhere to the Quantitative study using retrospective 
recommendations, do they have a positive impact observational study with propensity 
on their health, and the health of their child? score matching of treatment and 
standard of care groups. 
3) What aspects of the messaging are most 
effective in prompting women who are enrolled to 
take action? 
1) What is the effect of dosage/exposure of stage- Due to the launch of MomConnect in 2014 - 2015 
based text messages on improving MNCH South Africa, study of the SMS program 
outcomes? is retrospective. The methodology 
includes: 
2) Does co-enrollment into a text message and 
mobi- platform service improve infant health - Clinical records review  of 
(immunizations) and maternal outcomes (ANC treatment and standard of care 
attendance), compared to a historical cohort of groups 
pregnant women that received the standard of - Semi-structured interviews 
care? (post-intervention) 
- Analysis of intervention and 
3) What are the cost and outcome differences standard of care costs 
between the intervention and standard of care? 
MAMA Research Agenda, March 2015  7 | P a g e  
 
South Africa Bangladesh 
 
 Research Questions Methodology Timeframe 
Does the intervention lead to: A prospective cohort study, using 2015 - 2016 
intervention and control design. The 
 1. An increase in uptake of routine and risk- methodology includes: 
related health services by women during 
pregnancy and until the baby is one year old? - Clinical records review  of 
treatment and standard of care 
2. Improvements in hemoglobin levels at the time groups 
of delivery? - Semi-structured interviews (pre-
intervention and after baby turns 
3. A reduction in infant under-nutrition? one year old) 
- Analysis of intervention and 
standard of care costs 
 
Contribution vs. Attribution 
Social and behavioral change are seldom attributable to one factor; hence, MAMA Country Programs’ 
research studies are geared for measuring contribution to outcome-level impact as opposed to attribution.  
The complex nature of the social environments make it difficult to attribute any change to the mobile 
messaging service alone. Causal explanations in MAMA evaluation studies would be overly ambitious or 
simplistic due to many influencing variables, especially considering that most MAMA country contexts have 
many actors undertaking a variety of efforts aimed at improving knowledge, behaviors and practices relating 
to maternal and child health. It is also rare that a demand generation initiative is not paired with the 
appropriate supply-side response. Thus, the aim of the MAMA studies is to ascertain the correlation between 
mobile messaging and key behaviors and outcomes of interest.  
 
Domains and Data Sources 
The main maternal actions of interest for MAMA programs occur in two main domains: in the household and 
in the health facility. Potential changes related to MNCH within the household domain include control and 
influence over household expenditures and health-related decisions, self-care, caregiving to infants, and 
support for uptake of clinical services. The best possible source of information about these household level 
actions and changing dynamics are the women and household members themselves. These data are 
gathered using a variety of quantitative and qualitative methodologies in all three current studies.   
Clinical records and registers are often the most reliable source of information on health services attended 
and clinical outcomes. While clinic records can have fundamental data quality weaknesses, such as 
completeness, these sources can be incredibly informative in terms of when individuals accessed various 
preventive and curative services as well as data on the health status of the mother and baby. Before research 
teams embark on studies that rely upon clinical records as a source, a review of a sample of records is 
conducted to assess the viability of the records as a source. 
MAMA Research Agenda, March 2015  8 | P a g e  
 
India 
 
In India, anemia is one of the main direct causes of delivery complications and maternal death. Early 
identification of severe anemia and regular monitoring of treatment is important for safe delivery for mother 
and child. Thus, the MAMA program in India gives a great deal of importance to the prevention and 
treatment of anemia. Figure 2 below illustrates how the different levels of change across the household and 
clinic domains could jointly contribute to improvement in a woman’s hemoglobin levels. 
 
Figure 2: Example of Potential Pathway of Change (Hemoglobin levels) 
 
 
MAMA research partners in India and South Africa have identified key data points within clinical and patient 
records that will be used to validate self-reported claims of certain behaviors and practices, especially the 
uptake of MNCH-related clinical services. 
Table 4 below reveals the prioritized health and behavioral outcomes and sources used to collect data on 
both MAMA subscribers and nonsubscribers. Clinical records are available in India and South Africa to explore 
the level of change beyond the self-reported, such as actual services attended and when, as well as results of 
biological marker tests.    
 
 
 
 
 
 
MAMA Research Agenda, March 2015  9 | P a g e  
 
 
Table 4: Prioritized Health and Behavior Outcomes  
 
 
Cost Utility 
In addition to the studies on health and behavior outcomes of MAMA users, research teams in South Africa 
and India will also undertake cost utility analyses of the MAMA programs in those countries. They will do so 
by assessing the cost of delivering the messaging service alongside the health outcomes experienced by those 
in the intervention groups as compared to the control groups. This component leverages the Lives Saved Tool 
and is intended to help inform health policy makers and program managers.       
 
  
MAMA Research Agenda, March 2015  10 | P a g e  
 
 
Conclusion 
MAMA has prioritized assessing the effectiveness and impact of its country program interventions in 
Bangladesh, South Africa and India, as well as any future country program. Each country research team has 
designed a mixed-methods experimental study that maps to the overall MAMA research framework and 
applies similar quantitative methodologies to enable comparisons to be made between MAMA country 
programs. These studies include statistically significant samples with control groups, to improve the quality of 
scientific rigor being used to evaluate the interventions. The ultimate aim of this effort is to contribute to the 
evidence base for mHealth and MAMA’s momentum toward scale, sustainability and integration as part of 
countries’ standards of practice. The priorities for these studies include the use of clinical data on services 
and biological markers to validate self-reported claims of behavior change. When possible, cost utility studies 
of the interventions have also been incorporated.  Findings of this research is planned to be disseminated 
directly through MAMA publications and through the submission of abstracts and papers to peer-reviewed 
journals. 
MAMA Research Agenda, March 2015  11 | P a g e  
 
 
MAMA Research Agenda, March 2015  12 | P a g e  
 
 
 
MAMA Research Agenda, March 2015  13 | P a g e  
 
 
