Digital Documentation of 
COVID-19 Certificates (DDCC)
Communication materials for policy makers 
and program managers
Acknowledgements
This work was made possible through the support of the WHO and was 
conducted by Vital Wave. 
Special thanks are also extended to the organizations that offered their 
time and shared their expertise: the Bill and Melinda Gates Foundation, 
CDC, GAVI, UNICEF, and the World Bank. 
Country support for implementation of DDCC is being coordinated through 
Digital Health Centre of Excellence (DICE), a multi-agency mechanism co-
led by WHO and UNICEF. 
https://www.digitalhealthcoe.org/
2
How to use these and other DDCC materials
DDCC Guidance and Communication Materials
DDCC Guidance provides guidance to adapt DDCC Overview summarizes the key concepts 
and implement digital certificate programs for and value of digital certificates and supports 
vaccination status and SARS-CoV-2 diagnostic policy makers and program managers to make 
test result use cases in country. the case for sustainable investment in national 
digital certificate programs. 
Operational Guidance elaborates on technical 
and operational concepts contained in the 
DDCC Overview with detail on how to estimate 
costs and operationalize a national digital 
certificate program.
The DDCC FAQ is a companion document to 
Vaccination Status (VS) Test Result (TR) the DDCC communication materials, providing 
detailed answers to frequently asked 
questions.
See also: FAQ – 1. How can countries use Digital Documentation of 
COVID-19 Certificates (DDCC) materials? 3
Target audiences for these materials
Policy Makers Program Managers
• Policy makers, digital leads for • Program managers, operational 
ministries (e.g., health, ICT, border support staff (e.g., government,  
control) implementing partner)
• Need to make decisions to inform • Need to evaluate many certificate 
policy and advocate for funding options and quickly choose best 
solution, make operational 
Key Contents decisions, and plan 
• Value implementation
• Concepts
• Why invest Key Contents
• Pre-requisites
• What’s needed
• How to determine cost
• How to make a plan
See also: FAQ – 2. Who is the audience for DDCC materials? 4
DDCC Overview
5
Digital Documentation 
of COVID-19 Certificates 
(DDCC) is a standard 
and guidance for health 
certificate generation 
and status verification 
and validation across 
domestic and 
international use cases, 
at any stage of digital 
system maturity.
See also: FAQ – 3. What is the DDCC? 
6
DDCC guidance is: 
• Guidance for capturing the minimum data set to document 
an individual’s vaccination status and SARS-CoV-2 diagnostic 
test results 
DDCC is: • A mechanism for linking different certificate products into a 
compatible certificate for issue via paper, PDF, or 
a digitally signed HL7 smartphone
• A flexible solution that allows countries to customize for 
FHIR document that different use cases and data elements
represents the core • An approach that is adaptable for future use cases and 
data set content for guidance, beyond COVID-19
the relevant COVID-19 
DDCC guidance is not: 
certificate • Guidance on national COVID-19 travel or vaccination policies
• An International Certificate of Vaccination or Prophylaxis 
(i.e., “yellow card”)
• An identity card or passport
See also: FAQ – 3. What is the DDCC? 
7
The DDCC contains implementation guidance for policymakers 
and requirements and specifications for technology implementers
Implementation guidance 
• Data protection principles
• Ethical considerations
• National governance considerations
Requirements and specifications for technology implementers 
• Functional and non-functional requirements for different use cases
• Core data sets, defining data that is required for DDCC:VS and DDCC:TR certificates 
Vaccination Status (VS) Test Result (TR)
and optional data elements
• DDCC HL7 FHIR Implementation Guide detailing data standards for consistent 
representation and interoperability
See also: FAQ – 4. What is included in DDCC Guidance? 8
DDCC guidance supports the development of standardized health certificates 
for COVID-19 vaccination status and SARS-CoV-2 diagnostic test result use cases
Digital Documentation of 
COVID-19 Certificates 
(DDCC)
Vaccination Status Test Results 
(DDCC:VS) (DDCC:TR)
Use Cases
Proof of Negative Proof of Previous 
Proof of 
Continuity of Care SARS-CoV-2 Test SARS-CoV-2 
Vaccination 
Result Infection
The vaccination certificate is presented The vaccination certificate is The test result certificate is The test result certificate is 
to a healthcare worker so that presented to border control presented as proof of the presented as proof of the bearer’s 
vaccination status can be considered as and other authorities as proof bearer’s negative SARS- previous SARS-CoV-2 infection 
part of the bearer’s health care and that the bearer has received CoV-2 diagnostic test result with a positive result from a 
personal health record vaccine for COVID-19 SARS-Cov-2 diagnostic test
See also: FAQ – 5. What are the use cases for Vaccination Status and 
Test Result certificates? 9
DDCC supports three different certificate issuing modalities
Traditional paper record Digital representation of Purely digital (e.g., 
(e.g., paper certificate with traditional paper record stored in a smartphone 
a pre-printed QR code and a (e.g., PDF file or application or on a cloud-
handwritten unique ID) certificate printout) based server)
See also: FAQ – 6. How are Vaccination Status and Test Result 
certificates issued?
10
DDCC defines the standardized core data set* required to generate, verify, 
and validate certificates for test results and vaccination status
Test Result 
Legend: Type of Test + / - Test result Certificate issuer
Required data element
Date and time of 
Optional data element th7 Countrysample collection 123A.. Health Certificate Identifier (HCID)
Test centre or facility 
Pathogen targeted v2.. Certificate schema version
name
Specimen Test brand 
th
7 th Certificate valid from / until
sample origin 9Manufacturer 
Vaccination Status
Name &
Date of Birth Vaccine brand and batch
(minimum) Vaccine / prophylaxis Manufacturer or market Certificate issuer
Dose # authorization holder
123A.. Health Certificate Identifier (HCID)
Date of vaccination Country
th Date valid from
7
Due date of next dose Administering centre
v2.. Certificate schema version
Health worker and th
Agent targeted 7 th Certificate valid from / until9
signature
*Countries may extend this core data set to store other data based on their requirements. Required and optional data elements may vary depending on certificate use case.
See also: FAQ – 7. What standardized data does the digital certificate 
include?
11
Digital Documentation of COVID-19 Certificates are human- and machine-readable packages 
of data in a standard HL7 FHIR “Bundle” containing all information necessary to verify and 
validate vaccination status or test results
Example FHIR Bundle* contents for a Vaccination Status 
certificate: 
• Unique identifier for the certificate bundle
• Type of FHIR Bundle (e.g., document)
• Date and time FHIR Bundle was assembled
• Link to health certificate identifier (HCID)
• Health information including: 
• Patient details
• Organization where immunization was administered
• Immunization details (e.g., type of vaccine, lot number)
• Recommended date of next immunization (if applicable)
• QR code representation of health information
• Signature of issuing public health authority to verify the authenticity of the 
certificate
* In FHIR, a “Bundle” is simply a container for a collection of resources. DDCC uses a FHIR Bundle 
to bring together the required resources related to a certificate into a single document.
Source: https://worldhealthorganization.github.io/ddcc/StructureDefinition-DDCCDocument.html
See also: FAQ – 8. What digital health interoperability standard does 
DDCC certificates use?
12
DDCC is an umbrella specification that is compatible with other 
digital certificate formats
Countries are producing digital certificates COVID-19 vaccination status and SARS-CoV-2 diagnostic 
test result use cases and linking those certificates with national, regional, and global standards.  
DDCC provides a common international and extensible format that is interoperable with other 
available digital certificate formats currently used in African, European, and South-East Asia regions 
and supports specific renderings of certificates that can be verified through these specifications.
Several COVID-19 certificates in the marketplace
Digital Infrastructure 
for Vaccination Open EU Digital Covid Smart Health Custom Country 
Credentialing Certificates (DCC) Cards Solutions
(DIVOC)
See also: FAQ – 9. How are countries approaching digital certificates 
today? 13 Source: https://dhis2.org/digital-certificates/
DDCC guidance recommends ethical considerations as integral to 
the design and deployment of any digital certificate solution
Ethical Considerations Recommendations
• To protect and promote the welfare of 
1. The scope of use of digital certificates should be 
individuals, communities and the 
clearly defined
population as a whole
2. Potential benefits, risks, and costs should be 
• To ensure equal treatment for all 
assessed before introduction of a digital certificate
individuals and prevent or mitigate, as 
3. Obtaining and using a digital certificate should be as 
far as possible, avoidable and unfair 
inclusive and fair as possible
health inequalities (i.e., health 
4. All necessary measures should be put in place to 
inequities) within the boundaries of the 
protect participants for continuity of care
state
5. All communication should be clear and transparent
• To create and maintain trust in public 
6. The digital certificate program should be constantly 
health activities as part of the health-
monitored for impact and adjusted as necessary
care system
See also: FAQ – 11. What ethical considerations and data protection 
principles need to be considered in a digital certificate solution?
14
Value of Digital Certificates
15
Complicated, evolving scientific landscape around COVID-19 and lack 
Global Situation of global policy coordination on vaccination status and test result 
certificates creates challenges for Member States
Public Health Verifier challenge
Potentially incompatible certificates
Challenge limit ability of healthcare workers, Need
border agents, and other authorities 
to validate vaccination and SARS-
Many options and limited CoV-2 diagnostic test result status Standards-compliant 
guidance slows deployment solutions that can be widely 
of certificate solutions, adopted in multiple 
Beneficiary Challenge
making it difficult to countries in the immediate 
Lack of compatible certificates limit 
validate vaccinations and term and interoperate with 
ability of individuals to hold valid 
SARS-CoV-2 diagnostic test information regarding their other solutions
results status vaccination and SARS-CoV-2 
diagnostic test result status
See also: FAQ – 12. What is the need for 
standardized and interoperable certificates? 16
Standardized digital certificates have advantages over paper 
to prevent fraud and other issues
Paper certificates or Digital systems ensure 
!
photocopies are prone to authenticated certificates and 
fraud and a host of other precise data can be shared 
issues (e.g., loss, damage, domestically and 
unauthorized use) internationally
This provides a technical basis to 
Incidence of fraudulent health 
support bilateral agreements (EU 
certificates is expanding rapidly around 
equivalency) to recognize legal 
the world. Health data can be sold for 
requirements for vaccination status 
nearly 50 times payment card data on 
and SARS-CoV-2 diagnostic test results 
the black market1.
across borders
See also: FAQ – 13. What advantages do digital 1 Trustwave Global Cybersecurity Report (2018)
certificates have over paper formats? 
17
Standardized digital certificates help rebuild economies and 
strengthen health systems to address COVID-19 and beyond
Supports Reopening Economies Increases Equitable Access to Strengthens Digital Health 
Health Information Infrastructure
Enables verification and validation required to Brings authenticated information into the Standardizes health content and provides 
facilitate cross-border movement, commerce, context of care and personal health records infrastructure that strengthens health 
and economic security and access certain via digital tools (e.g., digital immunization information exchange capabilities
socioeconomic activities records)
Improves Exchange of Health Adapts to Country and Regional Supports Local Solution 
Information Ecosystems Development
Provides clear guidance for designing systems Works for central or federated certificate Supports local developers and technology 
that easily interoperate with existing digital tools issuers and generates QR codes that are providers to develop solutions for COVID-19 
(e.g., vaccination campaign systems and compatible with other certificate programs and future digital health interventions by 
immunization registers) and build a foundation (e.g., EU, DIVOC) providing a flexible standard that can be 
for long-term health information exchange adapted to local needs
See also: FAQ – 14 & 15. What value do standardized digital certificates 
bring to country health systems / technical implementers? 18
Program Managers Policy Makers
Standards-based certificates and guidance benefit decision makers and 
their technical partners
Guidance Digital Certificates
Policy Makers Healthcare Workers Border Control and other Verifiers
(Vaccination Status)
Allows faster and more accurate
Guidance enables usable and Clinical decision support ensures interpretation of vaccination status or 
compatible digital certificates and health worker knows vaccination SARS-CoV-2 diagnostic test result in 
supports rapid dissemination and status of patient and can provide a accordance with rapidly changing science, 
application of new policy subsequent dose and better care policies, and agreements
based on guidelines 
Program Managers Software Developer Individuals
Guidance and clearly defined business Ecosystem of open-source FHIR Provides standardized core data that 
requirements support easier tools reduces software applies across borders and use cases
implementation, reduce vendor lock-in development time
See also: FAQ – 16. What value does DDCC certificates and guidance 
bring to individual stakeholders? 19
Next steps for policy makers
Identify applicable policies that are in place and any gaps 
for use of digital certificates
Make certificate decisions to inform policy development
• Short-term (COVID-19) vs. long-term approach to 
solution development 
• Issuing modality: paper vs. digital representation
• Which QR specification to support 
• How to identify individuals (e.g., passport, national 
ID, health ID)
Consider intergovernmental recognition of certificates to 
inform negotiations and discussion with other countries 
and regional networks  
Additional Support: Requests for technical assistance can be made through DICE. 
contact@digitalhealthcoe.org
See also: FAQ – 35. What are next steps for countries 
considering digital certificate implementation? 20
Making the Case for Investment
21
Make the case for the upfront 
investment in digital certificates, 
infrastructure, and policy
• Upfront investment supports standards-based digital health 
interventions now and reduces their costs in the long run
• Digital certificate and services are extensible. They can be 
updated to include additional data or functionalities to respond 
to policy changes such as evolving traveler testing requirements
• Infrastructure can be used to service other types of certificates 
in health, such as digital immunization records, or other health 
domains
• Investments in policy and human capacity build a foundation of 
trust that extends beyond country borders to improve world-
wide response to COVID-19 and future epidemics
See also: FAQ – 17. Why invest in digital certificates 
over traditional paper certificates? 22
Understand the digital health ecosystem to estimate costs and upfront 
investment required for a long-term digital certificate solution 
Leadership and Governance • Which regulatory agencies (e.g., pharmaceutical, health, ICT) need   
• Is there an existing department within the ministry of health that   to be engaged? 
will be accountable for this work? • Will there need to be agreements established bilaterally?
Strategy and Services and Applications Legislation, Workforce
Investment • Are point-of-care applications used to support immunization? Policy, and 
• Are there existing products in the marketplace that would fit your Compliance • How will training 
needs? and technical 
• What are the support for health 
potential benefits, workers and 
risks, and costs of Standards and Interoperability • Are policies for 
implementing a appropriate use 
officials be 
• Is there an existing interoperability framework? and data provided? DDCC solution? • Are there existing systems that capture the minimum data for protection in • Are change 
identification of an individual? place? management 
• Are digital health processes and 
Infrastructure data sharing and support in place?
consent 
• Is there adequate supply of equipment (e.g., mobile devices for • Is there a ready management 
health workers and verifiers, printers for certificates)? domestic supply policies in place? of digital health 
• How can existing digital health investments be leveraged? workers? 
• Is a public key infrastructure (PKI) in place that can also be 
leveraged to support digitally signing DDCC?
See also: FAQ – 18. What key considerations impact upfront Graphic and information adapted from the WHO ITU 
investments for a long-term digital certificate solution? 23 eHealth National Strategy Toolkit. 
Estimate costs for each implementation phase to align with 
country context and intended use cases
underline = significant cost driver
Ongoing / all phases • Governance
• Management and staffing
Development Deployment Integration and Scale Sustained 
and setup • Equipment and hardware interoperability • Printing operations
• Technology adaptation • Testing • Establishing trust • Human resources • Refresher training
• Training frameworks • IT licensing / service • Adaptive management
• Roll-out • Interoperability with other provision • Communication
• Outreach and raising systems • IT scalability • Technology maintenance
awareness
See also: FAQ – 19. What types of costs need to be 
considered across digital certificate implementation phases? 
24
Typical costs Illustrative Breakdown of Total Cost of Ownership*
By Implementation Phase Over Five Years
by phase for 
digital health Development and Setup (16%)
interventions*
Sustained 
Operations 
While exact costs will vary (47%) Deployment, Integration 
depending on country context, 
and Interoperability 
sustained operations over five 
(27%)
years average close to 50% of 
total cost.
Scale (10%)
Development and setup costs, Source: Understanding Total Cost of Ownership for Digital Health. https://digitalsquare.org/market-analytics.
commonly equated with the 
* Based on a comprehensive evaluation of costs for five, nationally scaled logistics management information systems (LMIS) 
“cost of a solution,” average used to manage stock and distribution of life-saving commodities. This is provided as a point of reference since there is no 
less than 20% of total cost. reliable cost data specific to COVID digital certification implementation projects.
See also: FAQ – 20. How might costs for a digital certificate 
program break down by implementation phase? 
25
Create a transparent understanding of costs per phase to advocate for 
upfront investment and long-term government budget commitments
Planning &
Development Deployment Integration Scale Sustained Operations
Establishing a plan for 
Upfront investment sustainable financing
required will vary 
depending on existing 1. Determine level of up-front 
infrastructure and human investment required for 
1 capacities available for use initial phases, depending 
on country context
2. Determine annual  
operating costs and obtain 
government commitment 
2 to  schedule annual  
operating costs under 
government budget (or 
long-term health system 
strengthening funding)
Time Sources of funding (illustrative):
Government-
See also: FAQ – 21. How should countries approach the sustainable Donor community managed investment
financing of digital certificate solutions over the long term? investment 
26
Cost
Seek funding through the digital health ecosystem or related national 
programs
Make a request through the Digital Health Centre of Excellence (DICE) to 
connect with implementing partners and access technical assistance 
(contact@digitalhealthcoe.org))
Work with leaders of related national digital health investments (e.g., 
electronic immunization registries or vaccine distribution programs) to 
identify shared resources or infrastructure 
Engage with regional groups working on certificate standards  (e.g., WHO, 
EU, DIVOC) to support bilateral agreements and knowledge sharing
See also: FAQ – 22. What sources of financing may be 
available to support DDCC implementation? 
27
Request technical assistance through DICE
Depending on the type of request, DICE may be able to 
provide either direct technical assistance or recommend Requests for technical assistance should come 
from a government institution or endorsed 
consultants, vendors, or in-country partner organizations 
partner and include a brief description of:
who can provide direct support. 
• The specific health system processes or functions that 
need to be addressed through the digital health 
DICE Technical Assistance Approach intervention.
• If COVID-19 vaccine related, how the need for the 
I. Needs digital health intervention 
analysis, (technology/system/platform) is described in the 
II. Platform IV. Results 
problem III. National Vaccine Deployment Plan (NVDP).
assessments and 
definition Deployment 
with recommend-
and readiness • How the digital health intervention is supported by a 
stakeholders ations
anticipated National eHealth or Digital Health strategy.
outcomes
• The main in-country stakeholders that should be 
included in the process.
Approximate timeframe: 3 weeks to 3 months
See also: FAQ – 23. How can countries request technical 
assistance through DICE? 28
Operational Guidance
29
Steps to plan and implement a digital certificate solution
1 Country Readiness: Determine country readiness to fulfill prerequisites: (1) Unique identification and (2) Public Key Infrastructure 
2 Use Case Planning: Determine the intended uses for a digital certificate system
3 Benefit and Cost Assessment: Assess the potential risks, benefits, and high-level costs of a digital certificate program
4 Policy Framework: Establish policies and a legal framework to support your intended uses of the digital certificate
5 Landscape Assessment: Determine whether to leverage existing digital systems that document certificate status or adopt a new system
6 Requirements Gathering: Gather health content requirements and system requirements for the intended use of your digital certificate
7 Finalize Plans and Budget: Finalize plans to develop, deploy, implement, and scale the solution
Development & Implementation
Development Integration and Sustained 
Deployment Scale
and setup interoperability operations
See also: FAQ – 24. What are the overall steps to planning 
and implementing a digital certificate solution? 30
1 Country Readiness
Investigate whether key prerequisites are in place to ensure 
trust before beginning digital certificate planning
Countries must determine an Countries must determine if national Public Key 
acceptable and ethical way to link Infrastructure (PKI) exists that can be used to 
certificates to the identity of the issue, verify, and sign digital certificates 
individual holding the certificate
• Suitable PKI may already be available for other domains 
• Name and date of birth are required (e.g., law enforcement, banking transactions). If not, the 
by DDCC. country must set one up. 
• Countries must decide if certificates • A PKI guarantees that the information contained in digital 
should be linked to additional unique certificates has been validated by an accredited authority.
identifiers (e.g., health ID, national ID 
• Each country is responsible for managing its own PKI 
number, passport number, 
through its Public Health Authority (PHA) or another 
biometrics), if available.
national delegated authority. 
See also: FAQ – 25. What pre-requisites need to be in place for country 
See Annex A for additional 
readiness prior to planning a digital certificate system (Step 1: Country 
Readiness)? detail on these key concepts31
2 Use Case Planning
Select one or more use case for digital certificates that support country 
policies, and determine which organizations are likely verifiers
Continuity of Care Proof of Vaccine SARS-CoV-2 Negative Proof of Previous SARS-
The vaccination certificate The vaccination certificate Test Results CoV-2 Infection
is presented to a is presented to border The test result certificate The test result certificate is 
healthcare worker so that control and other is presented as proof of presented as proof of the 
vaccination status can be authorities as proof that the bearer’s SARSCoV-2 bearer’s previous positive 
considered as part of the the bearer has received diagnostic test results result of SARS-CoV-2 
bearer’s health care and vaccine for COVID-19 infection
personal health record
Inputs Outputs
• National digital health or eHealth strategy (if one exists) • Problem statement detailing specific challenges that each 
• Documents including COVID-19 response intervention digital certificate use case will address
objectives, progress, and any evaluations • List of priorities for the digital certificate program that align 
• Organograms describing directorates or departments in the with national digital health strategy 
relevant government bodies, such as ministries of health, • Organogram for prospective digital certificate program
ICT, border control, and civil registrars • List of stakeholders to engage 
See also: FAQ – 26. How do countries determine priority use 
cases for digital certificates (Step 2: Use Case Planning)? 
32
3 Benefit and Cost Assessment
Conduct an assessment to understand risks, benefits, and high-level costs
Recommendations on ethical and privacy protections for design, development and implementation of digital certificates
1. The scope of use of digital certificates should be clearly defined 4. All necessary measures should be put in place to protect 
2. Potential benefits, risks, and costs should be assessed before participants for continuity of care
introduction of a digital certificate 5. All communication should be clear and transparent
3. Obtaining and using a digital certificate should be as inclusive 6. The digital certificate program should be constantly monitored 
and fair as possible for impact and adjusted as necessary
Inputs Outputs
• Documented objectives for digital certificate program • Current-state (“status quo”) workflow diagrams illustrating 
• Identified team and list of stakeholders to be engaged the user journey for vaccination and testing
throughout the planning and implementation process • Prioritized bottlenecks mapped to list of health system 
• Prospective personas for the digital certificate program challenges to be addressed
• Historical budgets and total cost of ownership (TCO) data for • Enabling-environment assessment defining possible 
comparable digital health interventions constraints 
• Knowledge sharing of digital certificate implementations in • High-level cost estimate to inform go / no-go decision to 
other countries to inform feasibility and total cost estimate proceed with program development
See also: FAQ – 27. How do countries conduct a benefit and cost 
assessment for digital certificate programs (Step 3: Benefit and Cost 
Assessment)?
33
4 Policy Framework
Establish policies and a legal framework to support appropriate use, data 
protection, and governance of the digital certificate
Additional governance considerations* 
Additional WHO guidance documents include: 
• Issuing digital certificates • Data management and • Technical considerations for implementing a risk-based approach to 
• Appropriate use of digital privacy protection international travel in the context of COVID-19: Interim guidance
certificates • Revocation of digital • Policy considerations for implementing a risk-based approach to 
international travel in the context of COVID-19 
• Verifying digital certificates certificates (informing • Interim guidance on considerations for implementing and adjusting public 
• Validating digital certificates individuals, informing health and social measures in the context of COVID-19
verifiers, remedy provision)
*in addition to the authorized DSC- sharing mechanism
Inputs Output
• Enabling-environment assessment • Detailed implementation plan for digital certificate program, 
• Ethical considerations specifying: 
• Personas and future state user task flow diagrams • Governance, workforce and training, links to strategy 
• High-level data requirements and national data privacy laws and investment plans
See also: FAQ – 28. What needs to be considered when 
establishing policies and a legal framework to support See Annex A for additional 
intended use of digital certificates (Step 4: Policy Framework)? detail on these key concepts34
5 Landscape Assessment
Determine whether to leverage existing digital systems that document 
certificate status or adopt a new system
Additional implementation consideration components
Leadership and Governance
• Decisions related to digital health investments and 
Strategy and Services and Applications Legislation, Workforce
selection of solutions should be guided by country 
Investment Policy, and 
strategy Standards and Interoperability Compliance
• Refer to the next slide for a series of questions to Infrastructure
guide this decision-making process
Inputs Outputs
• Defined future-state workflow and functional requirements • Core functional requirements for the planned digital certificate 
for digital certificate program  investment within the enterprise architecture 
• National digital health enterprise architecture (if available • Identification of which applications and shared services already 
collect data for certificates and which will require further investment
in country) 
• Linkages of digital certificate investment detailing the benefit to the 
broader set of digital health systems and enterprise architecture  
• Identified digital health interventions that capture the data required  
for the digital certificate program  
See also: FAQ – 29. How do countries assess existing digital 
systems and architecture (Step 5: Landscape Assessment)? 
35
5 Landscape Assessment
Identify data from existing data systems that can be pulled into the 
certificate generation service, if available
Test type and 
Laboratory Information manufacturer
Management Systems + / - Test result Associated activities
DD/MM/YY
Country • Data mapping determine Logistics Management 
/ Traceability Systems requirements for system 
Civil Registration integration 
& Vital Statistics Name & • Discussions with system 
Systems Date of 
Birth owners and establishing 
(minimum) #1 #2Vaccine brand Vaccine brand data sharing agreements 
and batch and batch
Country • Building and testing 
DD/MM/YY Country DD/MM/YY
system integrations
Vaccination 
Illustrative example Vaccination centre centre • Maintaining systems
of certificates Health 
worker
EHR / EIR
Systems
See also: FAQ – 30. How can data from existing digital 
health system be utilized for digital certificates (Step 5: 
Landscape Assessment)? 36
5 Landscape Assessment
Explore other ecosystem considerations that may impact how a new digital 
certificate system will be introduced and managed
Leadership and Governance • Is there an existing department within the ministry of health that will be accountable for this work? 
• Will there need to be agreements established bilaterally? 
Strategy and Investment Services and Applications Legislation, Policy, Workforce
• Is the DDCC solution • Are point-of-care applications used presently to support immunization? and Compliance • Is the value added by 
intended to be a short-term • Are there existing products in the marketplace that would fit your needs and • Are policies for the digital 
solution or a long-term adhere to international specifications and guidance? appropriate use and representation clearly 
digital vaccination data protection in communicated?
certificate or test result 
solution? Standards and Interoperability
place to address the • Are change 
ethical considerations management 
• What are the potential • Is there an existing interoperability framework to guide how DDCC can and data protection processes and 
benefits, risks and costs of interoperate with other existing solutions? principles of DDCC? support in place when 
implementing a DDCC • Are there reusable components, such as terminology services, that could be • For continuity of care, implementing DDCC? 
solution? incorporated? are digital health data • Is there a ready 
• What is the potential impact sharing and consent domestic supply of 
on public health and on the Infrastructure management policies digital health 
economy? • How can existing digital health investments be leveraged? in place? workers? Does this 
• What is the additional value • Consider the coverage of mobile phone adoption before pursuing a mobile-only • What review 
workforce have the 
added beyond using the processes are needed skillsets needed?solution. Is there broad mobile phone adoption and high coverage of mobile 
paper system only? phone networks outside the major urban areas? for newly developed 
policies?
• Is a PKI in place that can also be leveraged to support digitally signing DDCC 
digital documents?
See also: FAQ – 18. What key considerations impact upfront Graphic and information adapted from the WHO ITU eHealth 
investments for a long-term digital certificate solution? 37 National Strategy Toolkit. 
6 Requirements Gathering
Gather health content requirements and system requirements, and adapt 
DDCC guidance for the intended use of digital certificates
Example workflows, data requirements, and functional requirements
Inputs Outputs
• Enabling-environment assessment • Detailed implementation plan for digital certificate 
• Landscape analysis and data mapping results (Step 5) program, specifying: 
• Personas and future state user task flow diagrams • Relevant health and data content, infrastructure, 
• Functional and nonfunctional requirements for the digital existing digital systems, standards and interoperability 
certificate from the Technical Specifications and needs
Implementation Guide • Functional and nonfunctional requirements for the digital 
• Future state workflow with digital health interventions and 
certificate adapted to country needs
requirements for digital certificate program  
• National digital health architecture  
See also: FAQ – 31. How do countries gather solution requirements See Annex A for additional 
for digital certificates (Step 6: Requirements Gathering)? detail on these key concepts38
7 Finalize Plans and Budgets
Finalize plans and budget for all phases of implementation
Additional resources to support implementation
• WHO interoperability standard • General implementation guidance for digital health solutions 
• Example implementations • WHO international travel guidance 
• Software consistent with specifications’ dataset and architecture • WHO guidance on mass gatherings
• Example specifications that can be used to guide implementation 
Inputs Outputs
• Historical budgets and costs • Logic model for digital certificate implementation
• Implementation considerations for digital certificate • Implementation plan that is appropriate for the 
program environmental limitations 
• Historical and/or baseline data and analysis • Clear mechanism for obtaining and responding to feedback 
• Historical M&E and adaptive management plans from end users 
• Guidance from other digital certificate implementations • Detailed financial plan and costing (see next slides)
(e.g., EU, DIVOC)  • M&E plan, including for adaptive management and data use
See also: FAQ – 32. How do countries finalize plans to develop, deploy, 
implement, and scale digital certificates (Step 7: Plan for Development & 
Implementation)?
39
7 Finalize Plans and Budgets
Estimate detailed budget for each implementation phase to align with 
country context and intended use cases
underline = significant cost driver
Ongoing / all phases • Governance
• Management and staffing
Development Deployment Integration and Scale Sustained 
and setup • Equipment and hardware interoperability • Printing operations
• Technology adaptation • Testing • Establishing trust • Human resources • Refresher training
• Training frameworks • IT licensing / service • Adaptive management
• Roll-out • Interoperability with other provision • Communication
• Outreach and raising systems • IT scalability • Technology maintenance
awareness
See also: FAQ – 32. How do countries finalize plans to develop, deploy, 
implement, and scale digital certificates (Step 7: Plan for Development & 
Implementation)?
40
7 Finalize Plans and Budgets
Investigate country context to understand unique and variable costs
Relevant cost variances* Unique cost drivers
• Equipment: whether required equipment (e.g., • Governance and outreach: how much time 
mobile phones, printers) is already available and will be required to develop and socialize new 
can be shared across different interventions policies with the public and prospective 
• Training: how many people need to be trained and verifiers
how training is delivered (e.g., classroom-based • Establishing trust frameworks: how much 
training, on-the-job training) effort will be required to establish 
agreements between countries and ensure 
• Maintenance: how much and how frequently the 
certifications are accepted across borders
solution needs to change over time (e.g., to match 
rapidly changing policies) • Adaptive management: monitoring and 
evaluating use and uptake worldwide, and 
* See Understanding Total Cost of Ownership for Digital Health for more details on 
common cost variances and hidden costs for digital health interventions. adapting to emerging best practices
https://digitalsquare.org/market-analytics.
See also: FAQ – 33. What contextual factors need to be 
considered when estimating costs for a digital certificate 
program (Step 7: Finalize Plans and Budget )? 
41
7 Finalize Plans and Budgets
Estimate ongoing costs associated to governance across all phases  of 
implementation
Example activities* and five-year budget table
One-time 
Year Year Year Year Total 
Description Costs + 
2 3 4 5 Costs 
Year 1
Ongoing / all phases: Governance
Developing new policies for ongoing monitoring of use and impact
Allocate dedicated resources within the government or hire consultants to draft new 
policies for DDCC
Conduct ongoing consultations with key partners (e.g., industry associations, PHA, regional 
groups) to build consensus 
Seek formal approval or ratification of new policies with relevant government bodies
Socialize new policies with key stakeholders and the public
* Example activities for illustrative purposes only. Each country will define actual activities, level of effort required by new or existing human resources to complete activities, 
and the associated cost of human resources based on country context. 
See also: FAQ – 34. What are example costs for a digital 
certificate program (Step 7: Finalize Plans and Budget)? 
42
7 Finalize Plans and Budgets
Estimate upfront costs to adapt the DDCC standard to align with new or 
existing technologies to capture individual data 
Example activities* and five-year budget table
One-time 
Year Year Year Year Total 
Description Costs + 
2 3 4 5 Costs 
Year 1
Development and setup: Technology adaptation
Leveraging existing software systems (e.g., adapting EHR, EIR, and HMIS systems)**  
Map required data elements for certificate to existing systems
Adapt existing system to capture additional information (e.g., vaccines), if needed
Establish a link or integration with other electronic systems and digital health solutions 
(e.g., logistic management information systems (LMIS), lab management systems, 
Immunization eRegistry) to pull core data for DDCC
Ensure compliance with relevant national guidelines 
* Example activities for illustrative purposes only. Each country will define actual activities, level of effort required by new or existing human resources to complete activities, 
and the associated cost of human resources based on country context. 
** Existing systems that may already be used to capture relevant individual data required to generate digital certificates may include electronic health record (EHR) systems, 
electronic immunization registry (EIR) systems, and health management information systems (HMIS).
See also: FAQ – 34. What are example costs for a digital 
certificate program (Step 7: Finalize Plans and Budget)? 
43
7 Finalize Plans and Budgets
Estimate costs to raise awareness and establish trust in certificates both 
domestically and across borders
Example activities* and five-year budget table
One-time 
Total 
Description Costs + Year 2 Year 3 Year 4 Year 5
Costs 
Year 1
Deployment: Outreach and raising awareness
Communications on when, where, and how people can obtain digital certificates
Develop and draft communications materials for the public on obtaining a digital certificate
Conduct workshops or meetings with key stakeholders to finalize package of communications assets
Seek approval of communications materials with appropriate government body, if needed
Draft a communications plan, including outreach mechanisms and timeline 
Distribute communications materials to the public across key platforms
Integration and interoperability: Establishing trust frameworks 
Coordination for establishing bilateral agreements with other countries 
Allocate dedicated resources within the government to attend coordination meetings
Conduct ongoing consultations with key stakeholders across ministries on potential agreement
Seek formal approval of agreement with relevant government bodies
* Example activities for illustrative purposes only. Each country will define actual 
See also: FAQ – 34. What are example costs for a digital activities, level of effort required by new or existing human resources to complete 
certificate program (Step 7: Finalize Plans and Budget)? activities, and the associated cost of human resources based on country context. 
44
7 Finalize Plans and Budgets
Estimate costs to scale availability of digital certificates country-wide and 
sustain operations over years
Example activities* and five-year budget table
One-time 
Year Year Year Year Total 
Description Costs + 
2 3 4 5 Costs 
Year 1
Scale: Printing
With the paper-first approach: need for printing increases as more people are vaccinated and subsequently receive a physical vaccination certificate 
Forecast domestic requirements for high-volume printing capacity for paper forms 
Procure devices (e.g., printers) and related materials (e.g., toner, paper) needed at the vaccination site, 
sample collection sites, or in the back office
Provide continuous maintenance and replacement for devices and related materials, as needed
Sustained operations: Adaptive management
Monitoring and evaluation of digital certificate implementation practices and processes, with application of learnings 
Develop an M&E plan for digital certificates, including the adaptive management cycle 
Schedule regular meetings with key stakeholders to reflect on digital certificate implementation and 
progress 
Regularly update the M&E plan to align with ongoing digital certificate content updates in accordance with 
changes in national policy and context (e.g., available vaccines, available test types, variants), if needed
* Example activities for illustrative purposes only. Each country will define actual 
See also: FAQ – 34. What are example costs for a digital activities, level of effort required by new or existing human resources to complete 
certificate program (Step 7: Finalize Plans and Budget)? activities, and the associated cost of human resources based on country context. 
45
Next steps for program managers
Ensure appropriate policy and legal frameworks are 
in place
Evaluate readiness for deployment using DDCC:VS 
and DDCC:TR guidance
Create implementation plan and budget using 
Operational Guidance and DIIG
Coordinate across partners using DDCC:VS and 
DDCC:TR guidance to:
• Identify partners with appropriate technical skills
• Ensure compliance for technology vendors 
• Align digital certification with PHA business rules for 
vaccination and SARS-CoV-2 diagnostic test results
Additional Support: Requests for technical assistance can be made through DICE. 
contact@digitalhealthcoe.org
See also: FAQ – 35. What are next steps for countries 
considering digital certificate implementation? 46
Annex A: Other Key Concepts
47
Key Concepts: Trust networks
Countries must establish trust in the issuance and verification of digital certificates
Trust Network Value
Countries must set up a national • Maintains trust in the certificate issuing and 
trust framework consisting of verification authorities and systems, both 
domestically and across borders
public key infrastructure (PKI) to 
• Reduces potential for fraudulent issuance and 
align with established governance enables the revocation of certificates if there is 
evidence of fraud
processes and policies to enable 
• Ensures that data in the certificate was not 
digital signing of digital certificates corrupted or modified from its original form
• Provides a secure method for both offline and 
online verification
See also: FAQ – 36. Key Concepts: What is a Trust Network and 
Public Key Infrastructure (PKI)? 
48
Key Concepts: Public Key Infrastructure (PKI) 
A domestic PKI is required for signing and verifying digital certificates 
1 A designated government entity 2 A CSCA issues at least one Document 3 A DDCC issuer must have a 
acts as a Country Signing Signer Certificate (DSC) with a public- DSC to sign a digital certificate
Certificate Authority (CSCA) private key pair that can be used to $ Activities with cost 
digitally sign and verify DDCC implications
• Countries need to establish 
agreements with other 
countries that outline the 
governance process (e.g., 
policies, technical 
specifications, and 
interoperability criteria) for 
establishing trust
• The systems these countries 
have in place will impact what 
is needed to interoperate
• Countries must consider how 
to manage and ensure security 
of private keys
See also: FAQ – 36. Key Concepts: What is a Trust Network and 
49
Public Key Infrastructure (PKI)? 
Key Concepts: Linking unique identification 
Countries must determine the policies and procedures for linking a digital 
certificate to an individual’s identity which is verifiable
• DDCC may encode just the Health Certificate ID (HCID) or it could encode a full 
representation of a certificate
• Countries may determine which unique identification (e.g., health ID, national ID 
number, passport number, etc.) to link with a certificate, if any
• Policies should align with agreements established with other countries
Vaccination status and SARS-CoV-2 diagnostic test result certificates are health documents, and therefore are not 
intended to be used as identity documents
See also: FAQ – 37. Key Concepts: What is Identity Binding and 
Unique Identification?
50
Key Concepts: Governing trust networks
Countries establish a PKI and determine the most appropriate governance 
mechanisms for its context to support the trust network
$
Activities with cost implications
Governance needs to be 
established at two levels • Determine whether to leverage 
an existing PKI or establish a 
new one
• Establish governance 
Member State: need to mechanisms for digital signing 
Public Health Authority 
establish a mechanism to infrastructure at PHA and 
(PHA): need to generate at 
assert that a DSC from a Member State levels with clear 
least one document signer 
PHA has been authorized policies for:
certificate (DSC) – a private–
to sign health documents • Issuing certificates
public key pair that can be 
• Verifying certificates
used by the trusted agents 
of the PHA to sign the digital • Revocation of certificates
certificate • Data management and Two approaches: 
1. Root Certificate Authority privacy protection 
2. Master list
See also: FAQ – 38. Key Concepts: What governance 
mechanisms need to be established to support the trust 
network? 
51
Key 
Concepts: Considerations
• What agreements or formal collaborations will need to be established in a 
Cross-border policies memorandum of understanding? 
Bilateral and regional • Will there need to be agreements (e.g., data agreements) established 
bilaterally, multilaterally or at a regional level to establish trusted recognition 
policy negotiations may between DDCC of different provenance? 
be complicated and • Are bilateral or regional (e.g., EU) agreements in place that can be leveraged? 
require significant effort 
by policy makers
Several digital certificates for COVID-19 use cases 
To ensure that national governing are available in the global marketplace 
bodies can establish mutual trust • EU Digital Covid Certificates (DCC) [link]
with other countries through 
• DIVOC [link]
bilateral or multilateral EU DCC DIVOC VCI
agreements, governance • Smart Health Cards/ VCI [link]
mechanisms should be in place 
for the digital signing 
infrastructure based on each See also: FAQ – 39. Key Concepts: What needs to be considered in bilateral and regional policy 
negotiations for digital certificates? 
country’s governance context. 
52
Key Concepts: Standardized health content 
DDCC guidance provides standardized, trusted health content aligned with 
international standards
DDCC standardized health content applies the WHO evidence base for any stage of digital health maturity
Standardized Health Content
Traditional Health Content Structured Components Standards-based 
(e.g., decision trees, flow Software Code
(e.g., PDF diagrams) for (e.g., FHIR standards) that 
recommendations) in operationalizing within accurately reflects decision 
narrative format country programs logic and data requirements
Standardized health content converts traditional health content into Preferred digital health interoperability 
structured components for operationalizing DDCC guidance within standards: • Semantic standard: International 
country programs and software code that is aligned with international Classifications of Diseases, 11th edition 
(ICD-11) 
FHIR standards • Syntactic standard: Health Level Seven 
(HL7) Fast Healthcare Interoperability 
Resources (FHIR)® 
See also: FAQ – 40. Key Concepts: What is standardized health 
content? 53
Key 
DDCC provides an 
Concepts: DDCC Document“umbrella” 
specification using 
international HL7 FHIR 
Digital certificate standard 
• Provides common data 
interoperability model and support for EU DCC DIVOC
multiple QR codes
DDCC is designed to 
enable interoperability 
between certificates Compatible with other 
issued in other formats regional certificate formats Trust 
• EU Digital Covid Certificates QR Code Spec
and creates a (DCC) [link] Network
compatible certificate • DIVOC [link]
issued via paper, PDF, or • Smart Health Cards / VCI [link]
smartphones, reducing 
the long-term risk of 
changing certificates See also: FAQ – 41. Key Concepts: How does DDCC enable interoperability between certificates issued in other formats (e.g., DIVOC, EU DCC)?
54
Key Concepts: Workflow for generation and verification
Required technologies include services to generate and register certificates, while 
additional services and applications can be built in iteratively as needed
HCID provided by existing National DDCC:VS
System or issued by DDCC:VS / DDCC:TR DDCC:TR 
Generation Service
Repository 
(optional)
Submit vaccination or 
test result event DDCC:VS
Digital 
DDCC:TR 
Health Online status check
Solution Return 
Generation (optional)
DDCC:VS / DDCC:TR Service
Register
DDCC:VS
Status DDCC:TR DDCC:VS
Checking DDCC:TR 
Online verification DDCC:VS / DDCC:TR 
Application Registry 
(optional)
(optional) ServicePKI
See also: FAQ – 42. Key Concepts: What are the required 
and optional components of DDCC? 
55
