With its picturesque,  
easy-to-use, and touch 
screen-adaptable 
features, DrugStoc can 
be used by any type of 
facility or individual with 
minimum training. 
DRUGSTOC
IMPLEMENTATION DATE:  2015
A hybrid eHub of drugs and medical consumables in Nigeria 
The Nigerian healthcare market is characterized by an abundance of substandard, counterfeit drugs. In 
2001, it was estimated that about 50 percent of all drugs within the market were fake. This rate is said 
to have fallen over the next five years by about 80 percent following aggressive action by the Nigerian 
National Agency for Food and Drug Administration and Control (NAFDAC).
This problem is further exacerbated by a fragmented drug system, where health providers often 
purchase from multiple wholesalers, directly from manufacturers, and from open air drug markets 
simultaneously. This system leads to inefficiencies in the drug market, where prices are incomparable 
and opaque, and where health providers are unable to certify the quality of the drugs bought in the 
open drug markets or from unscrupulous distributors of drugs. No collated database exists that allows 
hospitals to view all available brand variations and make purchasing decisions based on the right pricing 
for their market. As a result of this fragmented system, prices often change sporadically and variety 
is limited to the health provider’s exposure to products they are familiar with. To put this in context, 
average drug prices in Nigeria range from two to 64 times the international prices in both private and 
public health facilities, according to a recent UNIDO report on the Nigerian pharmaceutical sector.
About DrugStoc
D rugStoc is a hybrid between an eCommerce website, of entry for substandard products; (3) improve the profitability a desktop application, an Android application, and a of hospitals and the pharmaceutical industry by translating 
networked chain of GPRS/SMS-enabled Android printers efficiency gains into monetary profit; and (4) build a database 
working in tandem to (1) eliminate reliance of medical facil- of location-based live pricing for drugs, consumables, and 
ities on the open air market for drug purchasing; (2) consoli- medical equipment in Nigeria. 
date the drug supply commodity chain increasing the barrier 
70  n  LOGISTICS
Clément Tardif, IntraHealth International
DrugStoc launched its Beta site in 2015 at Lessons Learned 
the co-creation hub in Yaba, Lagos. It was 
attended by the Director of Pharmacovigi-
n Scaling up the logistics unit is essential to maintain-
lance at NAFDAC as well as other relevant ing a low service failure rate. Right now, DrugStoc relies 
stakeholders. on the logistics provided by the pharmaceutical distrib-
With its picturesque, easy to use, and touch utors while optimizing specific parts of it. However, 
screen-adaptable features, DrugStoc can be in order to run an efficient system, DrugStoc needs to 
used by any type of facility or individual with minimum train- invest in a fully developed logistical infrastructure that 
ing. Support call centers are manned by staff who can help will complement its order generation capability.
facilities place and manage their orders. DrugStoc also offers a 
n Drugstoc has also developed a strategy for non-IT 
low-tech alternative for health facilities that are not connected savvy users. Use of the DrugStoc catalog and call center 
to the Internet or which have poor computing infrastructure. presents an easy and efficient way for users to check 
This comes in the form of a catalog with designated operator prices and order items on DrugStoc via text messages, 
codes which are linked to commodities on DrugStoc. These direct calls, or QR code scanning.
codes can be used to check for prices and place orders using 
the Android app, text messages, or the DrugStoc call center.
Conclusion 
Evaluation and Results DrugStoc is an innovative hybrid online/offline drug 
distribution and inventory management solution that creates 
Qualitative questionnaires were distributed among hospitals an efficient drug supply chain for health facilities while 
and pharmacies in Lagos State, Nigeria, while focus groups reducing order time, enhancing purchasing power, and 
were conducted with health facility owners, procurement significantly reducing the risk of purchasing counterfeit or 
officers, and pharmacists. A limited Version 1.1 of DrugStoc substandard products. n
was introduced in 12 facilities that completed the question-
naire. The key findings related to the efficiency in timing, 
pricing, and orders.
Fragmented ordering and the use of multiple sources for 
the same drug item was noted. Preliminary results from the 
closed pilot indicate a 94 percent average reduction of time 
spent ordering and managing supplies observed when the 
facility used Version 1.1 of DrugStoc to place orders. Price 
efficiency was also tracked:  most facilities kept handwritten 
notes on the last purchase price of a drug item. Purchase 
price changes were sporadic and supplier dependent with the 
facility being informed about the price change during the 
re-ordering process. No maximum retail price (MRP) was 
observed with multiple suppliers offering the same drug item 
at a different price.
Finally, order supply time can vary between suppliers and is 
dependent on a distributor’s logistical capabilities, the dis- Geographic Coverage: Lagos, Nigeria 
tance from the supplier, and the monetary value of the items 
supplied. Item stock outs among suppliers were also noted, Implementation Partner: Integra Health Nigeria 
forcing facilities to look for alternative suppliers or asking the Donor: Private initiative – self-funded
supplier to send an alternative brand within the same price Contact Information: Adham Yehia, Integra Health Nigeria,  
range. All these factors reduce the efficiency and reliability of adhamyehia@integrahealth.com.ng
medicines orders, which DrugStoc aims to improve.
mHEALTH COMPENDIUM  VOLUME 5  n  71
