Overhead funding is saved 
by foregoing cash-based 
transfers of incentives, time 
is saved because the mobile 
mechanism transfers the 
funds to the beneficiaries 
efficiently, and security risks 
are decreased because the 
mobile transfers are more 
secure than handling cash. 
m4Change + mCCT
IMPLEMENTATION DATE:  January 2014 to Present
Facilitating mobile money transfers to improve 
maternal and newborn health in Nigeria
Nigeria has one of the world’s highest rates of maternal mortality. Each year, for every 100,000 live births, 
630 mothers die during childbirth. The government of Nigeria launched the “Information Communication 
Technology for Saving One Million Lives” (ICT4SOML) initiative in 2012; this initiative intends to increase 
government response to maternal mortality and bring Nigeria closer to reaching the Millennium 
Development Goals related to maternal and child health.
Mobile interventions and applications have been shown to improve health outcomes related to 
maternal health by providing decision support to patients and community health workers, improving case 
management of pregnant women and new mothers, and providing efficient, secure means for conducting 
financial transactions related to health care. Mobile money also has the potential to reach many patients 
who do not currently have access to banking services. The Nigerian government’s Subsidy Reinvestment 
and Empowerment Program (SURE-P) is currently implementing a conditional cash transfer (CCT) 
scheme through which mothers are incentivized to attend a continuum of maternal and neonatal health 
services. SURE-P is using a cash-based disbursement system that is both expensive and inefficient and has 
partnered with Pathfinder International to integrate mobile solutions into the SURE-P CCT program. 
About m4Change + mCCT
P athfinder International provides sexual and reproductive Nasarawa states were able to use a mobile decision support health services in over 25 countries, including Nigeria, application which helped them track pregnant women and 
where Pathfinder has worked for more than 50 years. The provide them with improved antenatal care. In 2014, Path-
m4Change project was launched by Pathfinder in 2012; finder built on the m4Change project’s success and launched 
through m4Change, 20 primary health centers in Abuja and m4Change + mCCT with funding from the UN Founda-
56  n  FINANCE
Carolyn Florey
tion, IWG mechanism. A mobile application is used to track Lessons Learned 
pregnant mothers through ANC, delivery and child’s first 
year of life who are enrolled in the CCT scheme, improving 
n There are numerous mobile money providers in Nigeria; 
health workers’ ability to collect data and verify that mothers making an application that works across platforms is 
are receiving services. A data dashboard was built to support ideal, but challenging. Also, in Nigeria, both banks and 
the government to easily access the data, facilitating client mobile network operators control the mobile money ser-
payment approvals, decision making and reporting. The vices. Bringing this application to national scale must be 
program is designed for clients to receive their payments via done with consideration for the many diverse stakehold-
mobile money. Overhead funding is saved by foregoing cash- ers involved.
based transfers of incentives, time is saved because the mobile 
mechanism transfers the funds to the beneficiaries efficiently, n The literacy rate of mCCT clients must be consid-
and security risks are decreased because the mobile transfers ered during development. Some clients were unfamiliar 
are more secure than handling cash. Furthermore, clients with mobile technology and mobile money.
are able to provide feedback, encouraging swift and accurate n Phone ownership, especially in rural Nigeria, is not 
improvements to be made to the system. yet universal. Only 39 percent of rural Nigerian popu-
lations have access to mobile phones. Some clients were 
Evaluation and Results issued SIM cards to participate in the program.
n Strategic partnerships with the private sector are 
The original m4Change project, which was implemented helpful when seeking to address some of the challenges 
from December 2012 to December 2013, resulted in 150 related to navigating the complex environment of banks, 
community health extension workers and supervisors being mobile network operators, and other value-added service 
trained. Pre- and post-intervention studies were conducted in aggregators who participate in the mobile money market.
order to assess the impact on the quality of antenatal care be-
ing provided by these facilities. 266 patients were interviewed Conclusion 
from 10 of the participating facilities. Scores increased, with 
statistical significance, in the categories of overall quality, 
technical quality, and counseling quality. 98 percent of pro- Mobile money is an emerging tool in Nigeria; its use 
viders said they would recommend continuing the use of the has the potential to transform conditional cash transfer 
application and that it should be adopted by the government implementation. In collaboration with private and public 
at other health facilities. However, around half (48 percent) stakeholders, SURE-P and Pathfinder International are 
of providers also noted that using the application increased working to develop an efficient, cost-effective strategy for 
their workload and the amount of time it took to engage rolling out a mobile money transfer intervention at the 
with patients. national scale. The m4Change + mCCT intervention uses a data-driven approach to track progress of pregnant women 
The m4Change + mCCT program seeks to increase the use enrolled in the CCT scheme with the ultimate aim of 
of the m4Change application and expand its coverage to improving maternal and newborn health outcomes.  n   
include tracking of beneficiaries of the CCT program. It is 
being designed and piloted for scale-up nationwide. It has 
also been designed to collect data for reporting purposes 
including over 100 national health indicators, data about 
new mothers and babies through their first year of life, and Geographic Coverage:  Kaduna and Abuja/Federal Capital Territory, 
tracking of approvals for the payment disbursements. Lessons Nigeria 
learned from the data collected from these mechanisms will Implementation Partners: SURE-P Government of Nigeria, 
inform the national scale-up strategy. Pathfinder International 
Donor: United Nations Foundation
Contact Information: Marion McNabb, Senior Technical Advisor, 
mHealth, Pathfinder International, mmcnabb@pathfinder.org; 
Farouk Jega, Pathfinder Nigeria Country Representative, Path-
finder International, fjega@pathfinder.org 
mHEALTH COMPENDIUM  VOLUME 5  n  57
