	
Home	»	What	We	Do	»	U.S.	Global	Development	Lab	»	Digital	ID
Show	Navigation
DIGITAL	ID
There	may	be	no	single	factor	that	affects	a	person’s	ability	to	share	in	the	gains	of	global
development	--	to	receive	services	and	be	represented	--	as	much	as	having	an	official	identity.
Identity	is	tied	to	voting	rights,	financial	inclusion,	land	ownership,	education,	and	can	even	help
protect	against	human	trafficking	or	child	marriage.	In	many	ways,	the	roughly	1.1	billion	people
who	lack	official	identity	are	invisible,	discounted,	and	left	behind.	Yet	the	complex	political	and
social	forces	behind	identity	systems	are	often	overlooked	or	misunderstood,	leading	to
inefficiencies	and	missed	opportunities	for	inclusive	and	sustainable	ID	systems.
ID	systems	are	a	critical	part	of	development	infrastructure,	impacting	institutions	ranging	from
governments,	NGOs,	service	providers,	private	vendors,	and	the	individuals	who	need	IDs	to
access	key	services.	ID	systems	can	help	create	a	basis	of	trust	and	inclusion	that	strengthens
democracies	and	free	market	economies.	They	can	also	be	used	by	authoritarian	regimes	to
exclude	or	oppress.	Balancing	the	value	and	risks	that	ID	systems	create	for	both	individuals	and
institutions	is	key	to	sustainable	ID	infrastructure.
Part	1	of	this	report	discusses	instrumental	and	infrastructural	approaches	to	ID	and	argues	for
long-term	investments	in	ID	infrastructure.	Institutions	and	individuals	each	have	key	roles	in	the Identity	in	a	Digital	Age:
ID	ecosystem,	and	we	will	discuss	the	tensions	inherent	in	trying	to	serve	both.	Part	2	of	this Infrastructure	for	Inclusive
report	asks	how	the	ID	landscape	is	changing.	Emerging	technologies	will	expand	the	options	for Development	 (PDF	-	12	MB)
identifying	and	authenticating	individuals	and	introduce	new	actors	across	the	DID	value	chain.
While	some	emerging	trends	may	offer	greater	opportunity	for	inclusion,	higher	confidence	in
authentication,	or	better	data	security,	new	technologies	and	new	actors	may	also	change	the	roles	of	traditional	ID-granting	institutions
and	their	relationships	with	ID-holding	individuals.	How	we	address	these	emerging	trends	in	technology	will	determine	whether	ID	is	an
instrument	of	empowerment	and	inclusion	or	surveillance,	disempowerment,	and	exclusion.
Last	updated:	November	20,	2018
SHARE	THIS	PAGE
JOIN
Find	out	about	career	opportunities	at	USAID
ACT
Learn	how	you	can	get	involved	and	lend	a	hand.
PARTNER
Find	business	and	funding	opportunities.
COMMENT
Make	a	general	inquiry	or	suggest	an	improvement.
CONNECT
FacebooTkwitter RSS LinkedInYouTubeStay
Connected
Connected
SEARCH
CONTACT	US
COMPLIANCE
FORMS
PRIVACY	POLICY
EGOV
NO	FEAR	ACT
ACCESSIBILITY
OPEN	GOVERNMENT
FOIA
INSPECTOR	GENERAL
USA.GOV
ARCHIVE
