 
MOBILE INTEGRATED RESOURCES FOR 
AURAT-WOMEN (MIRA) CHANNEL  
Providing critical MNCH services to women at the bottom of the pyramid  
The lack of maternal and child health (MCH) 
information, communication and services reaching 
women in remote and low resource settings is one of 
the main contributors to India’s high maternal 
mortality rate of 420/100,000 live births, and under-5 
mortality rate of 72/1,000 live births. Nineteen 
percent, or 56,000, of annual global maternal deaths 
occur in India. Only 40% of deliveries occur at a 
health facility and less than half are attended by a 
skilled healthcare provider. Additionally, 22% of 
babies in India are born at low birthweight. To reduce 
maternal and infant mortality and morbidity in India, 
women, especially those in rural and low-income 
settings, must be provided quality health information 
and connected to primary health centers and health 
institutions. 
The Millennium Alliance – a new partnership between 
USAID, the Federation of Indian Chambers of 
Commerce and Industry, and India’s Department of 
Science and Technology – is promoting technological 
innovations as possible solutions to addressing India’s 
development challenges. In response, ZMQ 
Development, a social enterprise, created the Mobile 
Integrated Resources for Aurat-Women (MIRA) 
Channel (formerly branded the Women Mobile Lifeline 
Channel) to bridge the information gap among rural 
women, help them connect with health services, and 
empower their decision-making abilities related to 
critical health issues.  
Implementation date: March 2012 
promoted through viral marketing mechanisms of 
partner NGOs. Local (village level) mobile recharge 
About MIRA Channel kiosks assist women to download the app.  
MIRA Channel is an integrated mobile phone-based Content is delivered based on users’ needs. Educational 
application using the Global App platform. It provides tools, iconic messaging kits, mobile games, mobile soaps 
lifeline sustainable development tools for low-literate and other components are available across dedicated 
women at the bottom of the development pyramid. The sub-channels geared towards maternal and child health, 
Windows compatible application is available on both Java reproductive health, family planning, home-based 
mobile feature phones and Android smartphones neonatal care and adolescent girls’ health. The MCH 
featuring an interactive iconic messaging system that channel features toolkits on prenatal care and universal 
requires limited audio and text support.  immunization. MIRA Channel also contains tools women 
can use to track and manage pregnancy, immunizations, 
MIRA Channel can be downloaded from the application 
menstrual cycles, family planning and infection 
site or through mobile operators. It is also embedded 
prevention.  
on new mobile handsets from OEM manufacturers and 
14 mHEALTH COMPENDIUM   |   VOLUME 3 
 
MOBILE INTEGRATED RESOURCES FOR 
AURAT-WOMEN (MIRA) CHANNEL  
Providing critical MNCH services to women at the bottom of the pyramid   BEHAVIOR CHANGE COMMUNICATION 
To expand MIRA Channel’s reach, ZMQ development Conclusion 
utilized Organized Human Networks to identify The MIRA Channel is an innovative response to the 
microfinance institutions, self-help groups and frontline health needs of low-socioeconomic populations in India. 
healthcare networks as possible markets. They are also Designed specifically for women in rural and low-income 
incorporating channels on financial literacy, functional settings, the mobile channel provides information 
literacy, vocational and skills training and women’s related to critical health issues to help manage women’s 
entrepreneurship into the application.  lives. It is important to find innovative and effective 
means to disseminate the women’s channel and reach a 
larger audience, as well as to utilize innovative marketing 
Evaluation and Results strategies when working with low promotion and 
Within the first year, MIRA Channel was utilized by marketing budgets. 
27,600 women in India’s Mewat and Rajasthan regions. 
To date, over 48,000 Mewat and 22,000 Rajasthan -------------------------------------------------------- 
women in self-help groups have benefitted from the 
Geographic Coverage: India, Mewat and Rajasthan 
program. Approximately 16,800 pregnancies and 11,800 
regions 
childhood immunizations have been registered. Women 
have downloaded almost 35,000 MCH-related games Implementation Partners: ZMQ Development along 
and Value Added Services. with Mewat Mahila Vikas Society and 6 SHG Federation 
Partners 
When compared with primary health center data from 
2011 to 2012, there has been an increase in uptake of Funder: USAID | Federation of Indian Chambers of 
folic acid during pregnancy, the number of pregnant Commerce and Industry (FICCI) | Technology 
women visiting frontline health workers or Anganwadi Development Board (TBD), Department of Science and 
Workers, and deliveries at healthcare facilities.  Technology, Government of India 
Contact Information:  
Lessons Learned ZMQ Development: Subhi Quraishi, CEO and Mobile 4 
 Use of iconic messaging with audio support and Development Director (+91-124-4368897, subhi@zmq.in); 
minimum text is an essential component and has Hilmi Quriashi (Ashoka Fellow), Co-Founder & Director 
been a successful method to convey messages to Social Programs (+91-987-1981960, hilmi@zmq.in) 
semi-literate and illiterate communities, producing USAID: Anu Rajaraman, Director, Office of Partnerships 
substantially better results than SMS. for Innovation, USAID India (arajaraman@usaid.gov) 
FICCI: Eittee Gupta, Deputy Director, Centre for 
 Incorporating training of semi-literate women Innovation, Science & Technology Commercialization 
enables them to effectively and efficiently use mobile (eittee.gupta@ficci.com) 
phones and is an essential component of successful 
mobile technology initiatives. References: 
1. GBCHealth Member ZMQ Wins USAID Award. GBCHealth. 17 
 The program realized that women benefactors July 2013. Web. 
became stakeholders rather than clients. They not 2. Johanna Morden. A mobile lifeline for maternal and child health 
only effectively test the messages but essentially act in India. Devex. 3 July 2013. Web. 
as marketers and peer educators.  3. Women Mobile Lifeline Channel. Fact Sheet. ZMQ 
Development. No Date. Web. 
 
 
  mHEALTH COMPENDIUM   |   VOLUME 3 15 
