  
  
 
Child Status Index (CSI) Mobile App 
 
B rief Overview 
 
High child mortality rates in Malawi remain a 
challenge despite progress in recent years. D-tree 
International is a technical assistance parnter in the 
USAID-funded “Integrated (HIV Effect) Mitigation 
and Positive Action for Community 
Transformation” (IMPACT) project, which is 
designed to improve the quality of life of orphans 
and vulnerable children (OVC) in targeted districts 
of Malawi.  One of the two mobile applications that 
D-tree designed in order to support IMPACT is 
based on the Child Status Index (CSI), an 
international paper-based case management tool for 
assessing the well being of children developed by MEASURE Evaluation. D-tree developed the CSI mobile 
application to digitally collect information from CSI assessments, prompt for referral, and track follow up care 
within the community. The CSI mobile application was designed for use by the secretaries of community-based 
OVC committees to enter data from the paper CSI forms into the digital platform on their mobile phone. 
 
The IMPACT project is being implemented from June 2010 to June 2014, and the last CSI mobile application 
training was completed in July 2012. A total of 104 OVC committee secretaries were trained on the use of the 
application, and it has been implemented in three districts in Malawi. 
 
 
 
 Geographic Coverage: 
3 districts in Malawi 
 
 Implementation Partners: 
D-tree International  
 
 Funder: 
USAID/Malawi 
 
 For More Information Contact: 
USAID  
 Ms. Kate Vorley, Community Care and OVC Advisor; 
USAID Malawi P.O. Box 30455, Lilongwe, Malawi; 
Tel +265-1-772-455; email: kvorley@usaid.gov 
D-tree  
 Dr. Marc Mitchell, President;  
52 Whitney Tavern Road, Weston, MA 02493;  
Tel: +1-617-432-6322; email: mmitchel@hsph.hardard.edu 
 27 
 
Data Collection 
 Child Status Index (CSI) Mobile App 
 
About CSI Mobile App  been eliminated. Additionally, manual data entry is no 
The stand-alone application was developed on the longer required since the reports are all available from 
CommCare platform and runs on a java-enabled phone the server, saving considerable time and money. 
that OVC committee secretaries use offline.  OVC  
committee secretaries enter information collected by However, analysis also revealed that with the expansion 
family care volunteers using the paper-based CSI tool, of users, the implementation of the CSI application posed 
which was developed to assess the wellbeing of several challenges. It became evident that the 
vulnerable children. It is based on six domains, such as technological competence and formal education level of 
wellness and education, with 12 measurable goals on CSI users influenced their performance with the phone, 
which a child is scored in a range of four (good) to one and as a result, the data that was being collected with the 
(very poor). If a child scores very low on a certain goal mobile application was of poor quality and therefore of 
(score = one), immediate referral is made to assist the limited use. Data error entries have consequences for 
child. The mobile application implements the Child Status program quality, and resolving them requires comparing 
Index tool, (both in English and the local language data from the phone with the paper forms, which is a 
Chichewa), and especially supports users in making labor-intensive activity. Because of these challenges, it 
decisions about appropriate actions for children scoring was decided during the IMPACT annual reflection 
low on a particular domain, as well as on following up. meeting to not continue with the implementation of the 
 CSI application with the existing user group. Instead, the 
On a daily or weekly basis, OVC committee secretaries IMPACT program is currently considering other user 
send their completed data to a server using general groups and methodologies (e.g., point of care vs. data 
packet radio service (GPRS), a packet oriented mobile collection). 
date service which is many times less costly than SMS, for  
storage, backup, and reporting. CSI data is then available Lessons Learned 
for IMPACT project staff to import into the project’s • The current cadre of users (OVC committee 
Management Information System (MIS), rather than secretaries) is not working as well as cadre of users 
having to wait for the paper forms to come from the field that work on the frontline delivering care. 
and to be entered into the MIS manually.  • The application seems more appropriate for point of 
 care use (use by social workers during the visit with 
Evaluation and Results the child), as opposed to data collection. 
During an early analysis of CSI data, a random sample of • If the phone is directly associated with service 
204 paper-based forms and mobile application data was provision, such as in a village clinic, the intervention 
analyzed and compared in detail. The data analysis is better received. 
showed that phone users made data entry mistakes on • Particularly in peri-urban areas, the security of 
just over five percent of the forms, but this figure is phones can be a challenge. 
expected to decrease once users become more • Older users can face vision challenges that may 
proficient with the application over time. It furthermore prevent them from using the phone effectively. 
revealed inconsistencies and missing information on Eyesight testing/corrective lenses should be included 
nearly seven percent of paper forms, while the mobile in the recruitment of users. 
application did not permit users to omit scores or  
referral information, and therefore collected more Conclusions 
complete data. The use of the application also resulted in 
The CSI application has the potential to improve support 
reduced loss-to-follow-up (LTFU) of children with active 
to vulnerable children and reduce loss to follow up.  
referrals as the phone reminds users on outstanding 
However, its success is dependent on careful 
cases whereas paper-based forms are often filed. 
consideration of the user group and methodology. It is 
 
critical for programs to objectively assess whether 
Through the use of the application, data from villages is 
applications provide intended benefit as effectively as 
now being received in a much timelier manner as the 
envisioned and make corrections/changes where needed.  
wait for paper forms to arrive and to be tabulated has 
28 Information was excerpted from:  Geldof, Marije. March 2012. Child Status Index & Community Case Management mobile applications. D-tree International 
http://www.d-tree.org/our-projects/ovc-and-community-imci-malawi 
 
