 
  
L a Ligne Verte Family Planning Hotline 
  
B  rief Overview 
 
Accurate information on fertility trends and family planning in Democratic Republic of 
the Congo (DRC) has been difficult to obtain over the past decade. In 2005, the 
modern contraceptive prevalence rate (CPR) was estimated at three to four percent 
of women of reproductive age in union, less than half the rate of a decade earlier. 
Numerous factors contribute to the low CPR and high unmet need. A decade of 
violence and unrest shattered the health and family planning system throughout the 
country. Additional factors are the dismal and worsening state of the DRC’s 
transportation network, poor communication infrastructure, and the population’s low 
exposure to media such as radio and television. These factors make it extremely 
difficult to spread health messages. Knowledge of two or more methods of family 
planning is strongly correlated with the uptake of a method; but in DRC, the level of 
knowledge, especially of modern contraceptives, is extremely low.  
 
Population Services International (PSI), through its local affiliate Association de Santé 
Familiale (ASF) implemented the Family Planning Project (FPP) to increase knowledge 
and the use of modern contraceptive methods among women of reproductive age 
and their partners. Under the FPP, PSI/ASF used an array of communication channels 
to spread accurate information on family planning and contraceptive methods as part 
of their intervention the DRC.  One of these channels was the cell phone hotline, 
locally known as “La Ligne Verte”, the first of its kind in the nation. The FPP offers 
the hotline as one element of an integrated package of services.  
 
The FPP was implemented in Kinshasa and in mostly urban areas of Equateur, Bas Congo, Nord Kivu, Sud 
Kivu, Katanga, Province Orientale, and Kasai Occidental provinces in the DRC, from 2003 to 2008.  FPP 
launched la Ligne Verte in early 2005 in these project regions. 
 
  Geographic Coverage: 
Democratic Republic of the Congo 
 
 Implementation Partners: 
Population Services International  
 
 Funder: 
USAID 
 
 For More Information Contact: 
USAID 
 Thibaut Mukaba, USAID/Democratic Republic of Congo; 
198 Isiro Avenue,  
Kinshasa / Gombe, Democratic Republic of the Congo; 
Tel: +243-81-700-5701; email: amukaba@usaid.gov 
PSI/ASF  
 Nestor Ankiba, Country Representative, PSI/ASF; 
Association de Santé Familiale, 4630 Avenue de la Science, 
Immeuble USCT Bloc C Kinshasa Gombé, Democratic Republic of Congo;  
Tel: +243-990-030-029; email: nankiba@psicongo.org  
 15  
 
Behavior Change Communication 
 La Ligne Verte Family Planning Hotline 
 
About La Ligne Verte operates in five cities and towns there, more than any 
By dialing a toll-free number, callers speak to a trained other province in DRC. Katanga is also home to more 
educator and get accurate information about birth than 20 partner clinics and more than 50 partner 
spacing, the correct use of family planning methods, how pharmacies.  All of these carry out information, 
to avoid unwanted pregnancies, and locating the nearest education, and communication (IEC) activities, and 
ASF partner clinic.  The Ligne Verte hotline allowed cell promote the hotline. 
phone callers to speak confidentially to trained mobile  
educators in Kinshasa, to ask about methods and side In Kinshasa, the capital, the high percentage of hotline 
effects, as well as to get referrals to clinics or sales calls may be linked to the large number of mobile 
points in the callers’ own neighborhoods.  educators (27 in the city alone) who directly promote 
 the hotline. Kinshasa is also home to 20 partner clinics 
The Ligne Verte was advertised via mobile educators and 106 partner pharmacies and wholesalers, which also 
and posters at clinics and pharmacies throughout the promote la Ligne Verte through posters and calendars.  
country. The hotline number and hours were printed on  
items like pocket calendars that were given away during While the majority of calls originate from provinces 
FPP’s outreach activities in eight of the DRC’s 11 where the FPP operates, more than 750 calls came from 
provinces.  The number was also broadcast in radio and Maniema, Bandundu, and Kasai Oriental, where PSI is 
television spots. not directly implementing the project.  
  
The system operates via a contract with Vodacom, the Lessons Learned 
largest cell phone service in DRC. All calls from Men in the DRC have a higher unmet need for family 
Vodacom phones to the hotline are free to the caller; at planning information than anticipated. Men made the 
the end of each month, the FPP pays Vodacom the overwhelming majority of calls, demonstrating their 
equivalent of 36¢ per call received.  interest and curiosity in family planning. 
  
The hotline is open to calls from Monday through The FPP’s contract with the cell company included the 
Friday, 8:00 a.m. to 4:30 p.m. The FPP’s trained stipulation that phone calls lasted no more than two 
educators staff the line. The project has a pool of 27 minutes each. While most questions and concerns can 
such educators in Kinshasa; all received comprehensive be addressed in that time, some callers could benefit 
training in family planning and outreach communication, from a longer conversation. The FPP believes that 
and they carry out family planning education in public allowing three minutes per call would address the 
places such as markets and neighborhoods and in private problem.  
homes.   
 Call data could be mined to further evaluate and guide 
Evaluation and Results programming. The hotline’s call data could also be more 
Throughout 2007, callers made between 600 and over closely analyzed as a means of monitoring family 
2,000 calls a month to la Ligne Verte. Surprisingly, it was planning needs and questions and to help guide future 
men who made the overwhelming majority of calls. In program direction and messaging. 
2007, 84 percent of hotline callers who sought family  
planning information were men. Most callers, both men Conclusion 
and women, wanted more information about People throughout the DRC are gaining high-quality 
contraceptive methods and about purchasing information about family planning, thanks to la Ligne 
contraceptives. Verte, a toll-free hotline made possible by cell phone 
 technology. The hotline allows the FPP to reach 
Katanga province accounts for the greatest number of unprecedented numbers of people in this vast, 
calls to the hotline, most likely because the FPP infrastructure deficient nation. 
Information was excerpted from: 
16 Population Services International, 2007. “Cell Phone Hotline Spreads Family Planning Information in DR Congo”. Retrieved from  http://www.flexfund.org/resources/technical_updates/psi_drc_case_study.pdf. 
http://sphhs.gwu.edu/departments/pch/phcm/casesjournal/volume4/peer-reviewed/cases_4_03.pdf 
 
