	
Home	»	What	We	Do	»	U.S.	Global	Development	Lab	»	Technology
Show	Navigation
TECHNOLOGY
Digital	technologies	have	transformed	the	ways	in	which	we	interact	with	businesses,	governments,	and
each	other.	While	much	of	the	world	has	access	to	a	basic	mobile	phone,	the	full	potential	for	digital
technologies	has	not	yet	been	realized.	Right	now,	approximately	four	billion	people	in	developing
countries	still	do	not	have	access	to	the	internet,	including	a	staggering	93	percent	of	households	in	the
least	developed	countries.	And	women	are,	on	average,	14	percent	less	likely	to	own	mobile	phones	than
their	male	counterparts.	This	ongoing	digital	divide	decreases	stability,	reduces	resiliency,	and	prohibits
countries	from	achieving	their	full	potential	on	their	journey	to	self-reliance.
As	part	of	USAID’s	U.S.	Global	Development	Lab,	the	Center	for	Digital	Development	(CDD)	works	to Afghan	women	sit	in	a	class	and
address	gaps	in	digital	access,	affordability,	and	advance	the	use	of	technology	and	advanced	data study	using	mobile	phones	in
analysis	in	development.	Taking	a	multi-pronged	approach,	CDD	leverages	the	resources	of	USAID,	its Kabul.
implementing	partners,	and	other	actors	in	three	main	ways: Jawad	Jalali/AFP
Catalyzing	Inclusing	Digital	Economies
Leveraging	multi-stakeholder	alliances,	CDD	supports	the	enabling	environment	that	serves	as	a	foundation	for	inclusive	digital
infrastructure	and	services.
Building	Agency	Capacity
Through	a	suite	of	technical	trainings,	a	series	of	toolkits	and	guidance	documents,	and	growing	network	of	Mission-based	specialists,
CDD	cultivates	a	strong	community	of	practice	around	Digital	Development	at	USAID.
Accelerating	USAID	Programming
CDD	works	to	foster	market-led	innovation	and	integrate	digital	technology,	advanced	data	and	geographic	analysis,	and	align	digital
development	best	practices	into	the	strategic	planning	and	design	of	enterprise-driven	programs	across	the	Agency	and	with	partners.
Learn	more	About	our	Teams	and	Work
Digital	Inclusion
Digital	Finance
Development	Informatics
GeoCenter
Digital	Agriculture
Strategy	and	Research
2017	Digital	Download 	 (PDF	-	13
MB)
Connect	With	Us:	@USAID__Digital	|	CDD	Newsletter	Sign	Up 	|	digitaldevelopment@usaid.gov
	
Last	updated:	May	21,	2019
SHARE	THIS	PAGE
JOIN
Find	out	about	career	opportunities	at	USAID
ACT
Learn	how	you	can	get	involved	and	lend	a	hand.
PARTNER
Find	business	and	funding	opportunities.
COMMENT
Make	a	general	inquiry	or	suggest	an	improvement.
CONNECT
FacebooTkwitter RSS LinkedInYouTubeStay
Connected
SEARCH
CONTACT	US
COMPLIANCE
FORMS
PRIVACY	POLICY
EGOV
NO	FEAR	ACT
ACCESSIBILITY
OPEN	GOVERNMENT
FOIA
INSPECTOR	GENERAL
USA.GOV
ARCHIVE
