Commentary
Innovation and Entrepreneurship: Harnessing the Public
Health Skill Set in a New Era of Health Reforms and
Investment
Elham Hatef, MD, MPH; Joshua M. Sharfstein, MD; Alain B. Labrique, PhD
The Context for Innovation and Entrepreneurship Are these companies pursuing important needs of
patients and populations? The ever-growing market
The implementation of the Affordable Care Act and of wearable technologies illustrates the potential and
major reforms of the health system have resulted in limitations of many innovations. Although some ear-
rapid proliferation of innovation-driven start-up com- lier wearables, such as hearing aids,made a significant
panies in the health sector.1 These start-ups typically change to the quality of life of their users, there is little
focus on the application of new technologies to im- evidence that suggests that the stand-alone use of tech-
prove a narrow selection of health services, or some nologies such as activity trackers, unlinked from clini-
aspect of patient self-efficacy, attempting to reduce the cal feedback loops, is able to consistently demonstrate
cost of services, increase patient competence, or im- improvements in health. The evidence on effective-
prove health care delivery writ large. It is time for the ness of wearable technology on a population level and
field of public health to engage with this industry and on the user’s experience with the technology varies; a
work to direct its energies to tackling major health randomized trial published recently in JAMA assessed
challenges. the effect of wearable technology combined with a
The rapid growth of these companies suggests a lifestyle intervention on long-term weight loss. It con-
strong potential market for these services. The in- cluded that devices that monitor and provide feedback
vestment in digital health care, such as telehealth, on physical activity may not offer an advantage over
mHealth, or wearable technologies, is one of the standard behavioral weight loss approaches.3 In con-
fastest-growing health sector markets; in 2015, start- trast, the systematic review by Bravata et al4 on the us-
up funding for digital health care reached a new in- age of pedometers to increase physical activity and im-
vestment high of $5.8 billion, a slight increase from prove health showed short-term increases in physical
$5.2 billion in 2014 and more than double the fund- activity and decreases in body mass index and blood
ing of $2.4 billion in 2013.1 Some of the major pri- pressure.
vate health systems in the country are also investing in
this growing market. Kaiser Permanente Venture,2 the
Kaiser network’s corporate venture capital arm with a The Missing Link in the Current Health Innovation
dedicated focus on health care investing for more than Ecosystem
15 years, has approximately $400 million of commit-
ted capital in these emergent fields. An interdisciplinary approach to health innovation,
with ongoing collaborations between technologists
and public health and clinical professionals, may be
missing. Driving innovation toward the greatest chal-
lenges in global or public health could help improve
Author Affiliations: Center for Population Health Information Technology
(Dr Hatef), Department of Health Policy and Management (Dr Sharfstein), and the alignment between profit-driven commercial suc-
Global mHealth Initiative, Department of International Health (Dr Labrique), cess and impact on individual and collective quality
Johns Hopkins Bloomberg School of Public Health, Baltimore, Maryland. of life.
The authors declare no conflicts of interest. There are examples of success as a result of in-
Correspondence: Elham Hatef, MD, MPH, Center for Population Health terdisciplinary collaborations between technology
Information Technology, Department of Health Policy and Management, 5
Johns Hopkins Bloomberg School of Public Health, 624 N. Broadway, Room and public health teams; Emocha is a start-up pro-
501, Baltimore, MD 21205 (ehatef1@jhu.edu). viding a versatile mobile health platform. It offers
Copyright © 2017 Wolters Kluwer Health, Inc. All rights reserved. solutions for several public health problems such as
DOI: 10.1097/PHH.0000000000000665 video-based Directly Observed Therapy (DOT) for
00 2017 • Volume 00, Number 00 www.JPHMP.com 1
Copyright © 2017 Wolters Kluwer Health, Inc. Unauthorized reproduction of this article is prohibited.
2 Hatef, et al • 00(00), 1–3 Commentary
tuberculosis, where patients self-record their daily solutions that address the key determinants of the
medication adherence through a HIPAA-compliant public health issues. For instance, the Chicago De-
app on their smartphone for their providers to verify partment of Public Health and the Smart Chicago
every dose and support them through the Web-based Organization launched the Food Borne Chicago
platform. Another example is the surveillance of application to track food safety in real time.8 The
infectious diseases such as Ebola virus disease and Baltimore City Health Department collaborates with
measles where with the use of a smartphone or desk- local programmers to develop technical solutions to
top the at-risk populations report their temperature, problems identified by frontline staff.9
symptoms, and/or travel plans according to customiz-
able schedules. Emocha’s Web portal provides the Reintroducing the Public Health Skill Set to
possibility for the health care organizations to visu- Address the New Challenge
alize critical data from individuals or risk-stratified
populations.5 The history of medicine and public health has often il-
Companies that apply innovative solutions to con- lustrated how public health problem solvers have had
nect patients’ Bluetooth-enabled phones to blood an important influence on the design, implementation,
pressure or blood glucose monitoring devices have and evaluation of health system innovations. For ex-
demonstrated efficacy in improving outcomes, often ample, the invention of the bifurcated needle was a
linked to powerful cloud-based analytics.6 turning point innovation to help eradicate smallpox
An example would be the application of a glu- by making the vaccine easier and faster to deliver in
cometer with a sensor that transmits the readings to low-resource settings.10
a mobile phone via a Bluetooth wireless link. A Web- Core elements of public health training provide a
based application enables the clinicians to examine required set of skills that facilitate impactful and
and respond to the readings.7 The interventions and sustainable innovation. The problem-solving
care models developed by collaborative public health paradigm in public health is designed to evaluate
and technology teams that harness the capabilities problems on a population level rather than on a
of phones have been able to motivate improved ad- patient level and to make diagnoses in terms of the
herence to prescriptions and can help navigate health problems in the community rather than an individual
systems and reduce losses to follow-up.5,6 patient (Figure). This approach has had a significant
Collaborations between the private sector and impact on the health of populations. Public health
public health agencies are beginning to emerge. The innovation approach can be conceptualized as an
collaborations range from public health experts extension to the problem-solving paradigm, modified
formulating a public health problem that affects to include the entrepreneurial ecosystem (Figure).
communities to applying public health techniques The public health innovation approach as a mod-
in measuring the problems or defining cost-effective ified problem-solving paradigm includes defining the
FIGURE Contrasting the Typical Public Health Problem-Solving Paradigm and the Interdisciplinary Public Health Innovation Approach
Copyright © 2017 Wolters Kluwer Health, Inc. Unauthorized reproduction of this article is prohibited.
00 2017 • Volume 00, Number 00 www.JPHMP.com 3
public health problem; assessing the magnitude and The Future Challenges of the Public Health
finding the key determinants of the problem in the Innovation Approach
public health paradigm; designing and prototyping
of a product or intervention; defining priorities to The arrival of a new Administration could influence
choose the program or policy of greatest impact; and private investment in health sector. If the Admin-
building a business model, implementing the program, istration and Congress continue to support state
and evaluating the results. This process is intrinsically innovation in health policy, states may have greater
multidisciplinary, as public health encourages collab- opportunities over time to expand their investments
orations across diverse specializations to achieve a in innovation and public health technologies.
common goal. Globally, as policy shifts toward greater account-
Adopting a public health innovation approach ability in the setting of unprecedented enthusiasm
could help direct health sector innovation to address for the use of technologies to overcome intractable
major global and domestic public health problems challenges in clinical and public health, a unique
and promote greater alignment between innovations window of opportunity is opening. Appropriate,
and interventions with the largest potential impact. impactful, and entrepreneurially interesting solutions
An increased bridging of these 2 cultures would also may provide a degree of sustainability to public health
push public health professionals to diversify their programs that today rely heavily on government or
traditional sources of financial support beyond fed- donor funding.
eral agencies and private philanthropic foundations, There is a need for greater dialogue and interdisci-
toward private sector funders such as the major plinary approach between technology innovators and
provider networks, managed care organizations, and public health professionals—recognizing the inherent
other payers in the health sector. differences in the way public health problems are de-
Such a transition will not be easy, as health care fined, solutions are developed and tested, and pro-
professionals still need to address some challenges to grams sustained and scaled. There has never been a
blending innovation and entrepreneurship with tra- better time for public health professionals to stretch
ditional public health research and practice. As op- their comfort zones to explore how entrepreneurial
posed to medical innovation, many public health so- approaches to public health innovation could have an
lutions focus on low-cost solutions, aiming for scale outsized impact on health.
and reach—a common feature true for both national
and international programs. References
The size of the targeted markets might justify in- 1. Digital health funding hits new highs in 2015, reaching nearly $6B.
vestment in low-cost solutions, but this requires a dif- CBINSIGHTS. https://www.cbinsights.com/blog/digital-health-
ferent marketing strategy in comparison with typi- funding-2015. Published January 9, 2016. Accessed June 20, 2017.2. Kaiser Permanente Venture. http://www.kpventures.com. Ac-
cal medical innovations with higher single-unit price cessed June 20, 2017.
points and wider profit margins. Inventors might 3. Jakicic JM, Davis KK, Rogers RJ, et al. Effect of wearable tech-
need to engage with multilateral agencies such as nology combined with a lifestyle intervention on long-term weightloss: the IDEA randomized clinical trial. JAMA. 2016;316:1161-1171.
the World Health Organization or UNICEF, while 4. Bravata DM, Smith-Spangler C, Sundaram V, et al. Using pedome-
also courting private sector investors. Investors fa- ters to increase physical activity and improve health: a systematic
miliar with medical device innovations understand review. JAMA. 2007;298:2296-2304.5. Emocha. https://www.emocha.com. Accessed June 20, 2017.
the high-risk/high-reward stakes of investing in the 6. Free C, Phillips G, Galli L, et al. The effectiveness of mobile-health
clinical or surgical space—the formula for a suc- technology-based health behavior change or disease management
cessful investment in public health innovation may interventions for health care consumers: a systematic review. PLoSMed. 2013;10:e1001362.
need to encompass strategies such as impact or social 7. Istepanian RS, Zitouni K, Harry D, et al. Evaluation of a mobile
investments. phone telemonitoring system for glycaemic control in patients with
In recent years, the financial services industry has diabetes. J Telemed Telecare. 2009;15(3):125-128.8. Foodborne Chicago. Report food poisoning to the Chicago De-
dramatically expanded offerings that allow investors partment of Public Health. https://www.foodbornechicago.org.
to fund projects generating social or environmen- Accessed June 20, 2017.
tal impact, alongside financial returns. The Global 9. Health departments partner with Emocha for video DOT. https://www.emocha.com/mobile-health-solutions/adherence-for-tb.
Impact Investing Network11 is one of the many exam- Accessed June 20, 2017.
ples of the financial service that builds critical market 10. Newton DE. Vaccination controversies: a reference handbook.
infrastructure and supports different types of activ- https://books.google.com/books?id=3MeQVLE49oYC&pg=PA213&lpg=PA213&dq=Benjamin+Rubin+(1917-2010)&source=bl&
ities such as research and education. Such services ots=xU5qcOGlY7&sig=F8c3Zd6kVuEBt2ngpUN9CXQOsWE&
help accelerate the investments made into companies hl=en&sa=X&ved=0ahUKEwiT2vGmkszQAhUns1QKHdYEC7cQ6
and organizations and funds to provide financial AEIMzAE#v=onepage&q=Benjamin%20Rubin%20(1917-2010)&f=false. Accessed June 20, 2017.
return while generating social and environmental 11. Global Impact Investing Network. https://thegiin.org/impact-
impact. investing. Accessed June 20, 2017.
Copyright © 2017 Wolters Kluwer Health, Inc. Unauthorized reproduction of this article is prohibited.
