 
 
AIDS Support and Technical 
Assistance Resources 
 
 
 
 
 
 
The Use of Information 
and Communication Technology in 
Family Planning, Reproductive Health, and 
Other Health Programs: 
A Review of Trends and Evidence 
 
 
 
 
 
Submitted to USAID by Management Sciences for Health 
 
 
 
This document is made possible by the generous support of the US President’s Emergency Plan for AIDS Relief 
(PEPFAR) and the US Agency for International Development (USAID) under contract No. GHH-I-00-0700068-00.  
The contents are the responsibility of the AIDSTAR-Two Project and do not necessarily reflect the views of USAID  
or the US Government. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
The AIDSTAR-Two Project. The Use of Information and Communication Technology in Family Planning, 
Reproductive Health, and Other Health Programs: A Review of Trends and Evidence. Cambridge: 
Management Sciences for Health, 2011. 
 
Funding for this publication was provided by the US President’s Emergency Plan for AIDS Relief (PEFAR) 
and the US Agency for International Development under contract No. GHH-I-00-0700068-00. The 
contents are the responsibility of the AIDSTAR-Two Project and do not necessarily reflect the views of 
USAID or the United States Government. 
Contents 
 
Acronyms ......................................................................................................................................... iv 
Acknowledgments ............................................................................................................................ vi 
Executive Summary ............................................................................................................................1 
Introduction ......................................................................................................................................4 
Objective of This Paper ......................................................................................................................5 
ICT for Health: Definition and Trends ..................................................................................................6 
Elements for Success in Family Planning Programming: Summary of select ICT applications in family 
planning, reproductive health, and other programs .......................................................................... 10 
Element #1: Build a high-performing, well-trained staff. ....................................................................... 11 
Element #2: Provide strong leadership. .................................................................................................. 13 
Element #3: Communicate effectively. ................................................................................................... 15 
Element #4: Base decisions on evidence. ............................................................................................... 18 
Element #5: Assure contraceptive security with a strong logistics system. ........................................... 19 
Using ICTs for Health Systems Strengthening .................................................................................... 23 
Enabling Conditions for ICT Use and Scale-up .................................................................................... 26 
Conclusion ....................................................................................................................................... 32 
 
APPENDIX A: ICT-Related Definitions ................................................................................................ 34 
APPENDIX B: Matrix on ICTs and Family Planning/Reproductive Health ............................................. 35 
APPENDIX C: References and Resources............................................................................................ 36 
 
Acronyms 
 
AIDS acquired immune deficiency syndrome  
AMREF African Medical and Research Foundation 
ARV antiretroviral 
CHMI Center for Health Market Innovations 
CHW community health worker 
CPR contraceptive prevalence rate 
DGFP Directorate General of Family Planning 
DLC distance learning center 
eHealth Electronic Health 
EHSDI E-Health Software Development and Implementation 
FHI  Family Health International 
FOOS free and open source software 
FSN Foreign Service National 
GAID Global Alliance for ITC and Development 
GHI Global Health Initiative 
HIV human immunodeficiency virus 
HR human resources 
ICT information and communication technology 
ICT4D information and communication technology for development 
IEC information, education, and communication 
ILS integrated logistics system 
IPPF   International Planned Parenthood Foundation 
IRH   Institute for Reproductive Health 
ISP Internet service provider 
IT information technology 
JHU CCP  Johns Hopkins University Center for Communication Programs 
JSI   John Snow International 
K4H   Knowledge for Health 
KNH   Kenyatta National Hospital 
MDG   Millennium Development Goal 
MSD   Medical Stores Department 
M&E   monitoring and evaluation 
mHealth  mobile health 
mHealthEd  mobile health education 
MOH   Ministry of Health 
m4RH   Mobile for Reproductive Health 
MRS   medical record system 
MSD   Medical Stores Department 
MSH   Management Sciences for Health 
NCK   Nursing Council of Kenya 
NGO   nongovernmental organization 
PEPFAR   Presidents Emergency Plan for AIDS Relief 
PDA   personal digital [or data] assistant 
PHN   population health and nutrition 
PRB   Population Research Bureau 
 
R4D   Results for Development 
RH   reproductive health 
SCIP   Supply Chain Information Portal 
SDP   service delivery post 
SMS   short message service 
SSBCC   Strategic Social Behavior Change Communication 
TB   tuberculosis 
UHIN   Uganda Health Information Network 
UNFPA   United Nations Population Fund 
USAID   US Agency for International Development 
VLDP   Virtual Leadership Development Program 
WHO   World Health Organization 
 
 
  
 
Acknowledgments  
 
This paper was produced by the AIDSTAR-Two Project in collaboration with the US Agency for 
International Development (USAID) Africa Bureau. Funded by USAID’s Office of HIV/AIDS, the overall 
objective of AIDSTAR-Two is to contribute to stronger and more sustainable, country-led HIV/AIDS 
programs, organizations, and networks. The AIDSTAR-Two consortium, led by Management Sciences for 
Health (MSH), includes International HIV/AIDS Alliance; Cardno Emerging Markets, USA, Ltd. (Cardno); 
Health & Development Africa, Ltd.; Initiatives, Inc.; Save the Children Federation; and Religions for 
Peace. 
 
Willow Gerber, knowledge management officer for AIDSTAR-Two, is the author of this paper. Ummuro 
Adano, the project’s deputy director and senior capacity building technical advisor provided valuable 
technical input. We extend our thanks to USAID, in particular, Ishrat Z. Husain, senior health adviser, 
Africa Bureau and Laurie Rushton, AIDSTAR-Two Contracting Officer's Technical Representative (COTR) 
for their support, and to Peggy D’Adamo, information technology & knowledge management (IT/KM) 
advisor—USAID Bureau for Global Health, Office of Population & Reproductive Health, for her extensive 
technical review and useful comments. AIDSTAR-Two Project Director Sarah Johnson offered technical 
guidance and reviewed and commented on early drafts. Elizabeth Walsh of MSH provided skilled editing, 
and Joanna Chao helped with program support. 
 
Our thanks also to the many individuals and organizations that offered their time to give critical input on 
current technologies and relevant information and communication technology (ICT) programming 
considerations. Their perspectives and contributions were invaluable for this document. We are 
especially grateful to those who volunteered to be interviewed, including Peggy D’Adamo of USAID; 
David Aylward, senior advisor, Global Health and Technology at Ashoka; Kelly L’Engle, senior technical 
advisor, FHI 360; Josh Nesbit, CEO, Medic Mobile \+/; Dr. Solomon Orero; Jody Ranck, DrPH.; Rose Reis, 
program officer, Results for Development Institute; Dykki Settle, HRIS Leader, CapacityPlus heath 
informatics, IntraHealth; Dr. Adam Slote, USAID Bureau for Global Health; and Dr. Marsden Solomon, 
regional family planning/reproductive health advisor, FHI 360 Kenya.  
 
Finally, we are very grateful to the people and organizations whose ICT-related projects are featured in 
this paper. They are pioneers in creative and useful ICT applications that are designed to improve health 
systems and achieve health goals. We realize that there are many more people worldwide who are 
actively involved in ICT applications for health. While time and budgetary constraints did not permit a 
more extensive review, we would like to acknowledge them for their contributions to the field.  
 
 
 
 
Executive Summary 
Since 2001, the US Agency for International Development (USAID) and its partners have been working to 
ensure that family planning and reproductive health remain a priority in the face of competing global 
health demands. The growing field of information and communication technology (ICT) can play an 
integral part in supporting these efforts to address family planning, reproductive health, and other 
health needs. The term “eHealth” was coined to describe the combined use of electronic 
communication and information technology in the health sector, but as one leading ICT scholar notes, 
“In a broader sense, the term characterizes not only a technical development, but also a new way of 
working, an attitude, and a commitment for networked, global thinking, to improve health care locally, 
regionally, and worldwide by using information and communication technology” (Pagliari 2005).  
 
As these new ways of working take hold, existing ICTs—particularly mobile technologies—have the 
capacity to improve access to family planning and reproductive health information and services for 
women, men, and youth, with the ultimate potential to better both their health status and their quality 
of life. ICTs also have the potential to strengthen the health care workforce through education and 
training opportunities by reaching health care workers at all levels of the system and supporting other 
areas of the health system including health finance, health information and the logistics system for 
vaccines, medicines, and lab supplies and equipment. 
 
This paper examines the current use of ICTs to advance family planning, reproductive health, and other 
health programs, and identifies the enabling conditions for further scale-up. The examples of ICTs at 
work are structured around specific elements of success that were captured in the 2008 USAID-funded 
report, Elements of Success in Family Planning Programming: (1) building a high-performing, well-
trained staff; (2) providing strong leadership; (3) communicating effectively; (4) basing decisions on 
evidence; and (5) assuring contraceptive security with a strong logistics system (Richey and Salem, 
2008). 
 
Examples of ICT are being applied to support or advance family planning and reproductive health programs 
in many African countries. Examples from Ethiopia, Kenya, Rwanda, Senegal, Tanzania, Malawi and Uganda 
are examined here, complemented by a review of efforts in Bangladesh and India as well as several virtual 
global programs. The paper also takes a look at how digital platforms and mobile technology are being 
integrated into the overall health systems strengthening approach. The collective review of these 
programs illustrates the myriad ways in which technology is adapted to respond to local needs as well as to 
support national health programs and global health initiatives such as the Millennium Development Goals, 
the Global Health Initiative, and the President’s Emergency Plan for AIDS Relief (PEPFAR).  
 
This paper identifies nine overall enabling conditions for ICT use and scale-up in family planning and 
other health programs, as follows: 
1.  Appropriate Infrastructure: While the ICT infrastructure in Africa has dramatically improved 
during the last decade, the Internet is said to still be in its infancy in sub-Saharan Africa. Efforts 
to advance broadband capacity are just beginning, and fiber optic cables have been put in place 
around the African continent. A recent report on ICTs indicates that the next major challenge on 
the horizon for policy makers in this region is the delivery of broadband Internet access at a 
reasonable cost to consumers. 
2. Cost: Health systems have competing priorities, and some people within the system consider ICT 
a luxury, particularly the current mobile and digital versions. In addition to the costs related to 
The Use of ICT in Family Planning and Other Health Programs: Trends and Evidence  Page 1 
broadband Internet access, hardware and software quickly become obsolete, necessitating 
additional investments and adding further financial burdens to already stretched health 
budgets. Civil society organizations, nongovernmental organizations (NGOs), the public sector, 
and other stakeholders should join forces to leverage their collective power to negotiate lower 
rates from private sector telecom providers.  
3. ICT Literacy: Overburdened health workers may view ICTs as just another work requirement for 
which they must struggle to make time. Many health workers may not have received basic 
computer training, and some from rural areas may never have used a computer. Successful 
engagement with health workers is crucial to the integration and scale-up of ICTs in family 
planning and reproductive health efforts, and that engagement is much easier when there is a 
clearly perceived value and sufficient training and support. 
4. Standards and Interoperability: The proliferation of digital and mobile ICTs has created systems 
that, though well intentioned, are often incapable of sharing information. Research indicates the 
need for interoperability standards in health information systems that would allow different ICT 
applications to be shared, replicated, and scaled up. Applications based on open source, as well 
as open standards, can further ICTs that can be more broadly shared, more effectively 
evaluated, and more cost effective for resource-poor countries.  
5. National Policies and Regulations: In the past, leaders did not need to put much focus on 
telecommunications in crafting national health policies and regulations. With the exponential 
growth in eHealth, officials and policy makers must now distinctly consider ICTs in their official 
approaches. Many countries in Africa must also overcome the challenge of restrictive telecom 
regulations that hinder ICT progress. 
6. Contextual Understanding:  Sociocultural contexts shape behavior and attitudes toward family 
planning, and much of family planning counseling takes place outside the formal health sector, 
delivered by local community health workers (CHWs). Marrying the complexities of counseling 
with the resources available to locally based service providers requires a focus on the needs of 
the community members themselves, including support to adopt and adapt new technologies. 
7. Sound Management: The influx of huge volumes of information created by ICTs presents a 
challenge for managers who need to decide what technologies are most appropriate for their 
staff, which are most cost effective, and which will increase productivity. Building the capacity of 
health workers and other intermediaries to be able to effectively use, work with, manage, 
adapt, and develop appropriate ICTs is an ongoing task. 
8. Language: With the exception of radio and television programming, the issue of language is 
frequently ignored in ICT programs, most of which offer very little content in local languages. 
Improving health workers’ capacity to deliver effective family planning or other health services 
involves providing these workers with updated information and guidance in a language they can 
easily understand—preferably their own. 
9. Evaluation: Many technologies look like sure successes while in the planning stage, but fail to 
deliver what they promised when implemented. Evaluation measures impact and allows 
corrective measures to be taken where necessary and offers opportunities for sharing lessons 
and exchanging knowledge. 
 
In the face of rapid change, many health and health systems needs remain constant: the need for 
reliable, accessible family planning methods and services; the demand for continuing education for 
health workers at all levels of the health system; the need to overcome gender inequities so women are 
able to take control of their own health; and the need for reliable health information. While it seems 
The Use of ICT in Family Planning and Other Health Programs: Trends and Evidence  Page 2 
that technology is changing every nanosecond, the astounding pace has led to many advances in the 
global health community, as the examples in this paper illustrate. ICTs can play an even greater role in 
the delivery of quality health care services and the overall support of the health system, especially if the 
scale-up of ICT interventions takes into account the conditions for success outlined in this paper.  
The Use of ICT in Family Planning and Other Health Programs: Trends and Evidence  Page 3 
Introduction  
I'm beginning to sense a continuing shift towards a better understanding and appreciation 
of appropriate technology in the information and communication technology for 
development (ICT4D) field. People are beginning to make the right noises—local 
ownership of technologies and tools, local content, and projects where end-users drive 
the process among them—and as new projects emerge… I hope we'll see actions speaking 
louder than words. 
—Ken Banks, mobile technologist, anthropologist, conservationist.  
Tech Awards Laureate 2009. Founder: kiwanja.net; creator: FrontlineSMS1 
 
Over the last several decades, there have been continuous efforts to promote and improve family 
planning and reproductive health, especially in the developing world. Despite these efforts, “unmet 
need”2 is likely to grow by 40 percent in the next 15 years (United Nations Population Fund [UNFPA] 
2011). In sub-Saharan Africa, where almost half the female population is of reproductive age, one in four 
married women still does not have her contraceptive needs met, and the total fertility rate of 5.2 is 
more than double the world average. The region also has the highest percent of adults ages 15-49 with 
HIV/AIDS. This has severely hampered economic and social progress; further impeding family 
planning/reproductive health efforts. As in many other parts of the world, significant gender barriers 
exist in Africa that contribute to unequal power relations, limiting the ability of women to gain economic 
freedom and improve their health status. Gender norms can present barriers to health services and 
contraceptive use when men control household finances, women’s mobility, and decisions on family 
health care (Foreman 2011). 
 
Since 2001, USAID—through the Office of Population and Reproductive Health, the Africa Bureau, and 
local missions—as well as the World Health Organization (WHO), and other partners, have been working 
to reposition family planning in sub-Saharan Africa to ensure that it remains a priority in the face of 
competing global health demands. Activities include: 
 Identifying targeted areas for increased investment and technical support in family planning at 
the country level; 
 Providing leadership development training to ensure advocates and managers have the skills 
needed to work in this new environment;  
 Developing methodologies for National Health Accounts sub-account analysis and other 
financial tools to support ministries of health in planning and budgeting for family planning 
services and commodities; 
 Improving the policy environment for private sector involvement in family planning service 
delivery; 
 Increasing health sector capacity by expanding the cadre of service providers, including 
community-based distributors through training, to administer injectable contraception; 
 Working with international and national partners in identification and dissemination of best 
practices (USAID, 2006). 
 
                                                          
1
 FrontlineSMS is free, open source software that turns a laptop and a mobile phone into a central 
communications hub. Once installed, the program enables users to send and receive text messages through mobile 
phones with groups of people. 
2
 “Unmet need” refers to women of reproductive age who are not practicing contraception but who do not want 
any more births (limiting their number of children) or who want to postpone the next birth for at least two years 
(spacing their children). 
The Use of ICT in Family Planning and Other Health Programs: Trends and Evidence  Page 4 
The Global Health Initiative (GHI) launched by the United States Government has an important focus on 
family planning/reproductive health outcomes that includes the prevention of 54 million unplanned 
pregnancies by reaching a modern contraceptive prevalence rate (CPR) of 35 percent across all GHI-
assisted countries. Similarly, national governments and other international donors are working to 
revitalize the focus on family planning and reproductive health and, as a result of a range of combined 
efforts to do so, countries are in various stages of repositioning family planning/reproductive health 
(Judice, 2011; UNC, 2010). 
 
Information and communication technology (ICT) can play an integral part in addressing family planning, 
reproductive health, HIV/AIDS, tuberculosis (TB), and many other health needs. ICT methods can be 
used to inform and educate family planning/reproductive health program planners, local clinic staff, 
community health workers, and other service providers, as well as clients. Appropriately applied, 
existing ICTs—particularly mobile technologies—have the capacity to improve access to family 
planning/reproductive health information and services for women, men, and youth, as well as to 
increase their opportunities to more effectively engage in the economy, with the ultimate potential to 
better both their health status and their quality of life. These technologies could also play a role in an 
overall approach to addressing gender inequities if care is taken to purposely support and encourage 
their use for and by women.  
 
Objective of This Paper 
Linking ICT and global health development is not a new concept, but the proliferation of ICT applications 
over the last decade is unprecedented. Key global health documents now mention ICTs as a means to 
support strategic development goals. The United Nations’ Millenium Development Goal number 8 (MDG 
8) calls specifically for increased access to new technologies,3 but ICTs also have the potential to 
advance results for the other seven MDGs. In particular, ICT applications used for family 
planning/reproductive health efforts are critical for moving ahead on MDG 3 (promote gender equality 
and empower women),  MDG 4 (reduce child mortality), MDG 5 (improve maternal health), and MDG 6 
(combat HIV/AIDS, malaria, and other diseases). Program strategies aligned to support the GHI’s goal of 
a 35 percent CPR could benefit by including an ICT 
component across each phase of the family Fostering innovation will require 
planning/reproductive health program cycle. There are “expand*ing+ access to existing 
also numerous opportunities to include ICT interventions technologies and practices,” as well 
in carrying out the seven core principles of the GHI.4 as “expand*ing+ global access to 
According to USAID’s High Impact Practices in Family knowledge by harnessing modern 
Planning, ICTs are recognized as recommended and information technology to narrow 
emerging categories of high impact service delivery the “digital divide.” 
practices based on the strength and consistency of the  
family planning/reproductive health evidence-base (US U. S. Strategy for Meeting  
Agency for International Development 2011). the MDGs, July 2010 
 
                                                          
3
 MDG 8 reads: “Develop a global partnership for development,” and its sixth target is, “In cooperation with the 
private sector, make available the benefits of new technologies, especially information and communications.” Its 
specific indicators include: telephone lines per 100 population, cellular subscribers per 100 population, and 
internet users per 100 population. 
4
 The GHI’s core principles include: implementing a woman- and girl-centered approach; increasing impact through 
strategic coordination and integration; strengthening and leveraging key multilateral organizations, global health 
partnerships, and private sector engagement; encouraging country ownership and investing in country‐led plans; 
building sustainability through health systems strengthening; improving metrics, monitoring, and evaluation; and 
promoting research and innovation.  
The Use of ICT in Family Planning and Other Health Programs: Trends and Evidence  Page 5 
 
The purpose of this paper is to examine the current use of ICTs to advance family planning/reproductive 
health and other health programs, and to identify the enabling conditions for further ICT use and scale-
up. The paper takes into account USAID’s Repositioning Family Planning Initiative’s three key 
intervention areas (advocating for policy change; strengthening leadership; and improving capacity to 
deliver services) for achieving its goals of increasing political and financial commitment to family 
planning, supporting expanded access, and helping meet women’s stated desire for safe, effective 
modern contraception (USAID, 2009). This paper discusses how ICT can contribute to specific elements 
of family planning mentioned in Elements of Success in Family Planning Programming (Richey & Salem, 
2008). The geographic focus of this paper is sub-Saharan Africa, where unmet need for contraception is 
the highest (PRB, 2011), there is an acute shortage of healthcare providers, and although eHealth 
initiatives are greatly increasing, they are doing so with uncoordinated systems that prevent cost 
efficiencies and scale-up.  
 
In preparing this paper, the author reviewed more than 140 relevant documents through online 
literature searches and materials provided by interested parties. In addition, the author conducted key 
informant interviews to enhance understanding of this broad topic and obtain further information on 
the referenced ICT examples. 
 
ICT for Health: Definition and Trends  
There is confusing and sometimes conflicting information on what constitutes ICT. Terms such as 
information and communication technologies (ICTs), information and communication technology for 
development (ICT4D), electronic health (eHealth), and mobile health (mHealth) are often used 
interchangeably. Another new term has recently emerged—mHealth education or mHealthEd—to 
describe applications for mobile devices used primarily to support education and training for health care 
workers. This paper uses the definition of ICT stated below; related definitions are provided in Appendix 
A. 
 
Information and communication technologies: Tools that facilitate communication and the processing 
and transmission of information and the sharing of knowledge by electronic means. This encompasses 
the full range of electronic digital and analog ICTs, from radio and television to telephones (fixed and 
mobile), computers, and electronic-based media such as digital text, audio-video recording, and the 
Internet, including Web 2.0 and 3.0, social networking and web-based communities (GAID, 2010).  
 
The use of ICT throughout the world has skyrocketed in the last two decades, albeit with a prevailing, 
significant difference in the use and scale of ICTs between the Global North and the Global South due to 
cost, availability, accessibility, and interoperability. The growing use of ICTs in the Global South—
eHealth in particular—demonstrates how this region is adapting relevant ICT to local contexts and 
effectively changing standard public health practices.  
Claudia Pagliari, a leading scholar in the ICT field, believes that eHealth is not only a worldwide technical 
advancement but something much larger: “In a broader sense, the term characterizes not only a 
technical development, but also a new way of working, an attitude, and a commitment for networked, 
global thinking, to improve health care locally, regionally, and worldwide by using information and 
communication technology” (Open Clinical, 2011). ICT is unquestionably revolutionizing the way we live 
and work, and touching health profoundly. In short, “used effectively, ICTs have enormous potential as 
tools to increase information flows and the dissemination of evidence-based knowledge, and to 
empower citizens” (InfoDev, 2006). 
 
The Use of ICT in Family Planning and Other Health Programs: Trends and Evidence  Page 6 
Most people are familiar with the use of more conventional ICTs in health interventions, including radio, 
television, computers, Internet, email, fixed land-line telephones, and fax. Some of these, such as radio 
and television, have been used for generations with differing results to support a multitude of family 
planning/reproductive health, HIV/AIDS, and other health programs. Health workers and health 
organizations are familiar with myriad examples: the driver who transports contraceptives from a 
warehouse to a clinic based on stock data emailed from a central office; the woman listening to a 
community radio serial or soap opera designed to increase modern contraceptive use or to encourage 
couples to openly discuss HIV/AIDS; the doctor who accesses the Internet to research family 
planning/reproductive health protocols or how to integrate services—all these are ICT in action.  
ICT for Sustainable Development 
The emergence of the ICT sector is the ideal vehicle for the dissemination of informational 
content. Currently, the community radio sector uses fax, telephone, e-mail, and cell phone to 
support the use of radio. 
[The] information highway is understood to originate and flow from the developed countries to 
the developing world. But, in the past few years, information and communications technology 
has been a pouring wave into the developing countries. 
The developing countries have no other choice but to adopt such technologies. Those who do 
not, risk being further marginalised. We need to jealously guard the role of broadcasting and 
local content development, as we face the challenges of information highway and convergence 
of technologies. Let’s ensure that information and communication are respected as human 
rights, in the building of [the current] knowledge society. 
 
“Community Radio, the Cradle of Information Technology” 
Africa.oneworld.net 
 
 
Of the more established ICT-based practices, radio and television use has been well tested  
and reported, and there are numerous websites and portals dedicated to documenting their results, for 
example Johns Hopkins University Center for Communication Programs (JHU CCP), Drumbeat, Soul Beat, 
infoDEV, K4H, C-Hub, and Communication Initiative. Current strategic social behavior change 
communication (SBCC) interventions use mass media in their structural-environmental models and radio 
and television have the greatest media reach to support these efforts.  
 
Radio—often called “Africa’s medium”—has been a staple ICT used for information, education and 
communication (IEC) and SBCC efforts for decades. Successful radio programs have reported extensive 
audience reach—frequently in the millions—and production and distribution costs are relatively 
inexpensive. Radios create “listening communities that radically shift the nature of the public sphere” 
and radio broadcasts can “transcend the barriers of cost, geographical boundaries, the colonial linguistic 
heritage, and low literacy levels” (WITS, 2011). 
 
There are countless examples of highly successful family planning/reproductive health-related radio 
shows, many of which incorporate multiple ICTs in their implementation, such as when a family 
planning/reproductive health serial program also holds call-in quizzes (by phone), and/or is recorded on 
audiocassettes to be rebroadcast, perhaps as a means for further community outreach by local NGOs or 
to broadcast in a local clinic. The SANYU FM radio station in Kampala, Uganda, recently adopted a 
The Use of ICT in Family Planning and Other Health Programs: Trends and Evidence  Page 7 
multiple ICT approach for their programming; they held a radio poll asking listeners what service 
delivery area (health, education, security, transport, or sanitation) should be the priority. Using a new 
tool called TRAC FM, the station solicited listener comments via short message service (SMS), discussed 
the comments on air, and then created and posted online visualizations of the results on Facebook. Of 
the listeners who voted, 65 percent said healthcare was the greatest concern.5 The station continues to 
solicit listener input on a wide variety of issues. In their use of radio, SMS, and Internet, Trac FM is 
mixing old and new technology to promote public debate and create a powerful feedback loop that 
allows Ugandan citizens to share their views and hold their leaders accountable. 
 
Television is also frequently used for family planning/reproductive health and HIV/AIDS community 
mobilization efforts, although there are fewer televisions than radios throughout Africa. It is considered 
an effective tool for raising awareness and distance learning. Its moving images attract and hold viewers 
attention and “can bring abstract ideas like family planning to life and give them effective value” 
(Munyanziza 1993).  
 
Lessons learned in the use of television in the health sector include: 
 Programming should be adapted to local contexts and cultural realities and include careful 
preparation, pretesting, evaluation, and revision. 
 In the case of family planning/reproductive health–related content, programs should clearly 
explain contraceptive choices and provide viewers with information on where to seek family 
planning/reproductive health services.  
 The disadvantages of television include its high cost and limited access in rural and urban poor 
settings (those that need family planning/reproductive health information the most); a limited 
pool of knowledgeable broadcasters to support it; and its single direction communication, which 
does not allow audience interaction (Munyanziza 1993).  
 
Both radio and television will remain viable ICT tools for family planning/reproductive health, HIV/AIDS, 
and other health issues for years to come. How they may be transformed by digital broadcasting 
technology in sub-Saharan Africa and elsewhere remains to be seen.  
 
Computers, specifically personal computers, are an extremely important technology that can be used to 
strengthen health systems, advance health services, and 
widely share and exchange health information. However, Now, the computer has joined the 
there are significant areas of sub-Saharan Africa where aeroplane as the tool of choice to 
computers are still not in use, and health clinics rarely bring modern health care to remote 
have staff with the time or requisite skills to champion rural hospitals. Using mobile phones 
their use in a sustainable manner. Furthermore, there is and computer, AMREF consultants 
little ongoing support from the health system to maintain can advise doctors (often not 
and upgrade computer equipment or software. While the specialists) in rural hospitals through 
personal computer penetration rate in households in the audio and video links on how to 
industrialized world is over 70 percent, in the Global handle difficult medical cases. 
South, the rate is less than 25 percent (Ahonen & Moore, –African Medical and Research 
2011). Although no concrete data is available on computer Foundation (AMREF) 
access in health service settings in sub-Saharan Africa, it is  
likely low. While computer use is frequently associated 
                                                          
5
 TRAC FM is an open source platform partially built in RapidSMS and originally developed by UNICEF. Interested 
fans can view more data visualizations of TRAC FM polls on its Facebook page and Twitter. TRAC FM Facebook’s 
page is located at http://www.facebook.com/#!/pages/TRAC-FM/123256091082072. Their Twitter feed is at 
http://twitter.com/#!/TracFM.  
The Use of ICT in Family Planning and Other Health Programs: Trends and Evidence  Page 8 
with Internet use, not all computers are connected to the Internet. Handheld devices, including mobile 
phones, are now being used extensively for Internet access and are generally less expensive and more 
user-friendly than desk- or laptop computers, and they do not require a constant power source. 
 
Internet penetration in Africa as of April 2011 was 11.4 percent, while the world average is 30.2 percent. 
Nigeria currently has the highest number of Internet users (44 million) across the continent (not 
unsurprising given its large population), but only a 28 percent Internet penetration rate. In the sub-
Saharan region, the Seychelles has the highest penetration rate, at 37 percent, and Sierra Leone has the 
lowest at 0.2 percent, followed closely by the Central African Republic, Congo, and Niger—all at 0.3 
percent (Miniwatts Marketing Group, 2011). Although large parts of Africa gained access to 
international fiber bandwidth for the first time in 2009 and 2010 through submarine cables, current 
broadband penetration in sub-Saharan Africa is less than 1 percent, making bandwidth expensive and 
connectivity very limited. Nonetheless, remarkable telecommunication advances are currently taking 
place throughout the region, which will have a great impact on Internet use and ICT applications. 
 
New wireless ICTs are revolutionizing all aspects of life and development around the world. Previous 
generations of ICT are being upgraded to digital platforms and open-source software use is increasing 
transparency and operability.  
 
People often associate wireless technology with mobile phones and personal digital (or data) assistants 
(PDAs), but the number and sophistication of wireless products and services is astounding, and many of 
these are being designed specifically to improve health information, diagnostics, and services. In 2009, 
the interest in mobile technology for health spurred the launch of the mHealth Alliance to “harness the 
power of wireless technologies to improve health outcomes in low- and middle-income countries.”6 The 
numbers are indisputable: there are now more than 5 billion wireless subscribers worldwide, and more 
than 70 percent of them live in low- and middle-income countries. Commercial wireless signals cover 
more than 85 percent of the global population, providing a much greater reach than the electrical grid 
(WHO 2011).  
 
Wireless technology does not rely on fixed telephone landlines, which are uncommon in many places 
throughout Africa. In 2009, sub-Saharan Africa had more than 300 million wireless subscribers and the 
mobile phone coverage was at 60 percent (Aker & Mbiti 2010). Beyond what wireless technology can do 
for the end-user, it also provides significant revenue for governments; between 2000 and 2012, sub-
Saharan governments will receive US$71 billion in tax revenues from the wireless industry (Wireless ICT 
Task Force 2010). 
 
mHealth, a more recent ICT that is based on digital and mobile capability, is now at the forefront of 
eHealth discourse because of its potential to transform information and knowledge exchange using 
wireless technology. There are multiple examples of mHealth initiatives worldwide, including data 
collection, supply chain management, health financing, treatment adherence support, health 
information messaging, diagnostic support services, and client helpline services. Certain applications can 
be integrated in a single program so a health worker can use the same mobile phone to do multiple 
tasks, such as accessing diagnostic support and training, collecting and sending data for epidemiological 
surveys, and updating patient records. Available evidence on the use of mHealth tends to be at the 
proof-of-concept stage only and very little formal evaluation has been conducted to date. With 
insufficient large-scale studies on eHealth and mHealth available to determine their relevance, 
applicability, and cost-effectiveness, it is difficult for sub-Saharan governments to determine related 
                                                          
6
 The mHealth Alliance original founding partners include the UN Foundation, the Rockefeller Foundation, and the 
Vodafone Foundation. Additional partners include the GSMA, PEPFAR, and Hewlett Packard. 
The Use of ICT in Family Planning and Other Health Programs: Trends and Evidence  Page 9 
health investment priorities (infoDev 2006). Regardless, compelling work is being done and it is critical 
to evaluate these experiences to develop appropriate guidelines and inform next steps.  
 
Elements for Success in Family Planning Programming: Summary of select ICT 
applications in family planning, reproductive health, and other programs 
In theory, any available ICT could be used to directly or indirectly support family planning, reproductive 
health, and HIV/AIDS activities and help build the capacity of health providers and clients alike. An ICT 
that “improves the ability of a person or entity to carry out stated objectives” (LaFond 2002) can be 
viewed as an element of capacity-building and systems strengthening. The variety, availability, and the 
cost of ICTs directly affect usefulness and uptake. How well people can use them depends on ICT literacy 
and operability.  
 
The use of ICTs in health is not merely about technology; ICTs are a way to achieve a series of desired 
outcomes, for example: 
 Health workers making better treatment decisions; 
 Hospitals providing higher quality and safer care; 
 Governments becoming more responsive to health needs; 
 National and local information systems supporting the development of effective, efficient, and 
equitable health systems; 
 Policymakers and the public becoming more aware of health risks; 
 People having better access to the information and knowledge they need to make informed 
choices for their own better health (infoDev, 2007). 
 
In this section of the paper, examples of current ICT applications are presented based on the USAID-
funded report Elements of Success in Family Planning Programming (Richey & Salem 2008):  
1. Build a high-performing, well-trained staff. 
2. Provide strong leadership. 
3. Communicate effectively. 
4. Work for supportive policies. 
5. Make services affordable. 
6. Base decisions on evidence (M&E). 
7. Assure contraceptive security with a strong logistics system. 
8. Offer client-centered care. 
9. Integrate services. 
10. Make services accessible through a mix of delivery sites. 
 
For ease of reference, the following ICT examples are grouped under five of these 10 elements. The 
remaining categories (work for supportive policies, make services affordable; offer client-centered care; 
integrate services; and make services accessible through a mix of delivery sites) have been subsumed 
under the following five elements:   
1. Build a high-performing, well-trained staff. 
2. Provide strong leadership. 
3. Communicate effectively. 
4. Base decisions on evidence (M&E). 
5. Assure contraceptive security with a strong logistics system. 
 
The Use of ICT in Family Planning and Other Health Programs: Trends and Evidence  Page 10 
Element #1: Build a high-performing, well-trained staff.  
Programs can keep workers motivated and on the job by creating a good working environment, 
matching skills with tasks, and rewarding a job well done (Richey & Salem 2008). 
 
ICT can play a vital role in training and updating the knowledge and practices of health care students and 
professionals—in nursing and medical schools, health facilities, urban settings, and particularly rural 
areas, where it is often needed the most. For example, ICT can support healthcare workers in remote 
hospitals, health centers and dispensaries, which are typically under-staffed and service hard-to-reach 
populations. Family planning services can use ICT to enhance provider skills and take health care worker 
productivity to the next level, helping them to update their knowledge and also maximize their direct 
interaction with patients. The technology already exists to deliver on-site, high-quality educational 
opportunities to health care workers in remote and rural areas through individual handheld devices and 
computers receiving relevant data directly from satellite feeds. 
 
The following are examples of programs that use SMS, text messages, and web-based and wireless 
eLearning platforms to build a high-performing and well-trained health staff. 
 
AMREF’s Distance Learning for Nurses in Kenya and Beyond: There are 20,000 nurses in Kenya—among 
them one registered nurse per 27,000 people. More than 85 percent of them do not have the requisite 
diploma to be “registered nurses,” leaving them inadequately qualified to treat major diseases. The 
number of nursing schools is insufficient for the number of applicants vying for the classroom-based 
training; only 100 of the 20,000 nurses can qualify each year.  
 
Beginning in 2005, the African Medical and Research Foundation (AMREF) and the Nursing Council of 
Kenya (NCK) changed the traditional classroom-based teaching to a paper-based distance learning effort 
that eventually transitioned to an “eLearning” option. This provided greatly increased opportunities for 
nurses to get the training they needed for the registered nurses diploma online. Now, in partnership 
with the Kenyan Ministry of Health, Accenture, and the 
Kenya Medical Training Colleges, AMREF and NCK are using eLearning is cheaper and faster than 
eLearning with the goal of registering 20,000 Kenyan the traditional residential program. It 
nurses. offers an interactive mode of learning 
 and allows students to gain IT skills. 
Four computer-based training modules are being delivered This mode of training harnesses 
through more than 100 eLearning centers by 400 tutors, technological advances to improve 
reaching nurses in even the remotest parts of Kenya. Twenty- health and reduce poverty on a local 
five nursing schools are also engaged in the program. level, and can easily be replicated 
Although students must pay tuition to the nursing institutions across Africa. 
where they are studying, some employers, such as Kenyatta Peter Ngatia 
National Hospital (KNH) are now supporting their employees’ Director of Capacity Building, AMREF 
participation in the program (ReliefWeb 2008).   
 
Between 2005 and March 2011, more than 7,000 students have enrolled in the program, which is now 
being replicated by the ministries of health in Uganda and Tanzania with AMREF’s support. Program 
graduates working in Kenya’s Kangundo Hospital are reportedly more motivated, knowledgeable, and 
proactive. They also have enhanced computer literacy skills that directly build their general professional 
capacities. According to one graduate, “I *now+ interact a lot with the patients and give them more 
attention than I used to. Even the doctors respect us. Before, we were just there to follow instructions, but 
after seeing what we’re able to do, they listen to us and even consult us” (iheed 2011). 
 
The Use of ICT in Family Planning and Other Health Programs: Trends and Evidence  Page 11 
SpacedEd Continuing Professional Development: Scaling up health workforce education to meet the 
overwhelming demand for more health workers generally involves tremendous resources, including 
investments in infrastructure and training facilities, as well as recurrent costs for trainer fees and 
program materials. Traditional classroom training often requires that participants be absent from their 
jobs, and does not usually take into account individual learning styles and/or scheduling conflicts. In 
response to these limitations, IntraHealth International’s CapacityPlus project is collaborating with 
SpacedEd.com on a unique approach to delivering knowledge and training through the Internet and 
mobile phones.  
 
Spaced education is a cutting-edge learning method that combines two core psychology research 
findings—the spacing effect and the testing effect. The spacing effect refers to the research finding 
that information presented and repeated over spaced intervals is learned and retained more 
effectively. The testing effect refers to the finding that long-tem information retention is greatly 
improved by testing learners on this information. Hence, “testing is not merely a means to measure a 
learner’s level of knowledge, but rather causes knowledge to be stored more effectively in long-term 
memory” (IntraHealth 2011). SpacedEd.com uses spaced education methodology to deliver learning 
content. 
 
CapacityPlus will develop and test context-specific health courses, using Harvard University’s Space 
Education platform, to deliver individualized in-service training via SMS and interactive voice response 
on cell phones. Courses will focus on family planning/reproductive health, HIV/AIDS, maternal and child 
health, malaria, and gender. Though currently available only in English, the platform will expand to 
include four additional languages: French, Mandarin, Portuguese, and Spanish. Ethiopia’s Ministry of 
Health has asked CapacityPlus to develop a course on breastfeeding for HIV-positive mothers that 
community health workers could access by mobile phones. In Mali, CapacityPlus is developing an in-
service course on postpartum family planning and a program monitoring family planning protocols. 
 
Knowledge for Health (K4H): Eighty-three percent of Malawi’s population lives in rural areas, and thus 
family planning/reproductive health and HIV/AIDS services are largely delivered in community health 
centers and district hospitals located miles from rural villages. To increase access to these services, 
Malawi’s Ministry of Health (MOH) has been working with coordinating partners to revitalize a cadre of 
volunteer community health workers (CHWs) to bring contraceptives and family planning/reproductive 
health and HIV/AIDS education directly to the rural population. The USAID-funded K4H pilot project 
promotes family planning/reproductive health and HIV/AIDS information use and exchange, and aims to 
increase access to up-to-date information on these topics through the use of district health learning 
centers, electronic health information toolkits, and a SMS-based mobile telephone network to benefit 
managers and service providers at the national, district, and community levels to improve family 
planning/reproductive health and HIV/AIDS services. 
 
To centralize and increase information access, District Learning Centers (DLCs) have been established 
in district hospitals in Nkhotakota and Salima; these offer a range of resources, including print 
materials and opportunities for face-to-face training and networking. The DLCs offer computers with 
free access to online and CD-ROM-based learning, including standardized Malawi-specific family 
planning/reproductive health and HIV/AIDS “toolkits.” Three Malawi-specific e-toolkits on family 
planning, neonatal and maternal health, and youth and reproductive health have been developed by 
technical working groups sponsored by the MOH; these include information to support the 
implementation of national policies and standards. The working groups are responsible for keeping 
the toolkits up-to-date. 
The Use of ICT in Family Planning and Other Health Programs: Trends and Evidence  Page 12 
In collaboration with Medic Mobile \+/, an SMS-based mobile telephone network was established that 
allows community health workers to send text messages between cell phones and other devices. 
Through the mobile network, the program alerts these health workers to new resources, training 
opportunities, changes in protocols, and other relevant knowledge exchange and public health activities 
in their district. 
As a result of these efforts, 60 percent of health workers at the national level and 40 percent at the 
district level are accessing information through the toolkits. Two DLCs are open, and 91 health 
workers have received computer training. Seventy-seven percent of CHWs have received telephones 
and are using SMS to report emergencies, make diagnoses, and communicate with supervisors. Many 
have reported significant reductions in travel time and expenses due to the use of these ICTs 
(Management Sciences for Health 2011). 
Global Health eLearning Center: USAID’s Population, Health, and Nutrition officers (PHNs) and Foreign 
Service Nationals (FSNs) demand current information on global health topics, but logistic and time 
constraints frequently make such knowledge exchange a challenge. In response to repeated requests 
from field staff for access to technical public health information, USAID’s Bureau of Global Health 
launched the Global Health eLearning Center, which offers Internet-based courses that: 
 Provide useful and timely continuing education for health professionals;  
 Offer state-of-the-art technical content on key public health topics;  
 Serve as a practical resource for increasing public health knowledge (USAID 2011). 
 
There are nine global health “certificate tracks” with dozens of online courses offered in each tract. 
More than two dozen courses relate to family planning/reproductive health, including  “Family 
Planning 101,” “Family planning Programming—Elements of Success,” “Family Planning Legislation & 
Policy Requirements,” “Family Planning/Reproductive Health for People Living with HIV,” 
“Contraceptive Logistics,” and more. Subject matter experts design the courses, which can be 
completed by users in one to two hours online. Participants can also download and print the course 
materials for further study (USAID 2011). 
 
Since its launch in 2005, participants from over 150 countries worldwide, representing USAID, its 
cooperating agencies, and other partners have accessed the eLearning Center. The program has 
awarded over 68,000 certificates to date for family planning/reproductive health-related courses.7  
 
Element #2: Provide strong leadership.  
Strong leadership helps programs navigate change. Good management solves operational 
problems (Richey & Salem 2008). 
 
Virtual Leadership Development Program (VLDP): In response to demand from public and private 
health care organizations for cost-effective, practical, and accessible leadership and management 
development, Management Sciences for Health (MSH) designed the Virtual Leadership Development 
Program (VLDP) in 2002. As of September 2011, the VLDP—available in Arabic, English, French, 
Portuguese, Russian, and Spanish—had been delivered to more than 2,900 participants from 379 
health teams in 63 countries around the world, with many managers and providers in family 
planning/ reproductive health, HIV/AIDs, and other health programs as participants. 
 
                                                          
7
 Data provided by MSH IT and program staff in personal email communication. Sept. 2011. 
The Use of ICT in Family Planning and Other Health Programs: Trends and Evidence  Page 13 
The VLDP uses the Internet, a print workbook, and teamwork to strengthen the capacity of health 
workers to overcome workplace challenges. While traditional leadership programs might call for 
giving a few top level managers off-site training for one to two weeks or longer, the VLDP trains 
teams of from four to 10 people virtually over the course of 13 weeks. Each team develops an action 
plan to address a current work challenge they are facing and applies the knowledge and skills they 
learn throughout the VLDP to improve the situation. 
 The course cannot close before I can 
The VLDP requires approximately four to six hours of share how much the program changed 
individual commitment per week by participants who me. You will never know your challenges 
can work according to their own schedules. Team until you are taught to analyze the root 
members work independently on the VLDP website cause. It was not only about those I lead 
with additional support from the workbook and a but also about me… 
team of expert facilitators. They also participate in VLDP Participant Remigio Kadzviti, 
on-site team meetings within their organizations Botswana, 2011 
throughout the program.   
 
A virtual program such as the VLDP offers a learning opportunity at a fraction of the cost of comparable 
face-to-face training. The estimated cost per participant of implementing a 16-week VLDP is 
US$78/week, while the estimated cost of sending one participant from an East African country to the 
United States for a three-week training course is approximately US$1,433 per week (MSH 2010). 
 
iHRIS Manage: The way health workers are managed and supported is central to the quality of the 
health services they deliver. According to human resources (HR) management expert, Ummuro Adano, 
“Adequate HR management capacity remains one of the critical missing factors in current efforts to 
meet the goals of national and global health system strengthening efforts including large global health 
initiatives” (McCaffery & Adano 2009). Recent efforts to support professionalizing HR personnel 
throughout sub-Saharan Africa can benefit from ICT applications and tools that can help HR personnel 
streamline management functions such as hiring, deployment, and training. The USAID-funded 
CapacityPlus project has designed and implemented one such tool, iHRIS Manage. 
 
iHRIS Manage is a free tool based on open source technology that gives health managers timely 
information to assess HR issues and functions, and to plan and evaluate appropriate interventions. It is 
primarily intended to help manage health care workers employed within a national ministry of health, a 
hospital, or other large health care organization, but it can also be used by private service providers or 
adapted to other settings.  
 
To ease the heavy HR administrative burden, iHRIS  
provides a Scanned Paper Records Module to We don't provide just software but offer a 
“archive paper forms and letters generated and program of technical assistance and expertise 
distributed when health workers are confirmed, to ensure that the technology is transferred 
promoted, or transferred” (IntraHealth 2011). In effectively and serves the ability of decision-
Kenya and Uganda, iHRIS Manage is showing makers to use data to lead and manage.  
results, helping the central ministry’s Human CapacityPlus, 2011 
Resources Directorate to manage the workforce 
more efficiently while reducing costs and data 
errors. Using the system, HR professionals are able to standardize job titles and classifications, solicit job 
applications for open positions, assign employees to fill positions, and maintain a searchable database of 
all employees that includes their identifying information and qualifications. Managers can also track 
each employee's history with the organization, including their positions and salary histories, and record 
the reason for departure when the employee leaves. 
The Use of ICT in Family Planning and Other Health Programs: Trends and Evidence  Page 14 
 
The developers believe in a “release early, release often” philosophy that encourages user feedback. 
Within the last year, multiple new modules and software features for advanced HR management have 
been introduced. iHRIS software now integrates with other health information systems more easily, 
allowing health workforce data to be aggregated with health delivery information and disease statistics.  
 
“One of the aspects that I’m excited about is the ability to build custom reports to facilitate health 
worker data analysis. Although the iHRIS software installation comes with a number of standard reports, 
the iHRIS team often receives requests for help creating custom reports. This new direction helps to 
meet the goals of the iHRIS team to build local capacity for the iHRIS software, as well as diversify and 
expand the iHRIS developer community,” says Kabelo Bitsang, iHRIS administrator for the Botswana 
Ministry of Health.  
 
With the addition of Translatewiki, a site that provides a large community of volunteer translators, the 
program now also offers better support to users in the current available languages of Dutch, English, 
Estonian, French, German, Italian, Portuguese, Brazilian Portuguese, Spanish, Swahili, and Tagalog. 
 
Element #3: Communicate effectively.  
Communication grounded in behavior theory and sensitive to local norms motivates 
clients to seek services and helps them make good family planning choices (Richey & 
Salem 2008). 
 
A woman’s well-being and that of her family and community depend on access to quality health 
information and education. There are many examples of ICT use for engaging, educating, and informing 
the community about family planning/reproductive health, HIV/AIDS, and other health issues, as well as 
the availability of related services. The programs described below use SMS and text messaging to 
effectively reach the community. 
 
Mobile for Reproductive Health (m4RH): In 2010, FHI 360's Mobile for Reproductive Health (m4RH) 
project launched a set of SMS and text messages about eight family planning methods for mobile users 
in Kenya and Tanzania. The nine-month pilot project began in Nairobi in collaboration with nine of the 
city’s health clinics, including two private clinics operated by Marie Stopes International/Kenya and 
Family Health Options Kenya, the Kenyan Planned Parenthood affiliate. The messages were developed 
using information from evidence-based sources such as WHO’s family planning handbook for providers. 
They conform to the standard 160-character texting limit, and were rigorously tested for user 
comprehension. The m4RH system also provides service delivery information so users can locate clinics 
for the family planning method of their choice. The mobile access codes that clients need to get into the 
m4RH system are publicized on posters, palm cards, and flyers (see Figures 1 and 2).  
  
The Use of ICT in Family Planning and Other Health Programs: Trends and Evidence  Page 15 
 
 
Figures 1 and 2: Sample Information Cards for m4RH  
 
Ongoing research on the SMS project revealed that more than 10 percent of clients accessed 
information on all contraceptive methods, but in both Kenya and Tanzania, the menu of natural family 
planning methods received the highest number of hits (9.1%). Kenya’s client user numbers were 
significantly higher than those of Tanzania (20,489 vs. 7,377), but uptake was more rapid in Tanzania, 
where the m4RH service is offered in Swahili, the country’s local language. Although the service has yet 
to be formally evaluated, anecdotal evidence suggests that it is quite popular with young couples and 
youth. 
 
m4RH is one of the few text messaging services in Africa designed to provide family planning 
information and education to the general public, and anyone with a mobile phone in Kenya or Tanzania 
can access the free service. Partners see m4RH as a 
feasible and affordable means to deliver family We’re always talking about not knowing 
planning/reproductive health information to large numbers how to reach youth—they are so tech -
of people, many of whom would not normally seek such savvy now so this is a perfect way to 
information in clinics. The expectation is that access to this reach them! 
information will generate demand for related services. A –Dr. Marsden Solomon 
separate FHI 360 project is now promoting m4RH among Regional family planning/reproductive  
its HIV/AIDS peer educators and CHWs as a way to health advisor, FHI 360 Kenya 
integrate family planning into their HIV/AIDS programs.   
 
m4RH is now “earmarked for expansion and replication to cover more geographic acreage” (Mwaila 
2011). At a stakeholder dissemination meeting in March 2011, participants recommended that the 
platform be used to promote the services of youth-friendly centers, expand the support information for 
service providers to improve quality of care, and to strengthen Health Management Information 
Systems relative to commodity security. There was also a proposal to set the team up under the 
chairmanship of the Division of Reproductive Health “to support replication, further development, and 
institutionalization” (Mwaila 2011). With 25 million mobile phone subscribers in Kenya and more than 
14 million in Tanzania, m4RH has significant potential for scale-up (International Telecommunications 
Union 2011; JamiiForums 2010). 
 
CycelTel™: The Institute for Reproductive Health (IRH) at Georgetown University developed CycelTel as 
an educational and support mechanism for clients who prefer a nonhormonal modern contraceptive. 
CycelTel is a mobile phone–based version of the well-known fertility awareness product, Cycle Beads.® 
The developers considered the following trends to support the initiative:  
The Use of ICT in Family Planning and Other Health Programs: Trends and Evidence  Page 16 
 More than two-thirds of the world's 5 billion mobile phone subscribers live in developing 
countries. 
 Over 3 billion (of 5 billion) are short message service (SMS) users. 
 India topped 350 million cell phone users in 2008 (as of June 2011, India has 851.7 million 
mobile phone subscribers). 
 The vast majority of subscribers are women and men of reproductive age. 
 Mobile messaging services are extremely popular and growing, with mobile phone users sending 
over 2 trillion messages annually worldwide (Puleio 2011). 
The proof-of-concept testing in India used Frontline SMS–based delivery of the Standard Days Method, 
where 500 women subscribed to the service with SMS on the first day of their menses and then received 
daily follow-up text messages indicating fertility status. The Standard Days Method has been found to be 
over 95 percent effective in avoiding unplanned pregnancy and is recognized as an “evidence-based 
practice” by WHO. An additional menu-based service allowed women to receive information via SMS on 
alternative family planning/reproductive health methods (with an emphasis on the importance of 
healthy timing and spacing of pregnancies), STI/HIV prevention, condom use, and counseling and testing 
information, as well as to connect to local health clinics. A helpline number for individual phone 
consultation was also available (Bhavsar for MobileActive.org 2010). As the project develops, women 
and men will be able to access answers to their questions about the Standard Days Method and other 
RH issues via SMS.  
Voxiva, Inc. is the technology provider for CycleTel, whose application has significant potential to be 
scaled up across many countries and in different 
languages. The application is able to handle a high “In light of the high unmet need for family 
volume of users and messages—possibly reaching planning and reproductive health 
millions of people based on demand. According to the information, there is the significant 
Institute for Reproductive Health, “Voxiva's system is potential to help women avoid pregnancy 
able to send as many as 200 SMS messages per and improve their reproductive health by 
second and has proven ability to support expanding providing them with timely, actionable, 
messaging and data needs as projects scale. Data personalized information through SMS.” 
collection occurs in real time and is stored in one –Institute for Reproductive Health 
central database, accessible to researchers and Georgetown University 
project managers at any time from any personal 
computer connected to the Internet” (Devries 2009).  
Preliminary feasibility study results indicate that CycleTel w ould “fit well within typical mobile phone use 
and SMS habits in the study areas, and that women have significant interest in applying SMS to use the 
Standard Days Method and receiving related RH information” (Devries 2009). Other relevant findings 
included: 
 Messages should be precise and non-technical. 
 Participants definitely preferred text rather than voice messages. 
 The phrase “fertile day” was perceived as degrading to women.  
 Participants in the study showed a preference for phrasing "safe/unsafe day" rather than "you 
can/cannot get pregnant today" to protect privacy—confidentiality is an issue, even when cell 
phones are individually owned. 
 There was a preference for messages only on unsafe days and for minimal information about 
length of fertile window (only when it begins/ends). 
The Use of ICT in Family Planning and Other Health Programs: Trends and Evidence  Page 17 
 Messages should be Hindi words spelled with Roman alphabet (“Hinglish”)—researchers 
suggest assessing the feasibility of sending messages in languages based on the non-Roman 
alphabet.  
 Half of the male respondents thought both partners should receive messages. 
 People are willing to pay for a monthly service. 
 
These findings are being used to refine the CycleTel application and the service will be expanded in India 
and possibly adapted for other countries. 
 
Element #4: Base decisions on evidence.  
Research, monitoring, and evaluation yield important information to guide decision-
making, and these activities need not be expensive (Richey & Salem 2008).  
 
Monitoring and evaluation (M&E) is a core component of sound program design and management and is 
essential in advancing family planning/reproductive health, HIV/AIDS, and other health-related goals. 
Information acquired through appropriate research and M&E allows program staff to see how well a 
project is working, provides vital information to make well-informed decisions about performance, helps 
staff plan activities based on evidence, and helps determine whether projects are on track to meet 
desired goals. It also reveals if systems are in place and working effectively and, ultimately, whether a 
program is well established in the target community. Monitoring and evaluation can be used to help 
strengthen and institutionalize programs, shape funding decisions, and contribute to a global 
understanding of “what works” (Adamchak 2000). 
 
The following two examples cite interventions using mobile collection tools to facilitate M&E and 
research efforts. 
 
Last 10 Kilometer (L10K): John Snow International’s (JSI’s) Last 10 Kilometer (L10K) Project is using 
DataDyne’s EpiSurveyor8 (a free web-based mobile phone data collection software) in a program that 
allows field researchers in more than 115 communities in four regions of Ethiopia to collect critical data 
to help strengthen the bridge between households, communities, and the government’s flagship Health 
Extension program. The effort aims to “mobilize families and communities to more fully engage to 
improve household and community health practices and ultimately improve key reproductive, maternal, 
neonatal and child health outcomes.” L10K beneficiaries include approximately 14.5 million people, 
including 2.6 million children under five, and 3.5 million women of reproductive age (John Snow 
International 2011).  
 
EpiSurveyor in Senegal: In 2008, the Senegal Ministry of Health, in partnership with WHO, improved M&E 
health data collection by using mobile ICT. They gave 20 CHWs in 10 districts PDAs loaded with EpiSurveyor 
and trained them on its use. During a six-month pilot project, with PDAs in hand, the CHWs visited 90 
health posts each month. They carried out an 82-question survey on basic supervisory data and entered 
their responses in real time into EpiSurveyor. The data was then sent electronically to the district level, 
                                                          
8
 EpiSurveyor is a web- and mobile phone-based tool that makes it simple to collect public health and other data on 
mobile phones. Usable on common mobile phones available in every country, as well as PDAs and a variety of 
smartphones, EpiSurveyor is a simple, no-cost tool that requires only basic word processing and cell phone skills to 
use. Survey forms can be downloaded and modified, and data entered and synchronized. Recent releases of 
EpiSurveyor include automated analysis in charts and graphs and reporting by email and upload of data via SMS. 
EpiSurveyor is now the most widely adopted open source mobile health software in the world and has been 
officially established as an electronic data collection standard by WHO.  
The Use of ICT in Family Planning and Other Health Programs: Trends and Evidence  Page 18 
where it was analyzed and then sent on to the MOH, where it was synthesized and included with reports 
from other districts. The pilot clinics using PDAs showed an improvement in 67 percent of health 
indicators. In one district, data that would previously take a full day to compile was gathered in one hour. 
The district saw a 500% increase in infant vaccinations, and an increase of 10,000 vitamin A tablets ordered 
after data gathered by the survey indicated a shortage. Timely data processing allowed health officials to 
reallocate their budgets to promptly respond to identified needs (Ranck 2011). 
 
Relevant data from the pilot study indicated that health facilities in the pilot districts had a serious 
shortage of partograms, a basic birthing tool. The low-cost partogram is used by midwives to monitor 
labor to ensure safe deliveries. The EpiSurveyor-collected data allowed the MOH to identify that only 55 
percent of the surveyed districts had partograms. Based on this information, the MOH increased 
distribution of partograms and asked field workers to encourage midwives to use the tool for every 
delivery. Follow-up surveys noted the midwives needed training to use the partograms effectively, so 
necessary guidance was initiated. Subsequent EpiSurveyor information showed that partogram use 
during labor increased on average by 28 percent in the 10 pilot regions compared to only a one percent 
increase in use in areas outside the study (WHO 2011). 
 
Element #5: Assure contraceptive security with a strong logistics system.  
A strong logistics system and a long-term plan for contraceptive security ensure that a 
variety of methods, and the supplies and equipment to provide them, are always available 
(Richey& Salem 2008). 
 
Supply chain management systems in many countries throughout Africa are using eHealth and mHealth 
to transmit information “between medical dispensaries, logistics management units, local pharmacists, 
and patients to increase efficiency and fight against drug counterfeiting” (Vital Wave Consulting 2011). 
Required skills for any senior contraceptive supply chain advisor now include knowledge and experience 
with specific ICT for supply chain management and applications (e.g., software development and 
automation of logistics management information systems, use of mobile technologies for supply chain 
reporting, ordering, and monitoring), as well as capacity-building and organizational development for 
supply chain management (eTransformAfrica 2011). 
 
The following interventions use ICT to facilitate contraceptive security through strong logistic systems. 
 
Bangladesh Supply Chain Information Portal: USAID has been supporting efforts to strengthen the supply 
chain management system in Bangladesh to ensure family planning/reproductive health commodity 
security for many years. While advances have been made, problems still hinder the continuous availability 
of reproductive health commodities. Since the fall of 2009, the USAID-funded Strengthening 
Pharmaceutical Systems (SPS) Program has provided technical assistance to the country’s Directorate 
General of Family planning (DGFP) and other national stakeholders to improve procurement management 
for reproductive health commodities, build up the existing distribution and management information 
systems, and increase local capacity to strengthen health systems overall. This support has resulted in 
the Government of Bangladesh streamlining procurement, which led to the World Bank’s approval of 
commodities amounting to US$63 million. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
The Use of ICT in Family Planning and Other Health Programs: Trends and Evidence  Page 19 
 
  
 Figure 3: Screenshot of Bangladesh SCIP’s Procurement Tracker 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
The DGFP Supply Chain Information Portal helps ensure contraceptive availability in Upazila 
and at the field level, which eventually will help reduce unwanted pregnancies and 
population growth—steps toward reaching the relevant MDGs. 
The DGFP’s new Supply Chain Information Portal (SCIP) is key to the improved procurement 
management system, offering relevant and timely information for informed decision-making .9 
 
The Procurement Tracker (seen in Figure 3) allows government officials to track the status of the 
procurement process every step of the way, which helps prevent delays while also promoting 
transparency. The SCIP also provides information on current DGFP tenders and procurement 
opportunities, tender documentation, results of past tenders, a news page, and a photo gallery 
(http://dgfplmis.org/). The portal is unique in the government sector for its ability to allow users to 
manage data and create presentations using web-based dashboards.  
 
  
                                                          
9
 The SCIP received two prestigious awards at Bangladesh’s Digital Innovation Fair in July 2011. The secretary of 
Bangladesh’s Ministry of Health and Family Welfare accepted the SCIP’s award for the best e-governance initiative; 
in addition, the portal won the runner-up award for national digital innovation in the e-health category, making it 
eligible for the 2011 World Summit Award—the global initiative to promote the world's most innovative 
information technology applications.  
The Use of ICT in Family Planning and Other Health Programs: Trends and Evidence  Page 20 
The ILSGateway (Tanzania): Health system performance and related family planning/reproductive 
health outcomes are severely affected when essential supplies and contraceptives are not available on 
demand at service facilities. Poor supply chain management causing stock-outs or surpluses produce 
cost inefficiencies and result in poor quality of care for clients. Over the last two decades, the DELIVER 
Project, funded by USAID, has gathered experience and expertise in contraceptive security logistics and, 
more recently, in antiretrovirals and anti-malarial drugs. DELIVER staff have done so with a core focus on 
using appropriate ICTs.  
 
A large volume of data gets generated in logistics systems, and having a means to organize the data in a 
visual dashboard makes it much easier for decision-makers to translate the information effectively. Vast 
amounts of information are also produced by routine reports that are frequently difficult to summarize 
or analyze at the central level. To respond to this “information overload” challenge, the DELIVER Project 
in Tanzania worked with a local software developer to create a database application that allows 
systematic data capturing and analysis at the central level. The database facilitates order processing at 
the Medical Stores Department (MSD) and data collection on commodity use at the facility level, which 
the MSD had not regularly collected in the past. The system is “built with remote access capacity and 
has features that will also enable online order submission by Web-enabled facilities through the Internet 
and provide access to data on product usage to MOH program managers” (JSI 2007). 
 
In 2010, the project began working with Tanzania’s Ministry of Health and Social Welfare to develop a 
series of technological innovations to address weaknesses in the country’s newest supply chain system, 
the Integrated Logistics System (ILS). The ILSGateway is designed as a routine reporting system using 
SMS text messages and USB-powered bar scanners to scan order forms.  
 
Both the SMS messages and scanned report and request forms feed into a website with a user-friendly 
dashboard interface, which provides a reporting system with greater visibility of stock levels at service 
delivery points. This visual graphic information is intended to improve ordering and reporting rates and 
adherence to ILS procedures. It will also empower district logistics managers to diagnose and prevent 
chronic stock outs of contraceptive and other health commodities. ILSGateway began its pilot phase in 
several districts in November 2010 with the following objectives: 
1. Provide real-time stock status information on RH commodities. 
2. Improve the timeliness and accuracy of paper-based ordering and reporting from service 
delivery posts (SDPs). 
3. Improve the accuracy and timeliness of deliveries to SDPs by confirming delivery arrival in real 
time. 
4. Allow decision-makers at all levels to monitor the regularity and spread of facility-level 
supervision by managers at district and other levels. 
5. Prevent widespread emergency ordering that has resulted from other reporting systems by 
aiding districts and facilities in regular and routine ordering (JSI 2011). 
 
Figure 4 presents a view of the ILSGateway website. 
The Use of ICT in Family Planning and Other Health Programs: Trends and Evidence  Page 21 
 
Figure 4: Screenshot from the ILSGateway 
 
The Use of ICT in Family Planning and Other Health Programs: Trends and Evidence  Page 22 
Using ICTs for Health Systems Strengthening 
We’ve realized that it’s how you use this new set of tools to enact system change that 
makes the difference. It’s about the people in the system and their roles and how they 
relate to each other that’s most important. For ICT, mobile has the most impact because 
it’s people-centered. It allows patients and community health workers to all of a sudden 
be INTEGRAL to the system. This changes expectations and roles for patients and 
community health workers in a very positive way. When someone walks 40 miles to get 
trained, it means they want to play a particular role in the health system. Mobile tech can 
make that happen.  
–Josh Nesbitt 
CEO, Medic Mobile \+/ 
 
Health systems are complex and the people working within these systems require dedicated attention, skills, 
and support in order to sustain positive health results. ICTs are currently being applied to strengthen all six of 
the WHO health system building blocks—information, health service delivery, human resources, financing, 
governance and leadership, and drugs/vaccines. Information systems in particular involve sophisticated 
applications to help gather, send, analyze, store, and disseminate tremendous amounts of data from multiple 
sources. ICTs are used in many ways, including electronic patient records, monitoring drug supplies, ordering 
systems, budget management, and tracking disease prevalence. 
 
The following are examples of digital platforms and mobile technology being used to strengthen 
national health systems. 
 
Uganda Health Information Network (UHIN): Uganda has one of the highest burdens of disease in the 
world but also some of the best cellular telephone coverage in Africa. UHIN, launched in 2003, is a 
wireless network built around the country's cell phone network, handheld computers, and wireless 
servers to enable CHWs to access vital information. It makes data collection and reporting easier, 
disseminates health information, provides learning materials, and facilitates email exchange for health 
workers. At its start, the project equipped 700 health care providers in five districts of Uganda with PDAs 
loaded with a mobile clinical library, including MOH 
documents such as the Uganda Clinical Guidelines and other We received accurate HMIS data in 
resources on HIV/AIDS treatment and care, malaria, and a timely manner, empowering us to 
maternal and child health.  make evidence-based decisions 
regarding resource allocation and 
According to UHIN program staff, health workers use the PDAs response to outbreak prone 
to collect public health data at the community level and then diseases quickly.  
upload it along with emails they need to send to wireless –Dr. Robert Mayanja  
access points via infrared, Bluetooth, or Wi-Fi at a rural health Rakai District Health Officer, 
facility.10  These points transmit the data and messages over Uganda  
the network to a Kampala-based server, which routes them to  
the correct recipients and sends back the messages, data, and health information that clinicians need. 
Because the technology is solar powered, health care workers are able to access and exchange 
information in remote areas without fixed telephone lines or regular access to electricity.  
Among the information exchanged: monthly Health Management Information System reports; disease 
surveillance data; reports related to HIV/AIDS, tuberculosis, and malaria; and data for monitoring drug 
                                                          
10
 Bluetooth, Wi-Fi, and infrared wireless technologies are commonly used for short-range wireless communication 
between electronic devices. 
The Use of ICT in Family Planning and Other Health Programs: Trends and Evidence  Page 23 
usage and stocks. Additional tools for electronic data collection of non-routine sources of information—
especially in relation to community-based health care, nutrition, and environmental sanitation 
programs—have also been developed, and rural health facilities are using the network to capture data 
and report to district health offices and the MOH.  
In addition, continuing medical education for all health workers is regularly broadcast through the UHIN. 
Three times a week, health workers receive eLearning content pertaining to diagnosis, treatment, and 
prevention of major health problems on their PDAs. They also receive news from mainstream media on 
a daily basis through the network. 
A 2010 study showed that UHIN reduced the cost of managing health information by 25 percent 
compared to the “cumbersome paper-based manual systems that are delay-prone, less reliable, and in 
some cases incomplete” (NSJ 2010). Following the end of the initial project, the MOH of Uganda 
incorporated UHIN into its comprehensive strategy for a National Health Information System, and the 
districts continue to use the system to gather, report, and deliver vital health information and data.  
National Medical Record System in Rwanda: A key element for improving health service quality is the 
consistent use of appropriate medical records aligned with a strategic health information system. 
Though multiple electronic medical record systems exist in the private sector, there is a trend 
supporting national electronic records taking place throughout Africa. 
 
As part of the country’s Vision Figure 5: Rwanda's eHealth Architecture  
2020 effort, the Rwandan 
government implemented a 
comprehensive national 
medical record system for use 
in all their health facilities 
using TraCNet, Open MRS 
(medical record system), and 
the National Health 
Information System. The 
system consists of programs 
for tracking patient records, 
monitoring infectious diseases, 
managing drug and supply 
chains, telemedicine 
communications with health 
professionals in remote areas, 
and eLearning and training for 
health care workers (Fasier, 
May & Wanchoo 2008). The 
system will need to address 
patient record security and 
privacy as part of its quality 
control mechanism, an area of particular sensitivity for family planning/reproductive health and 
HIV/AIDS clients.  
This national initiative requires substantial technical expertise by local technicians, data managers, and 
programmers to implement, manage, and further develop software according to Rwanda’s clinical 
needs. To that end, the International Development Research Centre funded a technical mentorship 
program to train Rwandan programmers as local software developers for OpenMRS. 
The Use of ICT in Family Planning and Other Health Programs: Trends and Evidence  Page 24 
The E-Health Software Development and Implementation (EHSDI) training course is operated primarily 
by U.S.-based Partners In Health and the Rwandan Information Technology Authority.11 At the outset, 10 
recent graduates of top Rwandan universities were selected after a rigorous written exam and 
interview. The three EHSDI mentors supporting the graduates are experienced computer programmers, 
and the program also includes guest lecturers from Rwanda and other countries. In keeping with the 
trend to share learning experiences openly, the EHSDI team also created a blog to document their 
process (Partners in Health 2011). 
M-Pesa: In 2005, Nick Hughes, managing director at Signal Point Partners and Susie Lonie, executive 
head of Mobile Payments with Vodacom in South Africa, started a mobile money initiative in Kenya 
called M-Pesa (M for mobile, Pesa for “money” in Swahili). This joint venture between Safaricom, the 
leading mobile telecommunications company in Kenya, and Vodafone allows people to transfer money, 
pay bills, and save money by using a mobile phone, all without a bank account. M-Pesa’s mobile phone 
application also allows users to purchase airtime. Since its launch in late 2007, M-Pesa has attracted 
more than 13.8 million subscribers and has a network of 24,000 outlets. By 2009, 40 percent of Kenyans 
had used the service to send and receive money. The cumulative value of the money transferred via M-
Pesa since its inception is over US$3.7 billion—almost 10 percent of Kenya’s annual GDP (Safaricom 
2009). M-Pesa has inspired other mobile money services around the globe, and these “m-money” 
systems have recently transitioned from a pure money transfer system into a payment platform that 
allows NGOs, schools, hospitals, and firms to send and receive payments. 
In Kenya, Tanzania, and Afghanistan, M-Pesa directly helps improve health care by providing families 
“quick cash” necessary to pay for transportation to clinics or hospitals. In Tanzania, M-Pesa works with 
the Comprehensive Community Based Rehabilitation Center to transfer money quickly and directly to 
transportation companies and allows families to pay back the small transportation loan at a later date. 
In Kenya, it supports the Changamka Medical Smartcard, allowing women with limited access to money 
to pay for maternity care (Kim 2011).  
Center for Health Market Innovations (CHMI): The Center for Health Market Innovations (CHMI) is a 
global network of partners that collects, analyzes, and disseminates information about Health Market 
Innovations in developing countries with the goal of accelerating the diffusion of successful models. The 
research team consists of eight partner organizations in 16 countries that look for relevant and 
innovative health programs to document and include in an innovators’ database available on an open 
Internet platform at http://healthmarketinnovations.org. Highlighted activities can be implemented by 
governments, NGOs, social entrepreneurs, or private companies—as long as they have the potential to 
improve the way health markets operate.  
Beyond the core team, CHMI relies on the website’s users (which include program implementers and 
social entrepreneurs in the for‐profit and nonprofit private sectors, donors and investors, government 
policy makers and practitioners, and researchers from academic institutions) to contribute possible 
market innovation program information and to update the status of existing entries. The site has 
detailed information on more than 1,000 programs in more than 100 countries and an interactive 
database that can present comparable, visual information about the expanding number of programs. 
Users and contributors can “map” global innovations by program type, health focus, legal status, and 
target population. Registered users can also directly connect with people running the programs featured 
                                                          
11
 The EHSDI course is now in its second year of implementation in Rwanda, where it is run in partnership with the 
Rwanda Development Board. The goal of the course is to produce local software developers with the necessary 
knowledge and skills to develop electronic medical record software, specifically to create modules for OpenMRS. 
The course is nine months long (the first year it was 11 months).  
The Use of ICT in Family Planning and Other Health Programs: Trends and Evidence  Page 25 
in the database to learn more and to find implementing partners in their own countries. They can 
dialogue with the extended community on CHMI’s blog and download the whole database to use—with 
appropriate attribution, of course. CHMI’s database is a significant tool for researchers studying the 
private sector’s role in the health marketplace and for donors and investors looking to identify potential 
programs to fund.  
 “CHMI uses its rich information on programs around the world to identify and analyze emerging 
innovative models that could be scaled-up or adapted in other countries. CHMI works to better 
understand which emerging program models truly have the potential to improve health and financial 
protection in health markets” (Center for Health Market Innovations 2011). CHMI is coordinated by the 
Results for Development Institute with funding from the Bill & Melinda Gates Foundation and the 
Rockefeller Foundation.  
 
Enabling Conditions for ICT Use and Scale-up  
As stated previously, many conventional ICTs (radio, television, fixed phones, and fax) have been used 
for generations and are fully integrated into family planning/reproductive health, HIV/AIDS, and other 
health interventions. Their use depends on the reliability of an electrical power supply, fixed telephone 
lines, the necessary resources to pay electric bills, and a comfort level for routine use. Personal 
computers, with Internet access and email, also rely on a stable power supply and are currently less 
available in remote areas for several reasons, including lack of appropriate infrastructure, cost, and 
limited computer literacy.  
 
These barriers to use also apply to the more current mobile and digital ICTs and are key areas that need 
to be addressed in order to accelerate ICT development in sub-Saharan Africa.  
Leading global health transformation expert David Aylward sums up the current state of ICTs and what 
must happen to further advance the field of mHealth:  
What has not happened in either the developed or developing market is taking mHealth 
to scale or even to really big trials. Most of what is out there are small, non-sustainable 
proofs of concept addressing specific problems, rather than large health systems. We are 
really looking for how to support and facilitate the integration of services so that rather 
than having a series of point solution services, like SMS to people about behavior change, 
we get everything connected in an integrated, transformed system. This surely means 
empowering health workers in communities with new mHealth information and devices, 
but they need to be connected to clinics; they and the clinics (and the public) need to be 
connected to information centers; and then all that needs to be connected into the 
traditional health system. And we need to integrate across primary care; we cannot have 
disease-specific silos any more.  
So integrating those primary care services is one mission. Then integrating those kinds of 
services into underlying healthcare systems, e-health to use the short language, is a 
second. This means connections to labs, pharmacies, hospitals, doctors, insurance and 
payments generally. In other words, mHeath is not going to stand by itself. It is an 
extension of a transformed health system.  
Getting sustainable economics under both of the above is a third challenge. Who are the 
organizations and what are their costs and benefits? Researching and showing the health 
The Use of ICT in Family Planning and Other Health Programs: Trends and Evidence  Page 26 
and economic effects of these transformed approaches is a fourth. Research in a data rich 
environment is a very different animal from the data poor situation we have today.  
So, fundamentally, it’s those four goals that we are after.12 
 
This penultimate section of this paper discusses nine overall enabling conditions for ICT use and scale-
up: appropriate infrastructure, cost, ICT literacy, standards and operability, policies and regulations, 
contextual understanding, sound management, appropriate language, and evaluation. 
 
1. Appropriate Infrastructure: In general, the ICT infrastructure in sub-Saharan Africa has dramatically 
improved over the last decade, however, there is still only a minimum of fixed telephone lines, which 
offer poor service, and subscription rates to these services are stagnant.13 The primary ICT focus now is 
broadband Internet, which requires fiber optic cables and satellites, and whose use has become central 
to developed countries long-term economic strategies. In sub-Saharan Africa, the Internet is said to still 
be in its infancy and efforts to advance broadband capacity are just beginning. Nonetheless, much 
progress is being made, as illustrated in Figure 6. In 2009, undersea fiber-optic cables began connecting 
Africa to the global communications network. The work is ongoing, and an US$1.7 billion investment for 
fiber-optic cables brings with it radically higher volumes of potential Internet traffic. A recent report on 
ICTs indicates that the next major challenge on the horizon for policy makers in this region is “*e+nsuring 
that networks are capable of delivering broadband Internet access at affordable prices” (World Bank 
2011).  
  
                                                          
12
 Personal communication. September/October 2011. 
13
 According to the World Bank, in 2005 almost 70 percent of fixed lines were out of service at some point in the 
year, and the number of subscribers in 2008 was the same as it was in 2000, 1.4 subscribers per 100 people.  
The Use of ICT in Family Planning and Other Health Programs: Trends and Evidence  Page 27 
 
Figure 6: Africa's Undersea Cable Coverage 
 
 “The map paints a different-from-the-usual picture of Africa. It’s not a picture of a dark continent 
but rather a brightly lit one, lit by terabits of light capacity brought by a dozen  
cables landing on sub-Saharan African shores either now or in the near future. Africa, the brilliant 
continent. This also happens to be the Africa I believe in.” Steve Song 
(http://manypossibilities.net/) 
 
2. Cost: Health systems have competing priorities and some people within the system may consider ICT 
a luxury, particularly the current mobile and digital versions. “The cost of hardware, software, telephone 
connections, and Internet service providers (ISPs) is high in low- and middle-income countries, both in 
absolute terms and relative to the income people have available” (K4H 2009). In addition, hardware and 
software quickly become obsolete, necessitating additional investments in technology and adding 
further financial burdens to limited health budgets. Using open source software can help contain costs 
and also supports transparent efficiencies. 
The hub for global knowledge exchange is the Internet, and access to it is very expensive throughout 
sub-Saharan Africa compared to the Global North, a factor inhibiting broader use. High-end volumes of 
information now require a broadband connection to be effective, and in 2008 the median cost of a 
broadband connection in Africa was US$92 per month, far beyond the reach for many individuals and 
institutions. Wireless broadband technologies are causing access prices to fall, and as more operators 
enter the market, costs should continue to decrease (World Bank 2011). Civil society organizations, 
NGOs, the public sector, and other organized stakeholders should join forces to leverage their power in 
numbers to negotiate lower rates from private sector telecom providers.  
The Use of ICT in Family Planning and Other Health Programs: Trends and Evidence  Page 28 
3. ICT Literacy: There is a severe health workforce shortage across sub-Saharan Africa. Already 
overburdened health workers may view learning about and using ICTs as just another work requirement 
for which they must struggle to make time. Many health workers may not have received basic computer 
training and some from rural areas may never have used a computer.  
 
Lack of experience with eHealth can sometimes result in decision makers and frontline users feeling 
uncomfortable with its use or intimidated by ICTs that require solid computer literacy. Even in countries 
with far more exposure and access to modern ICTs, there are still reluctant adopters. Those who did not 
grow up in the information or digital age may not embrace the technology for a variety of reasons, 
including a preference for face-to-face exchanges or traditional learning methods. In addition, 
“information technology professionals who can maintain computer systems and trouble shoot problems 
are [also] in short supply in some countries outside of capital cities,” (K4H 2009) leaving those willing to try 
the new technologies with apprehension over how to move forward if they run into problems.  
 
Because of the severe personnel shortages, health systems throughout Africa often rely on community 
health workers to carry out basic health services and, in some cases, functions such as providing 
injectable contraceptives. Some of these CHWs may not have more than an elementary education or 
may have low literacy levels, which may present a challenge for adopting ICTs with mHealth or 
mHealthEd functions or diagnosis-assistance menus that support advanced services. Programs need to 
plan accordingly and have staff on hand at central or regional locations to answer calls directly rather 
than offering text message instructions for CHWs in that category.  
 
On the other hand, it is striking how many health workers at all levels have adopted ICT use—computers, 
Internet, SMS messaging, and eLearning/mHealthEd. mHealth remains in a category all its own because it 
combines the capacity of higher-end text exchange (the written word) with direct verbal exchange. 
Successful engagement with health workers is crucial to the integration and scale-up of ICTs in family 
planning/reproductive health, and that engagement is much easier when there is a clearly perceived value 
as well as sufficient training and support. ICT can fundamentally change the way care is delivered, including 
changing working practices, empowering clinicians to make decisions about patient care, providing further 
education and information to CHWs and reducing their paper-only reporting load, and empowering 
patients to assume more responsibility for their reproductive health. Most would find this an extraordinary 
advancement, though some professionals may feel that the old ways they know best are being challenged. 
This is where Pagliari’s previously mentioned remarks about a new way of working and attitudinal shifts 
must come in to play (Open Clinical 2011) and where ICT capacity-building is crucial. 
 
4. Standards and Interoperability: The proliferation of digital and mobile ICTs has created systems that, 
though well intentioned, are frequently incapable of sharing information. To remedy this, ICT health 
programmers are encouraging the use of free and open-source software (FOOS). Research throughout 
the Global South indicates the need for interoperability standards in health information systems that 
allow different health ICT applications to be shared, replicated, and scaled up. Health applications based 
on open source, as well as open standards, ensure that they can be broadly shared and more effectively 
evaluated; FOSS is particularly helpful in the context of cost containment for resource-poor countries.  
 
Interoperability is also crucial to transparent and inclusive processes—which can be enhanced by 
allowing the free flow of health-related information when ICT systems can be linked and are able to 
exchange data according to an agreed set of protocols and standards. However, developing countries 
have limited access to such standards. One of the solutions could be “open standards” that nonprofit 
organizations make publicly available, either free or at a nominal charge. 
The Use of ICT in Family Planning and Other Health Programs: Trends and Evidence  Page 29 
Recognizing the need for interoperability and attaining it are two different things. As one consortium of 
technology experts has noted, “Interoperability standards, guidelines and best practices can help 
overcome the problem, but achieving interoperability for products and services requires a change in 
mind set among key decision makers, product manufacturers, and service providers. Standardization is 
an important instrument in transparent processes, and should be promoted by innovative companies. 
The better that industry applies the processes of interoperability and standardization, the less will 
governments need to intervene” (The World Standards Cooperation 2011). 
5. National Policies and Regulations: In the past, health 
“The telecommunications 
officials did not need to put much focus on 
regulatory environment can play a 
telecommunications in crafting national health policies and 
key role in fostering increased 
regulations. Now, with the exponential growth in eHealth, 
mobile phone adoption. State 
officials must distinctly consider ICTs in their official 
ownership of telecommunications 
approaches. There are few eHealth policies in place in Africa, 
operators distorts markets and 
and those that do exist are not always aligned with national 
adversely affects competition. 
health strategies. Only three countries in sub-Saharan Africa 
Realizing this, governments across 
currently have eHealth as part of their national health 
the region have privatized their 
strategies. According to Brahima Sanu, regional international 
state-owned telecommunications 
telecommunications union representative for Africa, the new 
operators. By 2010, 28 African 
knowledge-based economy is forcing a paradigm shift for 
countries had gone through this 
policy makers in Africa who must include streamlining ICT as 
process.”  
a key factor in regional and national health policies.  
(The World Bank, 2011) 
 
Many countries in sub-Saharan Africa still have restrictive 
telecom regulations and national policies that hinder ICT progress. These can also impede important 
“cross-border harmonization of licensing rules, thereby frustrating the economies of scale that are 
needed to make large [ICT] projects affordable” (IDRC & CRDI 2010). In late 2007, the Connect Africa 
Summit helped to “kick-start Africa’s push for broadband and eLearning.” Participants developed five 
goals but few, if any, can be realized in the short time frame that they proposed. Of particular note is 
Goal 3, which focuses on easing regulation to expand ICT opportunities. It reads:  
Adopt key regulatory measures that promote affordable, widespread access to a full range 
of broadband ICT services, including technology and service neutral licensing/ 
authorization practices, allocating spectrum for multiple, competitive broadband wireless 
service providers, creating national Internet Exchange Points (IXPs) and implementing 
competition in the provision of international Internet connectivity. 
According to GSMA, an association representing the interests of the worldwide mobile communications 
industry, market liberalization results in increased volume and quality of mobile service (in both 
domestic and international traffic). Prices also decrease following market liberalization; with partial 
liberalization, prices fell by a minimum of 31 percent in Africa and up to 90 percent following full 
liberalization (World Bank 2011). 
An important question to consider in this area is how are the health sector structure and the national 
regulatory framework encouraging problem-oriented, interdisciplinary, rapid-response technical 
collaboration. Furthermore, what are the political, regulatory, and managerial tasks needed for taking 
on the current complex multifaceted technical challenges that come along with the progressive ICT 
landscape as it continues to rapidly evolve? (infoDev 2006) 
The Use of ICT in Family Planning and Other Health Programs: Trends and Evidence  Page 30 
6. Contextual Understanding: Deciding which technologies to use 
should be determined mainly by specific local contexts and 
Context and Content in ICT Use and demand (Weigel & Waldburger 2004). Context and content 
Scale-Up in Family Planning factors are critically important in considering ICT use and scale-up, 
 including local content creation, the language used, and the 
Uptake of family planning methods is relevance of content to the local situation. Information on 
influenced not only by poor knowledge sociocultural contexts that shape behavior and attitudes, patterns 
of modern contraceptive methods, but of population movement, cultural attitudes, and ICT readiness 
also importantly by cultural beliefs and define the ability of users to engage in developing innovative 
community opinions. In such a approaches in using ICTs and taking them to scale. Appropriate 
situation, there may be significant ICT enhancements depend on knowledge of the context, as 
benefit in having the counselling 
Routen et al. indicate in the box at left. 
offered from someone who lives within 
the community he/she serves, and who  
therefore will be fully cognizant of the 7. Sound Management: As stated earlier, the six building blocks 
nature of local concerns.  of the health system can each benefit from ICTs that provide 
 strategic ways to collect, organize, manage, and share 
Community health workers may visit information and educate and inform staff and the community. 
their clients on a regular basis and so The influx of huge volumes of information created by current 
be able to address, in a way in which ICTs presents a challenge for managers who need to decide 
clinics are not, important issues which technologies are most appropriate for their staffs, are 
relating to method compliance and most cost effective, and will increase productivity. Building the 
continuation. Family planning 
capacity of health workers and other intermediaries to be able 
counselling is, however, relatively 
complex and there may be a mismatch to effectively use, work with, manage, adapt, and develop 
between this complexity and the appropriate ICTs is an ongoing task. Many may feel 
resources available to the community overwhelmed by the abundance of information available 
health worker, who typically receives through rapidly increasing means (e.g., streaming content; 
relatively little training. digital archives; and the vast number of websites, listservs, 
 blogs, etc.). Hence, knowledge management depends heavily on 
Our project is developing mobile- whether ICTs are considered a help or a hindrance. The ICT field 
phone based software to support itself is grappling with exponential growth, and those looking in 
community health workers in providing from the outside view the rapid fire of ever-changing technology 
high quality family planning counseling 
and applications with awe and frequent anxiety. 
to their clients. Our objective is to take 
a best-practice family planning  
counseling method and encode the 8. Language: With the exception of radio and television 
provider-client dialogue it prescribes in programming, the issue of language is frequently ignored in ICT 
an interactive application. The programs, most of which offer very little content in local 
community health worker can then use languages. There are a huge number of languages in sub-
this application in guiding each Saharan Africa, and almost two dozen of them are considered 
counseling session along this best- “official.” In South Africa alone, there are 11 official languages. 
practice path. We believe that this Very few health information resources available on the web are 
model will prove to be an important 
written in any of those official languages, with the exception of 
addition to the resources available to 
English, French, Portuguese, and Spanish. Most current ICT 
support efforts in promoting the 
broadest provision of community applications designed to facilitate learning and knowledge 
based family planning counseling. exchange are not in local languages either. Improving health 
 workers’ capacity to deliver effective family planning or other 
–T. Routen et al. health services involves providing these workers with updated 
Using Mobile Technology to  
information and guidance in a language they can easily 
Support Family Planning Counseling  
in the Community understand—preferably their own. 
  
The Use of ICT in Family Planning and Other Health Programs: Trends and Evidence  Page 31 
 
9. Evaluation 
Evaluation is critically important in determining whether the investment in ICT use is worthwhile, 
particularly in gauging the benefits to the health initiative the ICT is supporting. Evaluation can measure 
impact and allows corrective measures to be taken where necessary and provides opportunities to share 
lessons learned for new or ongoing efforts. However, organizations frequently do not formally evaluate 
their ICT systems and may not fully understand how best to negotiate or address limitations in existing 
evaluation techniques that are still grappling with knowledge management evaluation models.  
 
As Charles Kenny of the Center for Global Development notes,  
Technology is at the center of global improvements in the quality of life. At the same time, 
the relationship between technology and development is a complex one, and many 
technologies that look wonderful on paper fail miserably in the field. So the three cheers 
for USAID’s new engagement have to be accompanied by a thousand cautions. Perhaps 
most importantly, any technology initiative needs to be intimately tied in with USAID’s 
revived focus on monitoring and evaluation (2011). 
 
Conclusion 
As public health folks we need to be IN the technology and influencing how it gets 
developed and created and become very literate so that our concerns are in the 
development of it further upstream rather than us being just passive recipients of it. I 
think that’s what the next generation of movements in public health will be. We don’t just 
have to passively accept things; we need to be there at the creation . . . We should be at 
the leading edge of innovating with these tools. 
–Jody Ranck, DrPH 
Global eHealth and Innovation Expert 
 
ICT solutions are facilitating access to information and education for patients, health workers and policy 
makers. As illustrated in this paper, ICT applications in family planning and reproductive health range 
from using SMS and text messages to give information on family planning methods to women mobile 
users; to wireless solutions that update and connect rural health workers to web-based distance 
learning programs; to mobile phones and PC solutions that help to manage health data, drug supplies, 
patient’s electronic medical records, and the health workforce. The use of ICT is breaking down barriers, 
enabling health service providers to work together more closely and reach out to local clients as well as 
communities far beyond their geographic borders. 
 
At the same time, governments and donor agencies worldwide are trying to come to terms with the 
complexity of current ICT opportunities, the multitude of new ICTs coming online, and the realities of 
the global digital divide. They are doing so at the same time that they are attempting to harness the 
power of cutting-edge digital technology within their own organizations. In some cases, already 
overburdened health workers and program managers are being asked to embrace new technologies 
even while standards and policies for their use are not yet in place.  
 
ICT costs are still prohibitive for many African countries and few have necessary eHealth policies in place 
to govern this exponentially growing field. A focus on the local context for capacity-building in the 
information and digital age is extremely important, as is collaboration and transparency among 
government ministries that each have a role in advancing eHealth; it is no longer just a matter for the 
The Use of ICT in Family Planning and Other Health Programs: Trends and Evidence  Page 32 
ministries of health, but also for ministries and leaders who manage education, economics, 
environment, energy, gender, and even trade. 
 
Donors, researchers, and public health practitioners agree that ICT will continue to play a significant role 
in the delivery of evidence-based interventions for greater health impact. This requires continued 
investment not only in hardware, software, and other technologies, but also in people, who are key to 
the success of any health system and in capacity building.  
 
It is important to move forward and act on some of the recommendations and lessons that have been 
generated by previous research studies. For example, in Improving Health, Connecting People: The Role 
of ICTs in the Health Sector of Development Countries, Working Paper No. 1, 2007, the authors present 
the following lessons learned on using ICTs to help strengthen health systems:  
 Pay attention to past experience. 
 Involve users in the planning and design of the system. 
 Build information cultures. 
 Strengthen the capacity of users. 
 Set realistic goals. 
 Focus on the benefits of the system, rather than the technology. 
 
In the face of rapid change, many health care needs as well as health system needs remain constant: the 
need for reliable, accessible family planning methods and family planning/reproductive health services; 
the demand for continuing education for health workers at all levels of the health system; the need for 
reliable health information as well as a regular supply of vaccines and medicines; and the need to 
overcome gender inequities so women are able to take control of their own health. Young people, with 
their open embrace of technology and their seemingly natural aptitude for mastering it quickly, can be a 
critical resource as ICT addresses these needs.  
 
While it seems that technology is changing every nanosecond, the astounding pace has led to many 
advances in the global health community, as the examples in this paper have shown. ICT can play an 
important role in addressing all these needs and in the delivery of quality, efficient health care services 
and the overall support of the health system, especially if the scale-up of ICT interventions takes into 
account the conditions for success outlined in this paper.  
 
 
  
The Use of ICT in Family Planning and Other Health Programs: Trends and Evidence  Page 33 
APPENDIX A: ICT-Related Definitions  
 
Information communication technologies (ICTs): tools that facilitate communication and the processing 
and transmission of information and the sharing of knowledge by electronic means. This encompasses 
the full range of electronic digital and analog ICTs, from radio and television to telephones (fixed and 
mobile), computers, and electronic-based media such as digital text, audio-video recording, and the 
Internet, including Web 2.0 and 3.0, social networking, and web-based communities (GAID 2010). 
Information and Communication Technology for Development (ICT4D): a relatively new and highly 
dynamic field of development interventions that use ICT to help poor and marginalized communities 
across the world benefit from modern technology that improves the quality of their lives. ICT4D is by 
nature multidisciplinary, and its interventions require a multi-stakeholder approach, not least to keep 
abreast with and take full advantage of rapid technological developments (SPIDER 2011). 
 
Electronic Health (eHealth): the combined use of electronic communication and information technology 
in the health sector for “cost-effective and secure use of ICT in support of health and health-related 
fields, including health-care services, health surveillance, health literature, and health education, 
knowledge, and research" [WHO]. Key eHealth applications include, but are not limited to, electronic 
medical records, telemedicine, health information networks, decision-support tools, Internet-based 
technologies and services, digital imaging, computer-assisted surgery, wearable and portable monitoring 
systems, and health portals (Open Clinical 2011). 
 
Mobile Health (mHealth): a new field of eHealth that supports health service provision and information 
via mobile and wireless technologies. According to the WHO’s Global Observatory for eHealth (GOe), 
mHealth is “medical and public health practice supported by mobile devices, such as mobile phones, 
patient monitoring devices, personal digital assistants (PDAs), and other wireless devices. mHealth 
involves the use and capitalization on a mobile phone’s core utility of voice and short messaging service 
(SMS) as well as more complex functionalities and applications including general packet radio service, 
third and fourth generation mobile telecommunications (3G and 4G systems), global positioning system 
(GPS), and Bluetooth technology” (WHO 2011). 
 
mHealth Education (mHealthEd): an emerging new set of applications designed for mobile devices and 
used for training, testing, supporting, and supervising health care workers, as well as applications that 
provide health information to individuals (iheed 2011). 
 
The Use of ICT in Family Planning and Other Health Programs: Trends and Evidence  Page 34 
APPENDIX B: Matrix on ICTs and Family Planning/Reproductive Health 
 
What issues currently dominate ICT use in FP/RH What emerging How does research How do 
(principally with regards to e-Health)? technologies are inform e-health? developments in e-
likely to impact health inform 
health care? research? 
Professional Electronic Consumer New Technologies Research Input Research 
Clinical Patient/Health Health  Outcomes 
Informatics Records (EPR, EHR) Informatics  
- Decision aids for - Electronic medical - Decision aids for - Satellite - Development - - Potential of 
practitioners records. patients facing communications (for Need for user electronic databases 
(prompts, Record linkage. difficult choices remote medicine) involvement in such as population 
reminders, care Databases and (genetic screening)  product conception, registers for 
pathways, Population registers  - Wireless networks design and testing. epidemiological 
guidelines)  - Information on (within hospitals, Iterative research. 
 - Achieving the Web and/or across geographical development. Needs  
- Clinical multiprofessional digital TV (public areas) assessment, - Research into the 
management tools access. Technical information and  accessibility and impact or use of 
(electronic health and ethical issues. educational tools - Palmtop technologies usability research. informatics tools 
records, audit tools)  for specific clinical (for information, for Multifaceted suggests appropriate 
 - Data protection/ groups) records) expertise required. and cost-effective 
- Educational aids security issues    priorities for 
(guidelines, medical  - Clinician-patient - New mobile - Implementation  policy makers. 
teaching) - Patient access communication telephones Understanding  
 and control tools:  people and - Areas of crossover 
- Electronic clinical  1. Remote: Clinical e- - Digital TV (for organizational (bioinformatics) 
communications - Integration with mail and Web-based disseminating health factors, system 
tools (referral, other services (social messaging systems for information & acceptability, 
booking, discharge; work, police in case of consultation, disease communicating with resistance to 
correspondence, rape) monitoring, service- patients) change. Use of 
clinical email/second  oriented tasks  tailored 
opinion, laboratory test - Clinical coding (appointment booking, - The WWW and its implementation. 
requesting  issues prescription reordering). applications for health 
and results (terminologies)  (issues: quality control, 
reporting  2. Proximal: Shared confidentiality, access) 
 Organizational  decision-making tools,  
- Electronic Management informed consent aids - Virtual reality  
networks (clinical 1. Billing and  
networking systems) tracking systems 3. Mixed: Online 
  screening tools (for 
- Condition-specific 2. Audit & quality depression) and 
tools and information assessment therapeutic interventions 
(diabetes informatics; systems (cognitive behavior 
hypertension informatics;  therapy) 
etc.)  
3. HRH 
 - Access and 
- Telemedicine equity issues 
applications (for (data protection 
interprofessional issues, the Digital Divide) 
communication,  
patient - Quality issues 
communication and for health information 
remote on the net 
consultation) - “virtual” health 
 communities 
- Subfields (nursing 
& primary care 
informatics) 
Source:  Vital Wave Consulting, 2011 
 
The Use of ICT in Family Planning and Other Health Programs: Trends and Evidence  Page 35 
APPENDIX C: References and Resources 
 
Adamchak, S., et al. A Guide to Monitoring and Evaluation of Adolescent Health Programs, Tool 
Series 5. Focus on Young Adults for USAID. 2000. 
http://www.fhi.org/NR/rdonlyres/eix2wdqdzrfy34nj7xgdqyc4nxnkzi3mghpymg3wqcu5u53yg6g
4uf654mn5k2iosigwudwyp2ezlc/mandEguidepart3enyt.pdf (accessed Sept. 9, 2011). 
African Society for Information and Communication Technology. “Women in Pink Collar ICT Jobs in 
Cameroon.” ASICT Research and Teaching Repository, 2010. 
http://asictresearch.wordpress.com/2010/05/21/272/ (accessed June 1, 2011). 
Ahonen, Tomi. “Household Penetration Rates for Technology Across the Digital Divide.” 
http://communities-dominate.blogs.com/brands/2011/01/household-penetration-rates-for-
technology-across-the-digital-divide.html. Blog on Communities Dominate Brands book 
website. Posted Jan. 21, 2011 (accessed Sept. 16, 2011).  
Ahonen, Toni. “Latest Unique Ability for Mobile, the 8th is Discovered: Augmented Reality.” Blog on 
Communities Dominate Brands book website. Posted Dec. 10, 2009. http://communities-
dominate.blogs.com/brands/2009/12/latest-unique-ability-for-mobile-the-8th-is-discovered-
augmented-reality.html (accessed June 1, 2011). 
Aker, Jenny C. and Isaac M. Mbiti. 2010. Mobile Phones and Economic Development in Africa. CDG 
Working Paper 211. Washington, D.C.: Center for Global Development. 
Allocate, Version 1: A Computer Program to Improve Priority Setting and Resource Allocation for 
Reproductive Health. http://www.policyproject.com/pubs/manuals/AlloManE.pdf (accessed 
Sept. 15, 2011).  
APC Africa ICT Policy web page. http://africa.rights.apc.org/ (accessed Sept. 14, 2011). 
BiztechAfrica website. “Renewed Call for Interoperability.” 
http://www.biztechafrica.com/section/computing/article/renewed-call-interoperability/784/ 
(accessed June 12, 2011). 
BRIDGE Project. “Building Media Capacity to Cover Population and Reproductive Health.” Population 
Reference Bureau. https://www.prb.org/pdf10/bridge-media.pdf (accessed Aug. 28, 2011). 
Butcher, D., “Mobile Software Reinventing Healthcare in the Developing World.” Mobile Marketer 
TM. 2009. Web page. http://www.mobilemarketer.com/cms/news/software-
technology/3204.html (accessed Aug. 28, 2011). 
CapacityPlus. “iHRIS—A Year of Development.” 2011. 
http://www.capacityplus.org/hris/blog/index.php/2011/08/ihris-a-year-of-development/ 
(accessed Sept. 18, 2011). 
Capps, J. and Wilcox, S. for US Agency for International Development. BRIDGE Project Final 
Evaluation, September 2008. http://www.ghtechproject.com/Attachment.axd?ID=4c2f7742-
1015-42ad-a33f-24f82c24b468 (accessed Aug. 28, 2011)  
The Use of ICT in Family Planning and Other Health Programs: Trends and Evidence  Page 36 
Casier, Peter, How to Convert “Social Media Reach” to “Impact”—Part 2. ICT-KM. 9 June 2011. 
http://ictkm.cgiar.org/2011/06/09/how-to-convert-social-media-reach-to-impact-part-2/ 
(accessed Aug. 12, 2011). 
Center for Health Market Innovations. Fact Sheet. Washington, D.C.: Results for Development 
Institute. 2011. 
http://resultsfordevelopment.org/sites/resultsfordevelopment.org/files/CHMI%202%20pager.
pdf (accessed Sept. 12, 2011). 
Chetley, Andrew, ed. “Improving Health, Connecting People: The Role of ICTs in the Health Sector of 
Developing Countries A Framework Paper.” 2007. Washington: infoDev. 
http://www.infodev.org/en/Document.84.pdf (accessed 27 August, 2011). 
Chuhan-Pole, Punam, and Manka Angwafo, eds. “ICT in sub-Saharan Africa: Success Stories.” Ch. 19 
in Yes Africa can: success stories from a dynamic continent. Washington, DC: The World Bank, 
2011. http://siteresources.worldbank.org/AFRICAEXT/Resources/258643-1271798012256/ICT-
19.pdf (accessed Aug. 10, 2011). 
Cole, R. ICTs, Telecenters, and Community Development. Ithaca, NY: Cornell University. 2001. 
Commonwealth Secretariat. Concept Note. “Commonwealth West Africa Regional Meeting on 
eHealth—Use of Information and Communication Technology for Health.” 2009. 
http://www.thecommonwealth.org/files/220413/FileName/ConceptNote.pdf (accessed Aug. 
10, 2011). 
Community-based Family Planning Toolkit: Monitoring & Evaluation. K4H. 
http://www.flexfund.org/resources/training/English_PDME/Facilitators_Guide_FINAL.pdf 
(accessed Sept. 14, 2011). 
Connor, C. et al. “Paying for a Healthier Future”. Global Health Magazine, Summer 2011, Issue 11. 
http://www.abtassociates.com/articles/GHC_summer_2011.pdf (accessed Sept. 21, 2011).  
Core Group. “Cell Phone Hotline Spreads Family Planning Information in DR Congo.” Washington, 
DC: The CORE Group. 2010. 
http://www.flexfund.org/resources/technical_updates/psi_drc_case_study.pdf (accessed June 
1, 2011). 
Core Group. “mHealth Fundamentals Debate.” 2011. http://www.coregroup.org/our-technical-
work/initiatives/mhealth/126 (accessed Aug. 11, 2011). 
Corker J. “Ligne Verte” Toll-Free Hotline: using cell phones to increase access to family planning 
information in the Democratic Republic of Congo. Cases in Public Health Communication & 
Marketing, 2010, 4:23–37. www.casesjournal.org/volume4 (accessed June. 10, 2011). 
DELIVER. Tanzania: Final Country Report. Arlington, Va.: DELIVER, for the U.S. Agency for 
International Development, 2007. 
Devries, K. “Creating Healthy Families in Nepal: Sustaining Family Planning Practices Among 
Marginalized Groups.” The CORE Group. ICT for Development Network website. 2009. 
http://www.comminit.com/community-radio-africa/node/288856. (accessed Aug. 10, 2011). 
The Use of ICT in Family Planning and Other Health Programs: Trends and Evidence  Page 37 
 
Devries, K. “Elements of Family Planning Success.” ICT for Development Network website. 2008. 
http://www.comminit.com/?q=africa/node/274968 (accessed Aug. 10, 2011). 
Devries, K. “Family Planning via Mobile Phones: Proof-of-concept Testing in India (CycleTel).” 
Institute for Reproductive Health, Georgetown University. ICT for Development Network 
website. 2009. http://www.comminit.com/?q=ict-4-development/node/307314 (accessed Aug. 
10, 2011). 
Devries, K., Uganda Health Information Network. 2011. ICT for Development Network web page. 
http://www.comminit.com/?q=ict-4-development/node/119535 (accessed Sept. 14, 2011). 
Donner, J., et al. “Reflections of MobileActive 2008 and the M4D Landscape.” 2008. 
http://mobileactive.org/files/DVT_M4D_choices_final.pdf (accessed Aug. 10, 2011). 
eHealth Connection. “Health Informatics and eHealth Capacity Building.” 2008. http://ehealth-
connection.org/wiki/index.php?title=Health_Informatics_and_eHealth_Capacity_Building 
(accessed Aug. 10, 2011). 
eHealth Strategies, web page for European Union. http://www.ehealth-
strategies.eu/about/about.html (accessed Aug. 15, 2011). 
Family Health International 360. “M4RH Innovative Approach with Global Potential.” 2009. 
http://www.k4health.org/system/files/m4RH%20description%20FHI%20Oct%202010.pdf 
(accessed Aug. 18, 2011). 
Foreman, Mia. “The Challenges of Integrating Family Planning and Maternal/Child Health Services.” 
The Population Reference Bureau. 2011. http://www.prb.org/Articles/2011/family-planning-
maternal-child-health-integration-programs.aspx (accessed Sept. 10, 2011). 
Foreman, Mia. “Unmet Need for Contraception in the 21st Century: sub-Saharan Africa.” 2002. 
http://www.prcdc.org/files/Unmet_Need_Africa.pdf (accessed Sept. 10, 2011). 
Futures Group. Rapid/Women Flyer. Health Policy Initiative. 2011. 
http://www.healthpolicyinitiative.com/Publications/Documents/1452_1_RAPID_Women_Flyer
_FINAL_May_2011_acc.pdf. (accessed Sept. 10, 2011). 
Gebru, Berhane. “Disease Surveillance with Mobile Phones in Uganda.” Mobile Active. 2008. 
http://mobileactive.org/berhane-gebru-disease-surveillance-mobile-phones-uganda (accessed 
Aug. 16, 2011). 
Gerardy, Justine. “Africa turns to cellphones for better health.” mHealth Alliance. 
http://www.mhealthalliance.org/news/africa-turns-cellphones-better-health (accessed May 
21, 2011). 
Global Alliance for ICT and Development (GAID). “Information and Communication Technologies for 
Development: Health.” White Paper. 2010. http://www.scribd.com/doc/35120854/GAID-
White-Paper-on-ICT4D-Health (accessed Aug. 8, 2011).  
The Use of ICT in Family Planning and Other Health Programs: Trends and Evidence  Page 38 
GOOD. “The UN Millennium Declaration.” Video, 2000. 
http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=nuvl9vOZedE. (accessed June 12, 2011). 
Health Policy Project: Software and Models. The Futures Group. 
http://www.healthpolicyproject.com/index.cfm?id=software (accessed Sept. 14, 2011). 
Health Unbound. “Mobile Operators as Clinical Service Providers?” http://www.healthunbound.org/ 
(accessed Aug. 10, 2011). 
Henrie, Gervais. “Mapping Seychelles ICTs.” BlogSpot posting. http://henrieict.blogspot.com/ 
(accessed Sept. 14, 2011). 
One World Africa. “Community Radio, The Cradle of Information Technology.” 
http://africa.oneworld.net/editorchoice/community-radio-the-cradle-of-information-
technology (accessed July 12, 2011). 
HUB: Health Unbound. mHealth Alliance. http://www.mhealthalliance.org/hub (accessed Aug. 10, 
2011). 
ICT for Development Network. “Family Planning Through Mobile Phone, No Doctor Necessary!” 10 
Nov 2010. http://www.comminit.com/ict-4-development/node/325843 (accessed June 1, 
2011). 
ICT for Development. “Family Planning via Mobile Phones: Proof-of-concept Testing in India 
(CycleTel).” ICT for Development Network. 2009. 
http://change.comminit.com/en/node/307314/307 (accessed June 1, 2011). 
ICT for Development Network. ClareG Blog: The Challenges of Promoting Southern Knowledge. 13 
Sept 2011. http://www.comminit.com/global/blogaboutGDNet (accessed Oct. 12, 2011). 
IDRC:CRDI. “The Development Challenge: Kick-starting Africa’s Digital Revolution.” 
http://www.idrc.ca/EN/Programs/Information_and_Communication_Technologies_for_Develo
pment/Acacia/Pages/ArticleDetails.aspx?PublicationID=594 (accessed Aug. 12, 2011). 
iheed Institute. “mHealth Education: Harnessing the Mobile Revolution to Bridge the Health 
Education & Training Gap in Developing Countries: Report for mHealth 2011 at the Mobile 
Health Summit June 2011.” Iheed Institute and Dalhberg Global Development Advisors. 2011. 
http://www.mhealthed.org/iheed_report_updates.pdf (accessed Aug. 28, 2011).  
Implementing Integrated Family planning and HIV/AIDS Policies and Programs Tools and Resources 
Futures Group and CEDPA, 2007. 
http://www.policyproject.com/pubs/generalreport/ImplementingPoliciesandPrograms.pdf 
(accessed Sept. 10, 2011). 
infoDev. “ICT in Health: The Role of ICTs in the Health Sector in Developing Countries.” InfoDev 
Activity File #1254. http://www.infodev.org/en/Project.38.html (accessed Aug. 12, 2011). 
infoDev. “Summary of On-line Discussions.” infoDev Working Paper Series---Improving Health, 
Connecting People: The Role of ICT in the Health Sector in Development Countries. April 2008. 
http://www.infodev.org/en/Publication.486.html (accessed Aug. 28, 2011).  
The Use of ICT in Family Planning and Other Health Programs: Trends and Evidence  Page 39 
infoDev. “Transforming the East African ICT Sector by Creating a Business Engine for SMEs: What’s 
next for ICT in Africa?” Posted April  25, 2011. http://www.infodev.org/en/Article.703.html 
(accessed Aug. 12, 2011). 
Information for Development Program. “Improving Health, Connecting People: The Role of ICT in the 
Health Sector in Developing Countries.” K4H Toolkit. 2006. 
http://www.k4health.org/toolkits/mhealth/improving-health-connecting-people-role-ict-
health-sector-developing-countries (accessed Aug. 12, 2011). 
Integrating ICT into Sustainable Local Policies. IGIGlobal.com. 
http://www.igiglobal.com/bookstore/chapter.aspx?TitleId=43194 (accessed Sept. 15, 2011) 
International Development Research Centre, Acacia Program web page. 
http://www.idrc.ca/EN/Programs/Information_and_Communication_Technologies_for_Develo
pment/Acacia/Pages/ArticleDetails.aspx?PublicationID=594 (accessed Aug. 12, 2011). 
International Development Research Centre. “Cape Town to Cairo: Connecting Africa.” Ottowa: 
2010. http://www.idrc.ca/EN/Documents/cape-town-to-cairo-connecting-africa.pdf (accessed 
Aug. 12, 2011). 
International Telecommunications Union. “Kenya Adds 2.9 MLN Mobile Users in Q4.” Web post on 
ICT Statistics Newslog June 28, 2011. http://www.itu.int/ITU-
D/ict/newslog/Kenya+Adds+29+Mln+Mobile+Users+In+Q4.aspx (accessed Aug. 10, 2011). 
International Telecommunication Union. “Measuring the Information Society: The ICT Development 
Index.” International Telecommunication Union. p. 108, 2009. http://www.itu.int/ITU-
D/ict/publications/idi/2009/material/IDI2009_w5.pdf (accessed Aug. 12, 2011). 
IntraHealth iHRIS Manage Overview. Web page. https://launchpad.net/ihris-manage (accessed Sept. 
12, 2011). 
ITU-D. The World in 2010: ICT Facts and Figures. International Telecommunications Union, Geneva: 
Switzerland. 2010. http://www.itu.int/ITU-D/ict/material/FactsFigures2010.pdf (accessed Aug. 
12, 2011). 
JamiiForums. “Tanzania 4th Mobile Phone User in Africa.” Web page. 2010. 
http://www.jamiiforums.com/business-and-economic-forum/48668-tanzania-4th-mobile-
phone-user-in-africa.html (accessed Aug. 14, 2011). 
Jembi Health Systems. District hospital in South Africa: Jembi. www.jembi.org  
Jones, Becca. “Executive Summary—Unmet Need for Contraception in the 21st Century: sub-
Saharan Africa.” Insert. Population Resource Center, September 2002. 
http://www.prcdc.org/files/Unmet_Need_Africa.pdf (accessed Aug. 12, 2011). 
Judice, R. and Snyder, E. “Framework for Monitoring and Evaluating Efforts to Reposition Family 
Planning.” [Unpublished], Washington: MEASURE Evaluation, 2011. 
Juma, Sahim. Guest post on Consultant Value Added. “Africa Broadband Revolution 2010: Tanzania 
Case Study.” 2010. http://consultantvalueadded.com/2010/04/14/africa-broadband-
revolution-2010-tanzania-case-study/ (accessed Aug. 14, 2011). 
The Use of ICT in Family Planning and Other Health Programs: Trends and Evidence  Page 40 
K4Health. “Elements of Family Planning Success: Supportive Policies.  
http://www.k4health.org/toolkits/fpsuccess (accessed Sept. 15, 2001). 
K4Health. “Mobile Outreach Service Delivery.” Community Based Family Planning–Technical Update 
No. 8, 2010. 
http://www.flexfund.org/resources/technical_updates/No8_MobileOutreachServiceDelivery.p
df (accessed June 1, 2011).  
K4H—mHealth Toolkit. “Behavior Change Communication.” 
http://www.k4health.org/toolkits/mhealth/behavior-change-communication-8 (accessed Aug. 
11, 2011). 
Kanter, Andrew, et al. “Bringing Together Millennium Villages Throughout sub-Saharan Africa.” 
International Journal of Medical Informatics, 78, 802–807. 2009. 
http://millenniumvillages.org/files/2011/02/Kanter_MGV-Net.pdf (accessed Aug. 12, 2011). 
Kenya Launches eHealth Strategy. Aug. 2011. Reliefweb website. http://reliefweb.int/node/440501 
(accessed Aug. 28, 2011). 
Kim, G. “M-PESA Supports Healthcare.” Mobile Marketing and Technology website. Posted March 
19, 2011. http://www.mobilemarketingandtechnology.com/2011/toppost/m-pesa-supports-
health-care/ (accessed Aug. 4, 2011). 
Kols, Adrienne. “Summary Report of the K4Health Environment Scan: Findings and Implications.” 
Baltimore: Johns Hopkins Bloomberg School of Public Health, Center for Communication 
Programs, Knowledge for Health [K4Health], 2009. http://www.k4health.org/needs-
assessments/EnvironmentScan (accessed June 1, 2011).  
LaFond, A. B. “Mapping capacity in the health sector: A conceptual framework.” International 
Journal of health Planning and Management, 17:3–22. 
L’Engle, Kelly, and Vadhat, Heather. “Mobile Phone Interventions for Reproductive Health (m4RH): 
Testing the Feasibility of Text Messaging to Improve Family Planning.” Family Health 
International. 2009. 
http://www.fhi.org/NR/rdonlyres/e426xemcs6kjxllp2t37p3k2h7sgpol5rjzft4gzqdwztaxjp7afnh6
pck6hedydsyzxzinimbfe3o/FormativeResultsM4RH1.pdf (accessed Aug. 28, 2011). 
Li, JunHua, Lesley Pek Wee Land, Subhagata Chattopadhyay, and Pradeep Ray. “eHealth Readiness 
from Electronic Health Records Perspective.” University of New South Wales, Sidney: Australia, 
undated. http://www.globdev.org/files/9-Paper-Li-E-Health-Readiness-Revised.PDF (accessed 
Aug 12, 2011). 
Luk, Rowena, Matei Zaharia, Melissa Ho, Brian Levine, and Paul M. Aoki. "ICTD for Healthcare in 
Ghana: Two Parallel Case Studies.” 
http://www.cs.berkeley.edu/~matei/papers/2009/ictd_ghana.pdf. Proc. IEEE/ACM Conf. on 
Information and Communication Technologies and Development, Doha, Qatar, Apr. 2009, 118-
128. IEEE CS Press (accessed Aug. 28, 2011).  
 
The Use of ICT in Family Planning and Other Health Programs: Trends and Evidence  Page 41 
Making/the/eHealth/Connection (conference website) and The Rockefeller Foundation. “Archbishop 
Desmond Tutu Launches Bellagio eHealth Call to Action.” Video, 2011. http://ehealth-
connection.org/content/archbishop-desmond-tutu-launches-bellagio-ehealth-call-action 
(accessed Aug. 28, 2011). 
Mano, Winston, and Wendy Willems. “Emerging communities, emerging media: the case of a 
Zimbabwean nurse in the British Big Brother show.” Critical Arts, 22 (1), pp. 101–128, 2008. 
http://www.scribd.com/doc/18755393/Journal-of-African-Media-Studies-Volume-1-Issue-1 
(accessed Aug. 14, 2011).  
Mars, Maurice and Chris Seebregts. “Country Case Study for e-Health: South Africa.” http://ehealth-
connection.org/files/resources/County%20Case%20Study%20for%20eHealth%20South%20Afri
ca.pdf (accessed Aug. 28, 2011). 
mBillionth Award South Asia 2011. http://mbillionth.in/. (accessed Aug. 28, 2011).  
McCaffery, James and Ummuro Adano. “Strengthening Human Resources Management: Knowledge, 
Skills and Leadership.” Capacity Project Legacy Series 11, Chapel Hill, NC: Capacity Project, 
2009. http://www.capacityplus.org/files/resources/LegacySeries_11.pdf (accessed Sept. 12, 
2011).  
MDG. Celebrate, Innovate, and Sustain: Toward 2015 and Beyond. The United States’ Strategy for 
Meeting the Millennium Development Goals.  2010. http://www.globalproblems-
globalsolutions-files.org/pdf/2010/US_MDG_Strategy.pdf (accessed Aug. 14, 2011). 
Measure Evaluation Population and Reproductive Health Project for USAID. Indicators Database. 
Chapel Hill: UNC Carolina Population Center, 2010. 
http://www.cpc.unc.edu/measure/prh/rh_indicators/specific/repositioning-family-planning 
(accessed Aug. 28, 2011).  
Ministerial-Leadership Initiative. Program website. http://www.ministerial-leadership.org/blog 
(accessed Aug. 21, 2011). 
Miniwatts Marketing Group. “Internet World Stats—Usage and Population Statistics.” 2011. 
http://www.internetworldstats.com/list4.htm (accessed Sept. 18, 2011).  
MobileActive.org. “Family Planning Through the Mobile Phone, No Doctor Necessary!” 10 Nov 2010. 
http://www.mobileactive.org/case-studies/family-planning (accessed June 2, 2011). 
Mobihealthnews. “Could Apricot Forest become the Epocrates of China?” 2011. 
http://mobihealthnews.com/11711/could-apricot-forest-become-the-epocrates-of-china/ 
(accessed Aug. 2, 2011).  
Mobihealthnews. “J&J Clinton launches MAMA maternal mobile health service.” 2011. 
http://mobihealthnews.com/10865/jj-clinton-launch-maternal-mobile-health-service/ 
(accessed Aug. 2, 2011). 
Mobihealthnews. “Text4Baby plans to reach 1M moms by 2012.” 2011. 
http://mobihealthnews.com/10683/text4baby-plans-to-reach-1m-moms-by-2012/ (accessed 
Sept. 1, 2011). 
The Use of ICT in Family Planning and Other Health Programs: Trends and Evidence  Page 42 
MobileActive.org. “Bad Services? Holding Officials Accountable with SMS, Radio, and TRAC FM.” 
Sept. 21, 2011 web post. http://www.mobileactive.org/casestudies/tracfm (accessed Sept. 24, 
2011). 
Munyanziza, B., “Television could be effective in the family planning program in Rwanda.” 
Imbonezamuryango. 1993 Apr; (26):31–4.  
Musembi, V. & Kariuki, J. Private Sector Franchising for Long Term Methods in Kenya. Powerpoint 
presentation. PSI. 
http://www.fpconference2009.org/media/DIR_169701/15f1ae857ca97193ffff837cffffd524.pdf 
(accessed Sept. 14, 2011). 
Mwaila, M. “Reproductive Health Services Going Mobile.” Posted 19 March, 2011 on GIZ Health 
Sector Program Blog. http://www.gtzkenyahealth.com/blog3/?p=7403 (accessed Aug. 28, 
2011). 
Nakkazi, E., Uganda to Adopt Electronic Health Records System. 
http://www.newsciencejournalism.net/index.php?/news_articles/view/uganda_to_adopt_elec
tronic_health_records_system/ (accessed Sept. 14, 2011). 
NGOconnect Africa. “Spotlight on Jembi.” 
http://www.ngoconnectafrica.org/NGOCONNECTAFRICA/NGOCONNECTAFRICA/Communities/
NGOSpotlight/Jembi/ (accessed Aug. 28, 2011). 
Nigeria: ICT4D Annual Review. 2007. http://www.jidaw.com/itsolutions/ict4dreview2007.html/ 
(accessed Sept. 14, 2011). 
Nigeria: ICT4D National Policy. https://www.comminit.com/?q=ict-4-development/node/148341 
(accessed Sept. 19, 2011). 
Official Google Blog. “An Update on Google Health and Google Power Meter." 2011. 
http://googleblog.blogspot.com/2011/06/update-on-google-health-and-google.html (accessed 
Sept. 19, 2011). 
One World Africa. “Community Radio, the Cradle of Information Technology.” Web page, 2011. 
http://africa.oneworld.net/editorchoice/community-radio-the-cradle-of-information-
technology (accessed Aug. 9, 2011). 
Open Clinical. “eHealth.” Web page. 2011. Open Clinical: Knowledge Management for Medical Care: 
http://www.openclinical.org/e-Health.html#applications (accessed July 13, 2011). 
Pagliari, Claudia, David Sloan, Peter Gregor, Frank Sullivan, Don Detmer, James P Kahan, Wija 
Oortwijn, Steve MacGillivray. “What is eHealth? A Scoping Exercise to Map the Field.” J Med Internet 
Res. 2005 Jan-Mar; 7(1): e9. 
http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC1550637/?tool=pubmed (accessed June 12, 
2011).  
Podcast. “Mobile Health in Africa: What Can We Learn?” 2010. 
http://www.mhealthalliance.org/news/audio-mobile-health-africa-what-can-we-learn 
(accessed Sept. 19, 2011). 
The Use of ICT in Family Planning and Other Health Programs: Trends and Evidence  Page 43 
“Program Design, Monitoring and Evaluation (PDME) of Family Planning Programs. Facilitators 
Guide.” ORC Macro and Save the Children for USAID. 2009. 
http://www.flexfund.org/resources/training/English_PDME/Facilitators_Guide_FINAL.pdf 
(accessed Aug. 2, 2011). 
Puleio, M., and V. Jennings. “CycleTel in India, From Proof-of-Concept to Development.” PowerPoint 
presentation. http://www.coregroup.org/storage/CycleTel_mHealth_WG_Jan2011-1.pdf 
(accessed Aug. 2, 2011). 
Radio in Africa, 2011: http://witspress.co.za/wp-content/uploads/2011/07/WUPcatalogue2011lr.pdf 
(accessed Sept. 14, 2011). 
Ranck, J., “Health Information and Health Care: The Role of Technology in Unlocking Data and 
Wellness – A Discussion Paper.” Washington, D.C.: United Nations Foundation & Vodafone 
Foundation Technology Partnership, February 2011. 
Reliefweb web page. “AMREF to train nurses for Kenya's largest referral hospital.” 
http://reliefweb.int/node/272530 (accessed Sept. 18, 2011). 
RH Reality Check. http://www.rhrealitycheck.org/about-us (accessed Sept. 12, 2011). 
Richey, Catherine, and Ruwaida M. Salem. Elements of Success in Family Planning Programming. 
Population Reports, Series J, No. 57. Baltimore, INFO Project, Johns Hopkins Bloomberg School 
of Public Health, 2008. pdf.usaid.gov/pdf_docs/PNADN430.pdf (accessed Aug. 24, 2011). 
Routen, T. Silas, et al. “Using Mobile Technology to Support Family Planning Counseling in the 
Community—Case Study, Proceedings of the 3rd International Conference on ICT for Africa, 
March 25-27, Yaounde, Cameroon.” Baton Rouge, LA: International Center for IT and 
Development, 2010. 
Solo, J. Expanding Contraceptive Choice to the Underserved Through Mobile Outreach Service 
Delivery: a Handbook for Program Planners. Washington, D.C.: USAID, 2010.  
Song, Steve. “Randomness vs. Leadership or the Inevitable Meets the Ineffable.” Blog on Many 
Possibilities website, 2011. http://manypossibilities.net/ (accessed Aug. 2, 2011). 
Soul Beat Africa. “Impact Data: Radio and Family Planning.” From Valente, T.W., et al. "Radio 
Promotion of Family Planning in The Gambia". International Family Planning Perspectives, Vol. 
20, pgs. 96–100, 1994. http://www.comminit.com/?q=community-radio-africa/node/295247 
(accessed July 12, 2011). 
Southwood, Russell. “Achieving a High-speed Africa—Closing the Gap Between the Potential 
Promise and Current Reality.” AllAfrica.com, 2011. 
http://allafrica.com/stories/201109190475.html (accessed Sept. 17, 2011). 
SpacedEd Continuing Professional Development. http://www.spaceded.com/?locale=en (accessed 
Sept. 20, 2011). 
SpacedEd: An Innovative Learning Methodology to Support Health Workforces. 
http://www.capacityplus.org/files/resources/spaced-education-overview.pdf (accessed Sept. 
20, 2011). 
The Use of ICT in Family Planning and Other Health Programs: Trends and Evidence  Page 44 
Spicehandler, Joanne. The Role of Health Systems Strengthening in Effectively Updating and 
Disseminating Family planning/Reproductive Health Guidelines. The Capacity Project for USAID, 
Washington, DC: 2009, http://www.intrahealth.org/page/the-role-of-health-systems-
strengthening-in-effectively-updating-and-disseminating-family-planningreproductive-health-
guidelines (accessed Aug. 6, 2011). 
SPIDER. (2011 July). About ICT4D. The Swedish Program for ICT in Developing Regions: 
http://www.spidercenter.org/about-ict4d (accessed July 14, 2011). 
Stroetmann, Karl, Jörg Artmann, and Veli N. Stroetmann. European countries on their journey 
towards national eHealth infrastructures—eHealth strategies final European progress report. 
Brussels: European Commission, 2011. http://www.ehealth-
strategies.eu/report/eHealth_Strategies_Final_Report_Web.pdf (accessed Aug. 4, 2011). 
Tatalovid, Mido. “New technologies altering healthcare landscape, says UN report.” 
http://www.textually.org/ (accessed Sept. 20, 2011). 
Telecom Regulatory Authority of India. "Highlights of Telecom Subscription Data as on 30th June 
2011." Press release, 8/11/11. 
http://www.trai.gov.in/WriteReadData/trai/upload/PressReleases/835/Press%20Release%20Ju
ne11.pdf (accessed Aug. 29, 2011). 
Torero, Maximo, and Von Braun, Joachim. Information and Communication Technologies for 
Development and Poverty Reduction: The Potential of Telecommunications. Johns Hopkins 
University Press. 2006.  
Torgan, Carol. “The mHealth Summit: Local and Global Converge.” Blog on Kinetics website, 2009. 
http://www.caroltorgan.com/mhealth-summit/ (accessed July 7, 2011). 
Transparency and Accountability Program. http://tap.resultsfordevelopment.org/ (accessed Sept. 
14, 2011). 
Unifying Kenyan Information systems for Health web page. 
http://www.abtassociates.com/Page.cfm?PageID=12605&CSB=1&OWID=2109769387 
(accessed Sept. 12, 2011). 
United Nations. Compendium of ICT Applications on Electronic Government, Volume 1: Mobile 
Applications on Health and Learning. United Nations: 2006. 
http://unpan1.un.org/intradoc/groups/public/documents/UN/UNPAN030003.pdf (accessed 
June. 12, 2011). 
United Nations Population Fund. “Ensuring that Every Pregnancy is Wanted.” UNFPA. 
http://www.unfamily planninga.org/rh/planning.htm (accessed June 1, 2011). 
US Agency for International Development. Family Planning Projects web page. 
http://www.usaid.gov/our_work/global_health/pop/partnerships/projects_purpose.html. 
(accessed July 25, 2011).  
US Agency for International Development. Global Health eLearning. 
http://www.globalhealthlearning.org/assets/filelib/GHeL%20eLearning%20Fact%20Sheet.pdf 
(accessed Sept. 12, 2011). 
The Use of ICT in Family Planning and Other Health Programs: Trends and Evidence  Page 45 
US Agency for International Development. High Impact Practices in Family Planning. 2011, 
Washington. D.C.: USAID, 2011. 
http://www.usaid.gov/our_work/global_health/pop/publications/docs/high_impact_practices.pdf 
(accessed Sept. 14, 2011). 
US Agency for International Development. “Repositioning Family Planning in sub-Saharan Africa.” 
Issue Brief, Washington, D.C.: USAID, 2006. 
http://www.usaid.gov/our_work/global_health/pop/techareas/repositioning/briefs/repo_suba
fr.pdf (accessed Sept. 14, 2011). 
US Agency for International Development. “Repositioning family planning operational plan 2008–
2013.” [unpublished]. Washington: USAID. 2009. 
Ushahidi. “Old War. New Peace. What it takes to send a text in Liberia.” Ushahidi blog. 2011. 
http://blog.ushahidi.com/index.php/2011/10/03/old-war-new-peace-and-what-it-takes-to-
send-a-text-in-liberia/ (accessed Oct. 5, 2011).  
Vasquez, Paloma. “Digital Life, Today and Tomorrow.” 
http://consultantvalueadded.com/2011/06/03/digital-life-today-and-tomorrow/ (accessed 
Aug. 28, 2011). 
Virtual Learning Development Program (VLDP). Program Description. Cambridge, MA: Management 
Sciences for Health. Undated. http://www1.msh.org/projects/lms/Documents/upload/VLDP-
Brochure.pdf (accessed Sept. 8, 2011). 
Vital Wave Consulting. ICT Landscape Analysis for eTransform Africa:  Health Sectorial Study. June 
21, 2011. http://etransformafrica.org/sites/default/files/Opportunities-challanges-
health%20.pdf (accessed Aug. 28, 2011). 
Vital Wave Consulting. mHealth for Development: The Opportunity of Mobile Technology for 
Healthcare in the Developing World. Washington, D.C., and Berkshire, UK: UN Foundation-
Vodafone Foundation Partnership, 2009. 
http://www.vitalwaveconsulting.com/pdf/mHealth.pdf (accessed Aug. 28, 2011). 
Walter, D. “Radio in Africa.” Wits University Press. ICT for Development Network website. 2011. 
http://www.comminit.com/community-radio-africa/content/radio-africa. (accessed Aug. 28, 
2011). 
Wikipedia. Information and Communication Technologies for Development (ICT4D). 2011. 
http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Information_and_communication_technologies_for_development 
(accessed June 12, 2011). 
Wikipedia. mHealth. 2011. http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/MHealth. (accessed June 12, 2011). 
Wireless ICT Task Force. “Helping Fuel ICT Growth in Ethiopia.” PowerPoint Presentation, Ethiopia: 
2010. http://www.ictet.org/downloads/Duty%20Waiver.pdf. (accessed Aug. 28, 2011). 
World Bank. Recent Developments in the Telecoms Sector in sub-Saharan Africa—a Booming Sector. 
The World Bank. 2011. 
http://web.worldbank.org/WBSITE/EXTERNAL/EXTDEC/EXTDECPROSPECTS/EXTGBLPROSPECTS
The Use of ICT in Family Planning and Other Health Programs: Trends and Evidence  Page 46 
APRIL/0,,contentMDK:22931817~menuPK:659178~pagePK:2470434~piPK:4977459~theSitePK:
659149~isCURL:Y,00.html (accessed Sept. 12, 2011). 
World Standards Cooperation. No. 2, May 2011 Newsletter. 
http://worldstandardscooperation.org/newsletters/002/newsletter02.html. (accessed Aug. 28, 
2011).  
World Summit on the Information Society. http://www.itu.int/wsis/index.html (accessed June 1, 
2011). 
www.AllAfrica.com. “Growing Use of Cell Phones for Family Planning.” 2009. 
http://allafrica.com/stories/200911200001.html (accessed June 1, 2011). 
 
 
The Use of ICT in Family Planning and Other Health Programs: Trends and Evidence  Page 47 
