  
 I ntegrated Health Systems Strengthening 
Project – IHSSP: RapidSMS 
Brief Overview 
The Rwandan health care system has made significant progress 
on reducing maternal and child mortality over the past ten 
years.  According to the demographic health survey (DHS) the 
both the maternal mortality ratio (MMR) and the infant 
mortality rate were cut by more that 50 percent. The MMR 
decined from 1070/100,000 live births in 2000 to 476 in 2010 
and the infant mortality rate declined from 107 to 50.  
However, data shows that most maternal deaths still occur at 
community level: 33 percent of women died before giving birth, 
44 percent were aged between 21-30 years old and 45 percent 
had had more than three pregnancies. 
 
In order to better identify and manage the health issues of at 
risk newborns and mothers, Management Sciences for Health 
(MSH), under the Integrated Health Systems Strengthening 
Project (IHSSP) worked with Rwanda’s Ministry of Health and 
UNICEF to implement a mobile phone-based tool for 
community health workers to use with their clients. The RapidSMS application follows national and 
international guidelines of care, helping community health workers (CHWs) to closely monitor pregnant 
women from through the duration of their pregnancy and providing guidance on the provision of care, 
especially related to high risk situtations. As a result of RapidSMS, there has been increased use of the formal 
health system by pregnant women and this has been demonstrated to have a positive health impact on 
mothers and their children.  
 
Initially introduced in one of Rwanda’s thirty districts, the system has now been rolled out nationwide.  It has 
also been integrated into the national eHealth Enterprise Architecture Framework, exchanging data on risk 
factors with the national shared health record.   
 
   Geographic Coverage: 
 Rwanda, Nationwide (30 districts as of 2012) 
 
 Implementation Partners: 
Rwanda Ministry of Health,UNICEF, Management Sciences for Health led a team of 
partners which included: Boston University | Cordaid | Futures Group International | 
Health Development & Performance (HDP) | Healthnet International | IDEAS | Intrahealth  
 
 
 Funder: 
UNICEF, USAID, Government of Rwanda  
 
 For More Information Contact: 
UNICEF 
 Dr Friday Nwaigwe, UNICEF/Rwanda; 
Email: fnwaigwe@unicef.org 
MSH  
 Dr Apolline Uwayitu, Chief of Party; 
Avenue Murehe, 04, Kicukiro District P.O Box 371 Kigali, Rwanda; 
 31 
Tel: +250-(0)7-88-30-80-81/82, email:  auwayitu@msh.org 
 
Data Collection 
 Integrated Health Systems Strengthening 
Project  - IHSSP: RapidSMS 
About RapidSMS 25 percent, home deliveries decreased by 54 percent, 
RapidSMS is a cell phone-based technology designed to while deliveries at health facilities increased by 26 
save newborns and mothers though routine surveillance percent. Health officials believe that the system also 
of health events by CHWs. The system relies on simple contributed to reducing the under-five deaths by 48 
text messages that are composed by CHWs to report percent. (Data from the Musanze District Hospital). 
specific events during the course of a woman’s  
pregnancy, delivery, and the first year of the infant’s life.  The use of RapidSMS also contributed to: 
At the national level, these messages are incorporated • The instant transmission and analysis of data 
into a web-enabled database. If the reported event which is immediately accessible to all 
indicates a risk for the mother or child, the system stakeholders; 
automatically sends a short SMS reply to the CHW • A decrease in data entry error rates through a 
notifying them of specific actions to take. In some feedback loop system identifying data outside 
villages, the CHW’s mobile phone is also the most normal parameters and verification with end-
direct method of communication for patient referral and users; and 
emergency transport through the nation’s ambulance • Improved monitoring capacity at the clinic, 
service (SAMU). district and national levels. 
  
The application runs on an open source software Lessons Learned 
platform Ubuntu Linux server, the MySQL database and • Community health workers at the front-lines of 
is programmed using the Python language.  Any cell health service provision in Rwanda and can 
phone can be used since it relies only on SMS messaging.  benefit from mHealth activities.  
In addition the system has a web-based graphical user • In spite of their limited educational background 
interface that allows supervisors at the district and and difficulties manipulating cell phones for the 
national levels to monitor use of the system, configure first time, CHWs quickly adapted to the 
the system and broadcast SMS messages to CHWs. technology.  
 • Regular feedback sessions are required to 
In order to implement RapidSMS, IHSSP procured and continually improve CHWs skills and share the 
distributed 10,000 cell phones to CHWs.  These were successes and difficulties encountered. 
combined with another 30,000 phones provided by • Phone maintenance and charging in areas 
other donors and distributed to all CHWs. MSH without electricity can be a challenge. 
coordinated the development of a national training • The use of solar chargers in areas without 
curriculum and approximately 1,000 people, including regular electricity can further use of mHealth 
data managers and CHW coordinators from nearly 450 applications. 
health centers, were trained in the use of RapidSMS.   
These trainers subsequently organized training on the Conclusion 
application for the CHWs in their catchment areas. All 
CHWs from a health center’s catchment area meet Clear progress has been documented in maternal and 
monthly to discuss progress and review feedback from child health in Rwanda by the recent demographic and 
RapidSMS and the CHW Health Worker Information health survey (DHS 2010).  However, maternal and child 
System (SIScom).  deaths are still high. Increasing the use of interventions, 
 which target maternal and child health, has been a 
Evaluation and Results national priority for the Rwandan government. Mobile 
phone-based applications, such as RapidSMS, show great 
A study of RapidSMS in Musanze district, located in the potential for supporting health workers at the lower 
north of the country, demonstrated appreciable results levels of the health system.  These mHealth tools can 
in improving maternal and child health. One year after assist CHWs in facilitating access to health services for 
the launch of RapidSMS, prenatal care visits increased by the population and in turn improving health outcomes.  
Information was excerpted from:  
32 http://intranet.msh.org/news-and-events/news/news-story.cfm?customel_datapageid_600=69167; RapidSMS Rwanda -  http://healthmarketinnovations.org/program/rapidsms-rwanda; Saving Mothers and Newborn lives in the community using 
RAPIDSMS technology – Exerience from Musange District of Rwanda: Dr. John Kalachi, District Hospital of Ruhengeri, Musange; 
International Conference on Community Health, Kigali 25-28 January, 2011  
 
