	Rock	Weekly
The	latest	digital	healthcare	news,	covering	trends,	funding	and	startups—delivered	weekly	to	your
inbox.
The	most	popular	newsletter	in	health	tech.	Join	your	40K	digital	health	friends	and	sign	up.
Stay	on	top	of	the	latest	and	greatest	stories	in	digital	health,	across	healthcare	news	and	tech.
Get	sweet	perks,	like	free	passes	to	the	best	events	in	digital	health	and	 ash	sales	on	products
Get	the	inside	scoop	on	Rock	Health	news
For	the	latest	in	healthcare	news	and	technology,	the	Rock	Weekly	has	you	covered.
First	Name Last	Name
Email	Address
	Also	notify	me	about	digital	health	events
Rock	Health	will	use	the	information	you	provide	on	this	form	to	be	in	touch	with	you	with	news	and	occasional
marketing.
You	can	change	your	mind	at	any	time	by	clicking	the	unsubscribe	link	at	the	bottom	of	our	emails	or	by	contacting
weekly@rockhealth.com.	We	will	treat	your	information	with	respect.	By	clicking	below,	you	agree	that	we	may	process
your	info	in	accordance	with	these	terms.
SUBSCRIBE
Previous	editions
Big	tech	and	hospitals:	a	match	made	in	heaven?
9/16/19
Digital	health’s	privacy	predicament
9/9/19
Who’s	downloading	their	health	records?
8/26/19
Keep	your	DNA	close
8/19/19
Can	your	smartphone	detect	dementia?
8/12/19
Surescripts	is	taking	on	Amazon
8/5/19
The	IPO	parade	continues
7/29/19
Digital	health’s	latest	IPO	has	lifto
7/22/19
+	View	more	rock	weeklys
Portfolio Events
Join	our	portfolio News
Research Job	board
Reports Startup	resources
Data Press
About	Rock	Health FAQ
The	Rock	Weekly
The	most	important	digital	health	newsletter.	Join	your	40K+	friends	and	sign	up.	View	Rock	Weekly	archive.
First	Name Last	Name
Email	Address
	
Also	notify	me	about	digital	health	events
Rock	Health	will	use	the	information	you	provide	on	this	form	to	be	in	touch	with	you	with	news	and	occasional	marketing.
You	can	change	your	mind	at	any	time	by	clicking	the	unsubscribe	link	at	the	bottom	of	our	emails	or	by	contacting	weekly@rockhealth.com.	We
will	treat	your	information	with	respect.	By	clicking	below,	you	agree	that	we	may	process	your	info	in	accordance	with	these	terms.
SUBSCRIBE
©	Rock	Health	2019
	 	 	
