 
DATA WINNERS PLATFORM 
BRIEF OVERVIEW 
DataWinners is an award-
winning, online, do-it-yourself 
data collection service for 
development professionals 
deve loped by Human 
Network International (HNI), 
a  W a s h i n g t o n - b a s e d 
nonprofit. Organizations use 
DataWinners to transform 
paper forms into digital 
questionnaires. Staff then 
submit data in seconds using 
any combination of SMS, 
Smartphone and Web with 
the equipment they already 
have. Account administrators 
can access and monitor this 
data in real-time and rapidly 
react with informed decisions. 
Unlike alternative platforms, 
DataWinners offers a low-
cost, all-in-one approach that 
encompasses every aspect of 
data collection and reporting, from an easy-to-use 
ABOUT DATA WINNERS 
questionnaire builder, to SMS deadlines and reminders, 
to a cloud-based database ready for export in a single DataWinners is a mobile data collection service that 
click. DataWinners is designed to be used by anyone, empowers partners across all sectors to shorten the 
regardless of technical background – no software time between collection and decision-making. Digital 
installation, no local servers, and no maintenance questionnaires can be created in minutes by starting 
required. For one low monthly fee, partners can collect from scratch or choosing a template. Users add 
an unlimited amount of data with as many questions, select answer types and set criteria to 
questionnaires, devices, users and submissions as increase accuracy. After creating a questionnaire, 
needed. More than 400 public sector and governmental DataWinners automatically generates the printable SMS 
partners in over 70 countries use DataWinners to questionnaire, Smartphone questionnaire, and Web 
collect data across all sectors, including public health. form needed for training staff as Data Senders.  
In the health sector, DataWinners has been used to Questionnaires can easily be edited as needs change. 
collect patient health information, track medical supply Any combination of SMS, Smartphone and Web can be 
stock, and modernize reporting by community health used to collect data and no special handset or SIM is 
workers. It has also been used to monitor large-scale required. The DataWinners Smartphone App can also 
health projects such as nationwide mosquito net collect data offline. As staff send in data to 
distributions, disaster response activities, and behavioral DataWinners, administrators view data in real-time as it 
change campaigns. is submitted with maps, graphs and charts.  
 
26 mHEALTH COMPENDIUM   │    VOLUME 2 
 
 DATA COLLECTION 
Data can also be filtered and exported to Excel in a LESSONS LEARNED 
single click or automatically transferred to an external  The primary obstacles that organizations face when 
database for sharing. DataWinners speeds up the transitioning to mobile data collection are the large 
collection of cleaned data by assigning unique ID costs associated with the development and 
numbers to patients, clinics, community health workers, installations of a new platform as well as the strong 
or any other subjects. Once recorded, this subject data technical expertise required to manage such a 
can be collected over time, and GPS coordinates can be system. As a cloud application, DataWinners 
recorded to display these subjects on a map. The enables partners to undertake unlimited data 
application also opens new lines of communication with collection with minimal start-up costs with safe and 
staff, partners and beneficiaries, as automatic secure data storage that is accessible 24/7.  
confirmation and error messages improve data accuracy, 
and deadlines and reminders can be set to ensure data is  Typically, a single, one-day training is sufficient to 
received on time.  train staff on SMS submission (and this initial training 
only needs to be done once regardless of the 
A local telephone number is linked to the DataWinners number of data collection projects to be carried 
so that communication costs are reduced by 80% when out). 
field staff SMS their data to a local number rather than 
an international line. DataWinners decreases the costs 
of data collection by enabling unlimited data collection CONCLUSION 
for one low monthly fee -- as many users, devices, 
DataWinners is a comprehensive solution for shortening 
questionnaires, submissions and data senders as needed. 
the time between data collection and better decision-
There are no equipment costs as staff use their existing 
making. It is easy to use, reduces costs by taking 
devices.   
advantage of staff’s existing equipment, can collect data 
Recurring communication costs are limited to SMS offline and in areas without internet access, and allows 
message fees to a local telephone number (roughly seamless integration of collection activities via SMS, 
$0.02 – $0.03 per SMS depending on local rates). Smartphone and Web. 
With timely and accurate data, organizations reduce  
inefficiency and increase their impact by allocating 
limited resources where they’re needed most. GEOGRAPHIC COVERAGE 
Over 70 countries across Africa, Asia, Europe, Latin 
America, and North America  
EVALUATION AND RESULTS 
Since its launch in 2011, partners across the world have IMPLEMENTATION PARTNERS 
Human Network International  
used DataWinners to reduce the costs of data 
collection while improving the quality of their data. Even 
CONTACT INFORMATION 
the best managed paper-based systems rarely achieve a 
Human Network International  
participation rate greater than 50%, generating additional  David McAfee, CEO  
indirect costs due to productivity loss and poor decision Tel: +261-32-07-452-70, Email: 
-making. DataWinners partners, however, routinely see dmcafee@hni.org  
participation rates as high as 90% to 100% and largely 
eliminate the indirect costs of inaccurate, incomplete 
and untimely data.  
  MHEALTH COMPENDIUM  |  VOLUME 2 27 
