PEEK VISION 
Delivering comprehensive affordable eye care in Kenya 
SERVICE DELIVERY 
Implementation date: January 2013 - March 2014  
Ophthalmic health is an important public health issue particularly because eye-related morbidity can have major impacts on other 
aspects of social development, including quality of life and level of productivity, particularly in developing countries. 
According to the World Health Organization, 285 million people worldwide are visually impaired and 39 million of these people 
are blind. However, 80 percent of blindness is avoidable. Moreover, a disproportionate 90 percent of blind people live in low-
income countries and it is these areas of greatest need where patients do not have access to diagnostics or treatment. 
During the planning and implementation of Africa’s first eye cohort study (The Nakuru Eye Cohort) by the International Centre 
for Eye Health in Kenya, the need arose to make ophthalmic screening portable, bringing services to the patient.  There was a 
clear need to use portable equipment while maintaining the rigorous standards of care for ophthalmic screening. The Portable 
Eye Examination Kit, known as Peek, is a smartphone-based system that carries out a full range of ophthalmic diagnostic tests in 
even the remotest of settings where clients are often unable to seek out screening and diagnostic services.  
About Peek Vision 
In low-income countries, more people have access to mobile patients diagnosed, either through an automated process, or 
p hones than running water. Peek presents a solution to via cascading of digital images to a network of experts 
support eye care systems where those most in need are the around the world. Peek can diagnose blindness, visual 
l east likely to access care. A team of ophthalmologists, impairment, cataracts, glaucoma, macular degeneration, 
developers and engineers have created a mobile app and clip diabetic retinopathy and other retinal and optic nerve  
-on hardware that transforms a low-cost Android diseases and crucial indicators of brain tumor and 
s martphone into an eye examination and diagnostic suite, hemorrhage. The system stores contact information and 
capable of running a range of tests, including visualization of GPS data for each patient. Google-map integration allows a 
the back of the eye. It is easy to use, affordable and portable.  novel way to follow-up and treat patients. More broadly, 
A  health worker with minimal training can use Peek to such technology allows coordination of services, to target 
gather detailed clinical information. Images are graded and mass treatment campaigns to the regions of greatest need.  
 
 
78  |  mHealth Compendium Volume 4 
Evaluation and Results 
A large validation study was conducted comparing Peek 
alongside conventional reference standard equipment which 
was used on approximately 2,500 study participants as part 
of the Nakuru Eye Disease Cohort Study, in Kenya.  
Close to 50 percent of participants in the follow up study 
(>1,000 participants) were examined using both Peek and 
standard screening exams. The results obtained from 
standard diagnostic equipment and Peek application and 
hardware are being compared to determine if Peek is as 
sensitive and specific as conventional eye examination 
equipment and the levels of agreement. Among the 1,000 
participants, all have received some form of treatment. 
Some of the participants had sight improved-restored with 
surgery or glasses. Analysis is now ongoing with a target of 
publishing the results in a peer-reviewed journal in 2014.  
Lessons Learned 
 The portability of screening services allows a larger proportion of the population to be screened, reducing missed 
opportunities to address avoidable blindness, particularly among hard to reach populations 
 The system has to be developed on the ground and in the local 
context with feedback from the population it will be serving 
Geographic Coverage: Kenya 
 Build communication channels for constructive feedback and What are these acronyms?? 
Implementation Partners: LSHTM, University 
improvement of mHealth tools LSHTM, University of Strathclyde, of Strathclyde, NHS Glasgow Centre for 
NHS Glasgow Centre for 
Ophthalmic Research  
 mHealth does not work in isolation from the healthcare Ophthalmic Research  
providers and recipients and therefore expectations must be Funder: The Queen Elizabeth Diamond Jubilee 
appropriate  Trust  
Contact Information: 
Conclusion 
Peek Vision | Dr. Andrew Bastawrous (+44(0)
Peek has the potential to reduce avoidable blindness, particularly in 2079588343, andrew@peekvision.org) 
low and middle-income countries. Based on results of the validation 
The Queen Elizabeth Diamond Jubilee Trust | Dr. 
study in Kenya, there are opportunities to introduce utilization of 
Andrew Cooper 
Peek in other countries where there is great need. A strong evidence 
(andrew.cooper@qejubileetrust.org)  
base is required for uptake and ongoing engagement with the existing 
health infrastructure to help strengthen, rather than replace models See References on page 89. 
of delivering health care. 
 
mHealth Compendium Volume 4  |  79 
