Partnership with the 
government resulted in a 
sense of ownership within 
the state health team, as  
their inputs on the 
application content were 
solicited and they were 
given a certificate for work 
performed in Chandil.  
COMMCARE Mobile Job Aid for Sahiyas 
IMPLEMENTATION DATE:  August 2014 to Present
Strengthening maternal and newborn health in India
Despite renewed efforts to improve maternal health outcomes, maternal mortality rates remain high 
in India. India recorded around 57,000 maternal deaths in 2010, and the country’s maternal mortality 
rate is nearly double its Millennium Development Goal of 109 deaths per 100,000 live births. The global 
health community has identified proven interventions for every stage of maternal care. Properly trained, 
motivated, and supervised community health workers (CHWs) have been shown to reduce neonatal 
mortality by up to 50 percent, making them a critical component in optimizing primary health care 
service delivery to the most remote and under-resourced locales.
mHealth interventions have demonstrated the effectiveness and relevance of mobile job aids in 
advancing the technical capacity and reporting of CHWs, as well as the quality of their behavior 
change communication services. These tools have been shown to increase worker motivation, and 
they provide a powerful set of tools for monitoring, supervising, and supporting community health 
programs. In this context, Dimagi developed mobile job aids for government CHWs in India, called 
Sahiyas, in partnership with the National Health Mission of Jharkhand; the US Agency for International 
Development Global Health Bureau’s flagship program, Maternal and Child Health Integrated Program 
(MCHIP); and the UN Children’s Fund (UNICEF), through its flagship mHealth platform, CommCare. 
CommCare supports Sahiyas in the tracking of pregnant mothers and newborn children through the 
continuum of care, focusing on integrating comprehensive decision-support, extensive multimedia for 
low-literate users, and offline capabilities to work in low-resource settings.
About CommCare Mobile Job Aid for Sahiyas
CommCare, Dimagi’s open source mobile health platform, sion-support, and counseling messages. It supports capabilities facilitates the work of Sahiyas by enabling easy electronic to gather high-quality data while incorporating features not 
data collection, remote monitoring and supervision, deci- available via conventional paper-based tools, including multi-
98  n  SERVICE DELIVERY 
Dimagi, Inc
ple languages, interactive multimedia, branching logic, global corroborate with earlier work that shows that videos played by 
positioning system integration, and photo capture tools. It aims CHW’s on phones helped engage beneficiaries.   4) Account-
to help Sahiyas more accurately track and support the registra- ability: CommCare improves monitoring and communication. 
tion, follow-up, and completion of care for pregnant women, In one project in Madhya Pradesh (MP), the introduction of 
postpartum mothers, and children up to the age of two years. CommCare improved data completeness from 67% to 84%. 
It is built on a complex decision- and logic-processing platform It also reduced the average time it took to submit data to a 
that can support these CHWs to deliver timely services sup- program coordinator from 45 days to 8 hours. 
ported across the continuum of care, as well as provide critical 
data-quality checks at the point of service. It submits data Lessons Learned 
collected from remote locations to a cloud server to be accessed 
by supervisors at various levels to support real-time, data-driven n Through Dimagi’s projects globally, an immense 
decision-making and worker supervision. Given Jharkhand’s importance in effective supportive supervision for the 
predominantly rural and forest-covered terrain, CommCare is a successful adoption and continued use of CommCare 
valuable tool for Sahiyas and enables better access, quality, and as a mobile job aid for health workers has been seen. In 
experience of care to beneficiaries. the context of government health workers, this project 
The content of the application was designed to integrate India’s has showed how important effective supervision is and 
National Health Mission guidelines in conjunction with rigor- the challenges of engaging supervisors in a system where 
ous field testing to incorporate feedback on the tool’s usability little incentives exist for quality supervision. Learning 
and accessibility for Sahiyas and beneficiaries. The application how to integrate supervisors into a program from 
incorporates extensive multimedia support, including local- the onset can be as integral to the success of a mobile 
language audio prompts and behavior change counseling video intervention as getting buy-in from end-users, especially 
content provided by UNICEF, to facilitate more engaging inter- for sustainability in the government context.
actions between Sahiyas and their beneficiaries. n Engaging with the government comes with its own 
challenges, and most often a top-down approach can 
Evaluation and Results be most effective in decision-making and facilitating 
buy-in at all levels. When implementing a project on the 
Since August 2014, Dimagi worked with the National Health ground, buy-in from local officials is key to ensuring 
Mission (NHM) of Jharkhand to design and pilot a mobile success of an implementation, but often buy-in from 
job aid for Sahiyas in the high priority district of Seraike- senior government officials can ease accessing and 
la-Kharsawan, deploying CommCare for 220 Sahiyas in 1 getting support from local officials in the field.
block. A core objective of the mobile job aid for Sahiyas is 
to increase the awareness and delivery of care on key NHM Conclusion 
priority areas. In order to assess the impacts of CommCare on 
knowledge retention on critical areas of care, Dimagi carried While Dimagi has contributed to successful interventions 
out a baseline knowledge assessment survey and aims to con- through mobile job aids for health workers with several 
duct midline and endline surveys to assess the impact of the partners in several locations across the world, this was the first 
mobile job aid introduction into standard care practices. time Dimagi partnered directly with the government. This 
Dimagi constantly examines how CommCare impacts the partnership resulted in a sense of ownership within the state 
four key areas of care: access, quality, experience, and ac- health team, as their inputs on the application content were 
countability. 1) Access: An RCT showed that reminders from solicited and they were given a certificate for work performed in 
CommCare led to 85% more timely home-visits. Another Chandil. Relationships were also forged with the health workers 
study found that ASHA’s using CommCare on average make and the officials on the ground. Dimagi will continue exploring 
visits that are 1.8 times longer and about twice as likely to different methods of supportive supervision in conjunction with 
include key decision-makers (client’s husband, mother-in- government officials to assess the most effective methods of 
law) compared to counselling sessions without CommCare.  ensuring program sustainability. n   
2) Quality:  One study in India demonstrated that after four 
months of use, ASHA’s had increased knowledge retention of Geographic Coverage:  Chandil block, Seraikela District, Jharkhand, India 
at least three danger signs from 48% at baseline to 70%. An-
other study, found 24% improvement in ASHAs’ knowledge Implementation Partners: Dimagi, Inc.
of high-impact MNCH interventions within five months.   Donor: World Bank Development Marketplace
3) Experience: The literature indicates that multimedia usage Contact Information: Rushika Shekhar, Senior Field Manager, 
in CommCare increases client engagement. These findings Dimagi, rshekhar@dimagi.com 
mHEALTH COMPENDIUM  VOLUME 5  n  99
