Leveraging MobiLe 
TechnoLogies To ProMoTe
MaTernaL & newborn heaLTh:
The CurrenT LandsCape & OppOrTuniTies fOr 
advanCemenT in LOw-resOurCe seTTings
The CenTer fOr innOvaTiOn & TeChnOLOgy in pubLiC heaLTh  
pubLiC heaLTh insTiTuTe | OakLand, CaLifOrnia

TabLe of conTenTs
aCknOwLedgemenTs …………………………………………………………………………………………… 4
eXeCuTive summary …………………………………………………………………………………………… 5
inTrOduCTiOn …………………………………………………………………………………………………… 7 
maTernaL and newbOrn heaLTh framewOrks ………………………………………………………… 9
mObiLe heaLTh in maTernaL and newbOrn heaLTh ………………………………………………… 13
stimulating demand among pregnant women and new mothers ................................................. 14
strengthening human resource Capacity ........................................................................................19
Transforming health system Capacity................................................................................................22
OppOrTuniTies fOr mheaLTh in maTernaL and newbOrn heaLTh ...........................................26
advanCing mObiLe heaLTh in maTernaL and newbOrn heaLTh ................................................ 27
Technology, design, and implementation ..........................................................................................29
scaling and sustaining ........................................................................................................................30
public policy ..........................................................................................................................................30
COnCLusiOn ............................................................................................................................................32
referenCes ............................................................................................................................................34
3
TOC  Leveraging MobiLe TechnoLogies in MaTernaL and newborn heaLTh
Acknowledgements
The authors would like to extend the deepest appreciation and regards to the many resources who 
have helped inform the preparation and writing of this report. many thanks go to neal Lesh (dimagi), 
eric blantz (inveneo), brendan smith (vital wave Consulting, inc.), pamela riley (abt associates), erin 
sines (macarthur foundation), sandhya rao (usaid, Office of health, infectious diseases and nutrition 
at usaid), James bon Tempo (Jhpiego), Catharine Taylor (paTh), kiersten israel-ballard (paTh), anton 
Luchitsky (paTh), peggy d’adamo (usaid, Office of population and reproductive health), rose reis 
and Trevor Lewis (Center for health market innovations), heather vahdat and kelly L’engle (fhi 360), 
patricia mechael (mhealth alliance, un foundation), Jaspal sandhu (gobee group), kelly kiesling 
(The mhealth working group), stan kachnowski (mailman school of public health at Columbia 
university), katherine de Tolly (Cell-Life), Trina dasgupta (gsma), Craig friedrichs (gsma), kyla reid 
(gsma), alice newton (government digital service), mojca Cargo (gsma), Toni eliasz (world bank), 
Jody ranck (Consultant at intrahealth international), kate Cummings (ushahidi), rafael anta (inter-
american development bank), bas hoefman (Text to Change), richard bartlett (international partnership 
for innovative healthcare delivery), michael syson (ateneo de manila university in philippines), Juan 
rodriguez (voxiva), patricia J. garcia (universidad peruana Cayetano heredia in peru), walter Curioso 
(universidad peruana Cayetano heredia in peru), and rodrigo saucedo martínez (instituto Carlos slim de 
la salud of mexico). we have drawn heavily from the practices, experiences, and contributions of these 
individuals and their organizations to characterize the scale and scope of mhealth activity in maternal 
and newborn health. This report would not have been possible without their sharing best practices, 
recommendations, and learned lessons in relation to mhealth intervention design, implementation, and 
evaluation, and the potential opportunities and levers for successfully advancing mhealth interventions at 
scale and on a sustained basis. Our many thanks also go to ada kwan, Cathryn meurn, Jennifer potts, 
francis gonzales, and madhura bhat for their help and support in the production of this report.
most importantly, we would like to express our appreciation to the mhealth alliance, hosted by the 
un foundation. without their leadership, support, and its commitment to advancing the role of mobile 
technology in global health and investment in supporting mhealth practices in maternal and newborn 
health, this report would not have been possible. it is our utmost desire that the product of our efforts 
will go forward to inform the strategic use and implementation of mhealth to improve access to care 
for pregnant women, mothers, and newborns so that reductions in maternal and newborn mortality – 
achievable with existing technologies of today – can happen without further delay.
4
Acknowledgements  Leveraging MobiLe TechnoLogies in MaTernaL and newborn heaLTh
executive summAry
every year, approximately 350,000 women die worldwide as a direct result of pregnancy and childbirth, 
and for each woman who dies, approximately 20 others suffer from pregnancy-related consequences.1 
additionally, three million babies die every year before they are a month old, and a similar number are 
stillborn.2, 3 when stillbirths are included, about half of all 7.5 million deaths in children under age five occur 
before the end of the neonatal period, or the first 28 days of life, and without a reduction in the number of 
neonatal deaths, a dent cannot be made in under-five mortality rates.4 with over six billion mobile phone 
subscriptions spread across a world population of over seven billion, mobile technologies are rapidly 
penetrating even the most remote corners of the world.5 for women and newborns in many low- and 
middle-income countries (LmiCs), the rapid expansion of mobile technology infrastructure presents an 
unprecedented opportunity to increase access to health care and save lives that are lost from preventable 
and avoidable conditions.
objective
The objective of this report is twofold: 
(1) to describe the current state of mhealth intervention design, implementation, and evaluation that can be 
leveraged to improve maternal and newborn health globally and 
(2) to identify ways to strategically advance mhealth in maternal and newborn care, as well as strategies for 
scaling up interventions.
methodology
This report prioritized information from 13 LmiCs in asia, Latin america, and africa: bangladesh, india, the 
philippines, brazil, mexico, peru, ghana, kenya, Liberia, the republic of south africa, rwanda, Tanzania, 
and uganda. a total of 70 projects related to maternal and newborn health (mnh) and 160 projects in other 
health areas were identified. key informant interviews were conducted with experts in health, technology, 
and public policy, as well as those involved in the development and implementation of mhealth programs 
worldwide. additionally, this report was informed by a review of published information and by contacting 
sponsoring organizations.
Findings
in mnh, combining mobile technologies with existing health system resources offers significant potential 
to provide women and newborns with adequate and appropriate care through interventions that stimulate 
demand for available services, promote improved access, and lead to efficiencies in care delivery and 
management practices. as with other application areas of mhealth, mnh interventions face significant 
barriers at technical, social, and economic levels.
conclusions
The ability to conduct rigorous evaluation and provide evidence of demonstrable impact is the crucial catalyst 
that will advance policy and investment in the field and lead to the successful scaling and sustainability of 
mhealth interventions. as evidence accrues, policy makers will be able to push forward supportive national 
policy for information and communications technologies in health care, which will promote an enabling 
environment where the potential of mhealth can best be realized.
5
executive summAry Leveraging MobiLe TechnoLogies in MaTernaL and newborn heaLTh
To achieve The Mdgs and To 
MainTain beTTer Mnh beyond 
2015, we MusT criTicaLLy 
exaMine new ways of using 
exisTing resources
introduction to deliver these already proven interventions  
every year, approximately 350,000 women at scale to reach the mothers and newborns  
die worldwide as a direct result of pregnancy who need them most.
and childbirth, and for each woman who dies, 
approximately 20 others suffer from pregnancy- a closer look at global maternal and newborn 
related consequences.1 additionally, three million mortality trends shows that half of maternal deaths 
babies die every year before they are a month old, occur in sub-saharan africa and a third occur in 
and a similar number are stillborn.2, 3 when stillbirths south asia with india contributing to 22 percent of 
are included, about half of all 7.5 million deaths deaths with similar patterns existing for neonatal 
in children under age five occur before the end of mortality.1,7 Challenges in getting effective solutions 
the neonatal period, or the first 28 days of life, and to mothers and newborns who are most at-risk can 
without a reduction in the number of neonatal deaths, be overcome by delivering proven interventions with 
a dent cannot be made in under-five mortality rates.4 better coverage and quality particularly in africa and 
south asia. factors that hinder adequate health 
although the majority of these deaths and care from reaching the women and newborns 
debilitating illnesses and injuries are preventable who are most at risk include distance to resources, 
and avoidable (see Figure 1), reducing the under- severe shortages of trained health professionals, 
five mortality rate and the maternal mortality ratio and lack of investment in public health. To achieve 
has seen slow progress.6 placed on the global the mdgs and to maintain better mnh beyond 
agenda as millennium development goals (mdgs) 2015, we must critically examine new ways of using 
4 and 5, respectively, the global health community existing resources in regions where improvements 
has determined whAt is effective at reducing the need to be made.
number of deaths, and now must focus on how 
DEATHS OF CHILDREN UNDER FIVE MATERNAL DEATHS
Embolism 1%
Diarrhoea 14% Preterm 12% Sepsis 8% Haemorrhage 35%
Pneumonia 14% Asphyxia 9% Abortion 9%
Sepsis 5% Other direct 11%
Other 
Other neonatal 5%
infections 9%
Pneumonia, Indirect 18%
neonatal 4%
Malaria 8%
Congenital 3%
Non-communicable 
diseases 4% AIDS 2% Tetanus 1% Hypertension 18%
Injury 3% Pertussis 2% Diarrhoea, 
neonatal 1%
Meningitis 2%
Measles 1%
CHILDREN 59% NEWBORNS 41%
Figure 1. Causes of deaths in children under five years of age and maternal deaths (source: global Campaign for the health  
millennium development goals, 2011).
7
introduction Leveraging MobiLe TechnoLogies in MaTernaL and newborn heaLTh
with over six billion mobile phone subscriptions facilities with point-of-care decision support tools to 
spread across a world population of over seven maintain existing standards and augment existing 
billion, mobile technologies are rapidly penetrating protocols that have been proven to be effective in 
even the most remote corners of the world.5 for case management. 
women and newborns in many low- and middle-
income countries (LmiCs), the rapid expansion at this time, mhealth applications in the mnh 
of mobile technology infrastructure presents an field are in the formative stage, and existing 
unprecedented opportunity to increase access to evidence for effectiveness and impact is new, but 
health care and save lives, but how exactly can we rapidly evolving. This report aims (1) to describe 
leverage the power of mobile technology to save the current state of mhealth intervention design, 
the lives of women and newborns? implementation, and evaluation that can be 
leveraged to improve mnh globally, and (2) to 
Through mobile health (mhealth), or the use of identify ways to strategically advance and scale 
wireless information and communication devices up mhealth in maternal and newborn care so 
(e.g. mobile phones and smartphones) and mobile that opportunities afforded by mobile phones and 
phone networks for health, not only can frontline networks can reach their full potential. This report 
health workers carry tools loaded with protocols, will first provide frameworks currently used in the 
but captured data can also flow through a health field of mnh, which will help provide a structure 
system in real-time and deliver critical information to for general mhealth strategies and those that 
support women’s and providers’ needs in a timely have been particularly implemented to improve 
and efficient manner. additionally, combining mobile mnh outcomes. detail is then provided on how 
technologies with existing health system resources mhealth can stimulate demand for services among 
offers opportunities in stimulating demand for pregnant women and new mothers, strengthen 
available services and expanding access to effective human resource capacity, and transform health 
and already existing programs through growing system capacity. The report then summarizes 
mobile phone networks, both of which can lead the opportunities that mhealth can leverage to 
to higher levels of efficiency in service delivery, reduce mortality rates, as well as suggestions for 
supervision, and management practices. strategically advancing the space.
To build from the accrued knowledge of global mnh, 
in particular, for mnh, mhealth can support and a quick review of existing frameworks will help 
strengthen existing efforts along the continuum of facilitate the integration of mhealth. This section will 
care, as well as offer innovative solutions, such as describe two frameworks used in the field of mnh: 
providing women with mnh-related information the maternal-newborn continuum of care and the 
services by phone, in addition to providing Three delays model.
community-based health workers and health 
8
introduction  Leveraging MobiLe TechnoLogies in MaTernaL and newborn heaLTh
mAternAl And newborn  in reality, along the continuum of care, significant 
heAlth FrAmeworks variation persists in the levels of coverage, and 
first, the maternal-newborn continuum of care because mhealth can provide solutions to improve 
ranges from pre-pregnancy and extends into access and extend reach of health efforts, it will be 
pregnancy, labor and delivery, and postpartum or important to acknowledge these relations when 
postnatal care, and it naturally includes child health; selecting and integrating appropriate strategies.
however, this report will focus primarily on the Figure 3 highlights the status in 2010 of coverage 
mnh section of the continuum. The purpose of the estimates of evidence-based interventions related 
continuum of care is to map the specific moments to maternal, newborn, and child health in 68 mdg 
along the continuum where proven interventions countdown countries.8 The high rate of maternal 
ought to be delivered (see Figure 2). an analysis and newborn mortality in many low-resource 
of ‘coverage gap’ measures, which represents the settings also reflects inequities in access to medical 
percentage of a target population not receiving services because of the geographic and economic 
critical services, indicated that the greatest imbalances that exist between rural and urban 
inequities in services fall into the categories of populations and the rich and poor. poor women 
maternal and newborn care and family planning. and their infants living in rural areas have a higher 
risk of poor pregnancy outcomes as a result of 
barriers to accessing timely and adequate care 
and limited preventive measures and treatments. 
for example, only one in three rural women in 
developing countries receive the recommended 
care during pregnancy.b
Pre- PregnAncy delivery PostPArtum PostnAtAl
PregnAncy
Family  Family  skilled emergency Postpartum/post natal 
Facility Planning Planning attendance obstetric care for mother and 
at birth care baby and imnci
Pmtct
community Family  health education skilled attendance at birth Postpartum/post natal care for mother and 
Planning during pregnancy baby, identifying/referring newborn illness
birth planning
Figure 2. maternal-newborn continuum of care (source: mhealth alliancea , Credit: uniCef)
a. maternal-newborn mhealth initiative. retrieved on march 25, 2012 previously available on the web page:  
mhealthalliance.org/content/maternal-newborn-mhealth-initiative-mmii
b. 2015 millennium development goals: retrieved on march 25, 2012 from: http://www.un.org/millenniumgoals/
9
meternAl And newborn heAlth FrAmeworks  Leveraging MobiLe TechnoLogies in MaTernaL and newborn heaLTh
60
50
46
43
41
40
30 29 29
26
22
20
10
1
0
Community
International Maternity Specific Midwives IMCI treatment of New ORS Costed
Code of protection in notification authorised adapted pneumonia formula implementation
Marketing accordance of maternal to administer to cover and zinc for plan(s) for
of Breastmilk with ILO deaths core set of neonates management maternal,
Substitutes Convention lifesaving aged 0–1 of diarrhoea newborn, and
enacted 183 interventions weeks child health
available
Figure 3. Coverage estimates from 2010 for evidence-based policies related to maternal, newborn, and child health 
in 68 countdown countries. iLO=international Labour Organisation; imCi=integrated management of 
Childhood illness; Ors=oral rehydration solution. (source: bhutta et al., 2010).
Median coverage for 68 priority countries*
90
80
70
Mortality risk 
for children
60
50
40
30 Mortality 
risk for 
20 mothers
10
0
ANC coverage Institutional Delivery** Postnatal Care Breastfeeding DPT3 Vaccination
*Data compiled for 68 priority countries for the 2010 Countdown Report Sources: Coverage data; Countdown to 2011, decade report (2010). Data for mortality distribution 
** Births occuring in the health facilities based on 1) for mothers; LI, XF, IJOG, 1996; for children; DHS survey data where available for 51 
selected countries.
Figure 4. mortality risk for mothers and Children along the Continuum of Care 
 (source: global Campaign for the health millennium development goals, 2011). 
10
Number of Countdown countries adopting policy
meternAl And newborn heAlth FrAmeworks  Leveraging MobiLe TechnoLogies in MaTernaL and newborn heaLTh
FACTORS AFFECTING PHASES OF DELAY
UTILIZATION AND OUTCOME
Socioeconomic/Cultural Factors Phase I: Deciding to
Seek Care
Accessibility of Facilities Phase II: Identifying and 
Reaching Medical Facility
Phase III: Receiving Adequate
Quality of Care
and Appropriate Treatment
Figure 5. Three delays model for maternal mortality (source: Thaddeus and maine, 1994).9 
notably, the onset of labor marks the beginning of the need to have effective emergency responses. 
another high-risk period that continues through the One model that frames the challenges of improving 
immediate 48 hours after birth. Figure 4 highlights maternal mortality is the Three delays model, 
the mortality risk for mothers and children along the which proposes that pregnancy-related mortality is 
continuum of care. expanding access to prenatal overwhelmingly due to delays in the decision to seek 
care, family planning resources, proper nutrition care, access to the appropriate level of care, and 
options, and postnatal care is important; however, receipt of the appropriate treatment and professional 
around the onset of labor, 150,000 maternal deaths, care upon arrival at the health facility (see Figure 5). 
1.6 million neonatal deaths, and 1.2 million stillbirths The maternal-newborn continuum of care provides 
occur each year.c almost all of the deaths occurring a general overview of what health systems can do 
during this high-risk period take place in LmiCs. in to assure that appropriate services are available 
sub-saharan africa and south asia, which together to mothers and newborns, but when designing 
accounted for 87 percent of global maternal deaths effective interventions, it is equally important to keep 
in 2008, less than half the women deliver in hospitals. in mind factors on the population side that may 
Optimizing birth outcomes in these countries requires prevent the usage of services, regardless of whether 
strengthening human resource and health system they are delivered with high quality or not. in this 
capacities during this acute high-risk period, and report, ways mhealth can be integrated to reduce 
encouraging women to deliver in well-equipped and these delays are described using this framework.
staffed institutional care settings, while addressing 
c. saving Lives at birth: a grand Challenge for development (http://www.savinglivesatbirth.net)
11
meternAl And newborn heAlth FrAmeworks  Leveraging MobiLe TechnoLogies in MaTernaL and newborn heaLTh
expanding MobiLe phone 
peneTraTion and neTwork 
coverage can reMove 
TradiTionaL geographic 
and econoMic barriers  
To heaLTh care
mobile heAlth in mAternAl  or health status reports; requests for self-reported 
And newborn heAlth data, encouragement or motivation to sustain 
The rise in mhealth solutions to improve health a positive behavior (and the reverse, to reduce 
outcomes is largely attributable to the ubiquity of a negative one); and education and information 
mobile phones as well as the convenience, user resources to improve self-efficacy. a systematic 
friendliness, and relatively low cost of mhealth review of the literature on behavior change and 
applications. expanding mobile phone penetration clinical outcomes from disease management 
and network coverage can remove traditional and prevention services delivered through text 
geographic and economic barriers to health care, messaging found significant results in eight of nine 
particularly in emergency situations that can be studies that support text messaging as a tool for 
life threatening, as is often the case for mnh. To behavior change.11 however, this review, much like 
provide the context to discuss the existing and the other published evidence to date, reflects small-
potential role of mhealth in mnh, a review of scale projects in high-income countries, and thus 
mhealth across 13 LmiCs was conducted. Lessons limits their relevance to many LmiC settings.
learned were drawn not only in mnh but from all 
mhealth efforts. Figure 6 provides an overview of mhealth services 
for mnh in LmiCs organized by three categories 
mhealth is fairly new with a rapidly developing reflecting responses to each of the delays in the 
evidence base that suggests encouraging progress. Three delays model: stimulating demand among 
in general, mhealth interventions fall primarily pregnant women and mothers, strengthening 
into two categories: (1) those directed toward human resource capacity, and transforming health 
improving the provision of health services where the system capacity. These three categories are further 
predominant focus is at the health system level, and explored in more detail below.
(2) those directed toward the recipients of health 
services where client-focused services can involve 
sending health information or reminders to improve 
treatment compliance or attend appointments.10 
in the former, target applications make use of 
mobile phone features for real-time or actionable 
information for data collection, surveillance, supply 
chain management, and point-of-care support 
applications. in the latter, client-focused services 
emphasize the promotion or reinforcement 
of positive health behaviors and the use of 
recommended health services, and mobile finance 
services that facilitate savings toward the cost of 
recommended health products and services. 
with regard to the type of mobile phone features 
utilized, recent evaluations of mhealth programs 
indicate a potential to broadly support patient self-
management through text-message-based cues, 
reminders, and prompts to schedule or confirm 
an appointment; notifications for laboratory results 
13
mobile heAlth in mAternAl And newborn heAlth  Leveraging MobiLe TechnoLogies in MaTernaL and newborn heaLTh
• Information services that increase awareness of health issues and available resources
Stimulating demand • Patient communication services that connect women to peer networks or local expert resources
among pregnant • Patient-support services for the management of health issues impacting health outcomes
women and mothers
• Financial services that remove barriers to access and utilization of available care services
• Services that support patient tracking and management at the community level
• Services that support risk screening, referral and rmote consultation
• Services that provide the point-of-care decision support to improve compliance with 
recommended care guidelines
Strengthening human
resource capacity • Services that strengthen or improve human resource management processes
• Services that equip community-based health worker cadres with mobile tools and extending the 
physical space of health facility coverage into the households and community
• Services that transform the submission of monitoring and evaluation indicator reports from 
paper-based to electronic or mobile-based, which can then enhance not only monitoring, 
Transforming health surveillance, and detection, but also accountability
system capacity • Services that improve governance, supply chain, and clinical process efficiencies
figure 6. mhealth services in mnh.
stimulAting demAnd Among increase women’s awareness of mnh issues and 
PregnAnt women And new promote behavior change in their utilization of 
mothers related care services; directly connect women to 
reasons that may delay a woman’s decision to expert resources such as skilled birth attendants 
seek care are many and the result of a confluence at health clinics; provide complementary patient 
of factors. These include a lack of knowledge support services for the prevention and treatment of 
about health services and complications during health issues contributing to maternal and newborn 
pregnancy and how these complications are mortality; and/or offer mobile financial services 
managed, as well as geographic, economic, and which either remove financial barriers to care or 
socio-cultural barriers. in certain societies, the lower directly encourage women to save toward delivery 
status of women is a barrier to their ability to make and post-natal care. 
independent decisions regarding their own care. 
Other barriers include the lack of financial resources because pregnant women can also be reached 
to pay for hospital services and to purchase through extended caretakers in their communities, 
medications; beliefs and practices surrounding mhealth interventions in this category also target 
childbirth and delivery, nutrition, and education; and family members of pregnant women, such as 
a lack of trust in health systems. a spouse or mother, or influential community 
members. Targeting these individuals can facilitate 
mhealth solutions that have been designed to the knowledge transfer of appropriate care, as 
influence a woman’s decision to seek care can well as encourage expectant mothers to seek 
address the problem from several perspectives. services. mhealth can also create peer networks of 
table 1 summarizes mhealth strategies for pregnant women or partner first-time mothers with 
supporting pregnant women and encouraging them experienced mothers for support. 
to seek medical care. in this regard, strategies 
have been standalone or integrated and aim to: 
14
mobile heAlth in mAternAl And newborn heAlth  Leveraging MobiLe TechnoLogies in MaTernaL and newborn heaLTh
table 1. mhealth interventions and strategies to stimulate the demand for mnh services among pregnant women d
mheAlth  ProgrAm strAtegy
intervention main affiliated Organizations
information babysms south africa – subscription-based services that require 
services that world of avatar,  participants to provide their expected delivery date (or date 
increase women’s mTn south africa of infant’s birth) to time content delivery for optimal impact on 
awareness of users’ health knowledge and behaviors. 
health issues and 
encourage women sms Appointment  philippines – standalone services that send appointment 
to use available reminder system reminders to women who have registered at local health centers 
health resources university of philippines 2-3 days in advance of a scheduled follow-up appointment. 
medical informatics unit
mcheck india – Targeted services that assist women and family 
world health Organization members in the identification of crucial risk factors in mothers 
psp/CpO and newborns during the immediate week-long, high-risk 
period following delivery and in seeking appropriate care. 
interactive maternal  mexico – interactive mapping services that mash up health 
health mapping tool system and geographic information system data to provide 
esaC project;  detailed information about the quality and types of maternal 
phi research group,  health services offered in local locations.
university of Toronto; pahO
mobile Alliance for bangladesh, india, south africa – for no charge to expecting 
maternal Action (mAmA) and new mothers, mama offers health information in the form 
usaid, Johnson & Johnson, of text messages adapted to different contexts. messages are 
babycenter developed with the help of babyCenter, which has reached 
25 million pregnant women and new mothers in 20 countries 
around the world. Locally adapted messages will be available 
on an online library for other projects to encourage sharing 
learned lessons.
d. for a more comprehensive list of mhealth interventions and strategies, visit the database on the health unbound website http://www.healthunbound.org/
15
stimulAting demAnd Among PregnAnt women And new mothers  Leveraging MobiLe TechnoLogies in MaTernaL and newborn heaLTh
mheAlth  ProgrAm strAtegy
intervention main affiliated Organizations
patient wired mothers Tanzania – services that strengthen communication between 
communication university of Copenhagen; pregnant women and primary health care units through 
services that ministry of health and social use of mobile phones to ask questions and seek advice in 
directly connect welfare, Zanzibar, Tanzania; cases of acute or non-acute problems and potentially avoid 
women to peer health sector programme unnecessary visits. 
networks or support Zanzibar;  
expert resources danida health sector 
in the community programme support
such as skilled 
birth attendants Project kopano south africa – services that allow hiv-positive mothers to 
The shm foundation, yale communicate directly with each other via sms about issues 
school of medicine, university affecting their lives during their pregnancy.
of pretoria
mmitra india – services delivered to elected, trained, trusted female 
uCsf bixby Center, armaan leaders from villages’ local consultation groups to ensure that 
the few eligible women without phones also have access to 
the educational messages on preventive and emergency care. 
complementary mobile for reproductive Tanzania, kenya – reproductive health services that use text-
patient-support health (m4rh) based messages to deliver evidence-based information on 
services fhi 360, usaid, prOgress family planning methods. services are designed to target both 
addressing the men and women with information on family planning. 
management of 
health issues cellphones4hiv south africa – programs to prevent the mother-to-child 
that contribute Cell-Life, vodacom, transmission of hiv/aids that use text messaging to 
to maternal and usaid, pepfar, The raith send educational messages and reminders for scheduled 
newborn mortality foundation, Johns hopkins appointments, testing and treatment. 
health and education south 
africa, right to Care
Mobile financial changamka kenya – services that enable women to save money over 
services that Changamka microhealth Ltd. an extended period of time to gain access to primary health 
remove financial care services by facilitating payment at the point of care using 
barriers to care by a medical smart card combined with mobile money transfer 
allowing women service systems.
to save toward 
delivery and post- m-money For women  kenya – services that combine mobile financial services, 
natal care with Fistula educational information, and the provision of free treatment in 
fistula Care, freedom from order to cover transport costs for women and facilitate their 
fistula foundation, usaid, access to fistula repair services. 
vodafone group
16
mobile heAlth in mAternAl And newborn heAlth  Leveraging MobiLe TechnoLogies in MaTernaL and newborn heaLTh
MheaLTh can aLso creaTe 
peer neTworks of pregnanT 
woMen or parTner 
firsT-TiMe MoThers wiTh 
experienced MoThers for 
supporT
mhealth services targeting new and expectant treatment for those who need it. mothers receive 
mothers involve a broad range of private and the messages free of charge and the project bears 
public partnerships in the planning for promotion the cost of approximately us$1.50 per mother 
and outreach, content and format, and pricing to send messages. The intervention is still being 
of mhealth services with the shared goal of evaluated as to whether they return for test results. 
increasing a woman’s awareness of health issues exit interviews indicated that participants received 
and encouraging her to use health services. These a strong psychological benefit from participation. 
include the use of the government health workforce a similar program among hiv-positive mothers is 
(sms advice for pregnant women in bangladesh); currently conducting an rCT to evaluate the mental 
facility-based posters, palm cards, and flyers health benefit from the use of mobile phones to 
(mobile for reproductive health in kenya and complement standard treatment programs and the 
Tanzania); and more traditional uses of national role of peer mentors who provide participants with 
media campaigns (wazazi nipendeni in Tanzania). mental health support in managing their conditions 
(project masihambisane in south africa).
Preliminary evidence indicates:
•	 improved compliance in scheduled follow-up in low-resource settings, a financial hurdle 
appointments (sms appointment reminder often confronts proper and adequate health 
system in philippines) service delivery. This is now being addressed by 
•	 higher rates of service utilization (mobile transaction-based mobile financial services, which 
ehealth safe motherhood project in philippines) are particularly valuable for individuals who do not 
•	 higher levels of trust (mobile for reproductive have bank accounts. mobile technology solutions 
health in kenya and Tanzania) that allow users to save money for future payment 
•	 improved user satisfaction with services for goods and services have proven particularly 
(CycleTel in india) effective among expectant mothers as a sustainable 
•	 higher rates of delivery in the presence of financing mechanism. for example, participants 
skilled birth attendants in the intervention arm can save for their antenatal, delivery, and postnatal 
than the skilled birth attendant rate at delivery in services at participating health facilities. in kenya, 
Tanzania was 43 percent in 2004-20057 (wired Changamka has distributed more than 10,000 smart 
mothers in Tanzania) cards to low-income pregnant women through 
health facilities. The service is being deployed more 
results indicate the potential benefit of these broadly through other health facilities nationwide. 
measures in preventing loss of mothers to follow- One example of success is the m-money for women 
up (Cellphones4hiv in south africa). a randomized with fistula program, which has noted a sharp 
controlled trial (rCT) in south africa assessed the increase in caseload following the launch of a broad-
effectiveness of reminding hiv-positive mothers based outreach and promotion campaign that offers 
to keep appointments, bring their infants for hiv women a free hotline, transportation, and treatment 
testing, and if needed, treatment. in the trial of service. The program transfers money via m-pesa 
738 mothers, more than 90% of the 323 who to those who cannot afford transport to a fistula unit. 
received messages brought infants for testing, during the six months prior to the campaign, the 
compared with 78% of those who didn’t receive average caseload of fistula patients at one facility 
messages. The service comprises a ten-week called the Jamaa mission hospital (Jmh) was 15 per 
intervention that provides educational information month. in the month following the campaign, Jmh 
and reminders to keep scheduled appointments saw an increase in the demand for services as it 
and bring infants for hiv testing and also further supported a patient caseload of 40 fistula patients.
18
mobile heAlth in mAternAl And newborn heAlth  Leveraging MobiLe TechnoLogies in MaTernaL and newborn heaLTh
strengthening humAn resource facilitate the ability of frontline health workers to 
cAPAcity transmit data and receive expert feedback on urgent 
delays in accessing the appropriate level of care care cases; (2) direct communication with different 
are primarily due to shortages of qualified health levels of the health system, such as in the case 
professionals, most often in difficult-to-reach of emergency transportation of pregnant women 
rural and remote areas. The labor shortage is with complications; and (3) tools offering improved 
compounded by (1) the lack of transportation, efficiencies in remote diagnosis, treatment, and case 
particularly important in emergency situations management of patients across the maternal and 
involving complications during a pregnancy, and newborn continuum of care. These efforts often 
(2) the lack of systems that could support the direct information and data from the community 
ability of community health workers to monitor and level to health facilities and from the district level to 
track at-risk patients and to refer those in need to the ministry of health. such existing programs have 
specialized care in a timely manner. demonstrated their feasibility; however, success in 
scaling up to the national level requires the strategic 
as found in table 2, mhealth programs strengthen alignment of the intervention with the prioritization 
human resource capacity in three main ways: of mnh on national health agendas, in addition to 
(1) point-of-care decision support solutions that strong public-private partnerships.
table 2. mhealth interventions and strategies to strengthen human resource capacity for healthe
mheAlth ProgrAms strAtegy
intervention main affiliated Organizations
services that AshA (Accredited social india – services that provide registration forms, checklists, 
support patient health Activist) Project care protocols, and educational materials to support 
tracking and CommCare community health workers in tracking pregnancies during 
management at home visits, supporting maternal, neonatal and early child 
the community health, and providing referrals for at-risk individuals.
level
mobile technology ghana – services that integrate community-based electronic 
for community health records of care with the delivery of sms or pre-recorded voice 
(motech) educational messages to pregnant women and their families 
grameen foundation, to remind women and newborns that they are due for or are 
Columbia university’s mailman non-adherent with scheduled care.
school of public health, 
ghana health service
childcount+ ghana, kenya, rwanda, Tanzania, uganda – services that 
millennium villages project allow community health extension workers to use text-
based messages to register new births, monitor community 
health events in pregnant women, receive feedback on 
recommended treatment, and track and manage their care.
e. for a more comprehensive list of mhealth interventions and strategies, visit the database on the health unbound website http://www.healthunbound.org/
19
strengthening humAn resource cAPAcity Leveraging MobiLe TechnoLogies in MaTernaL and newborn heaLTh
mheAlth ProgrAms strAtegy
intervention main affiliated Organizations
services that sajida bandhu bangladesh – services that support the ability of clinicians 
support risk sajida foundation, aCCess in central facilities to monitor data that has been collected 
screening, referral, health international and transmitted by phone during home visits and to provide 
and remote medical advice in real-time.
consultation
mi bebé mexico – mobile health monitoring services that allow health 
instituto Carlos slim, professional and community health workers to continuously 
Qualcomm and remotely monitor women with high-risk pregnancies to 
provide early warning of abnormalities and to connect women 
to specialized clinics in a timely manner.
using cell Phones for Tanzania – district-level referral services for emergency 
obstetric emergencies obstetric care for pregnant women that connect health 
ifakara health institute, workers in peripheral facilities with senior medical staff 
maternal health Task force at district headquarters for immediate consultation and 
emergency clinical support.
services that e-imci (integrated Tanzania – services that provide electronic protocols on 
provide electronic management of  mobile devices to guide health workers step-by-step through 
versions of care childhood illness) the assessment, classification and treatment of a condition to 
protocols for d-Tree international, dimagi improve their adherence to standard care protocols as well as 
community health to ensure favorable patient outcomes.
workers and 
facility-based mobiles for Quality uganda – education and training services that use text 
staff improvement messages to deliver daily instructions, tips, and quizzes to 
marie stopes international, health workers that reinforce clinical content learned during 
usaid training and adherence to standards and guidelines.
clinical Patient kenya – services that employ portable devices with 
Administration kit embedded workflow processes that guide skilled 
(cliniPAk) professionals or less skilled health workers through primary 
vecna Cares Charitable Trust, care and specialized clinical protocols and that support 
Click health improved data capture, longitudinal patient care and reporting, 
and patient outreach.
services that capacity Project kenya – services that support effective communication 
strengthen intrahealth international, with health workers deployed to remote areas to improve 
or improve usaid monitoring and supervision, and produce time and cost 
human resource efficiencies in reporting administrative data and in responding 
management to personnel concerns.
processes
20
strengthening humAn resource cAPAcity  Leveraging MobiLe TechnoLogies in MaTernaL and newborn heaLTh
in particular for frontline health workers, mhealth on health workers. in rural areas where paper-based 
can not only improve mnh care delivery but data collection and submission to district-level 
also increase work motivation, autonomy, and reporting systems requires hand delivery, traditional 
supervision in a number of ways. To improve techniques are being streamlined by electronic 
delivery, mobile phones offer options to better opportunities of transmission, effectively resulting 
collect routine patient data during home and in both money and time savings. furthermore, 
clinic visits; screen for risk factors during data collected on mobile phones can be directed 
pregnancy; transmit any data for remote review for immediate feedback by experts to frontline 
and interpretation by clinicians, which allows health workers on follow-up actions, such as 
remote monitoring of high-risk pregnancies; and diagnosis, referrals, or treatment. additionally, 
deliver protocol-driven care and treatment. mobile- administrators have the ability to track health 
mediated solutions can facilitate postnatal home indicators at the community level, monitor health 
visits in the period immediately following discharge worker performance, provide learning resources 
from a facility, as well as provide critical linkages and to community- or facility-based health workers to 
referrals to further remote monitoring or consultation. reinforce previous training or prioritize community-
level actions and resource allocation. additionally, 
with regard to increasing work motivation, well-equipped health facilities and on-time payment 
autonomy, and supervision of health workers, of salaries or per diems are as important to the 
mhealth solutions facilitate workloads and workforce morale as are financial incentives that 
automate challenging aspects of the duties placed reward performance. 
21
strengthening humAn resource cAPAcity  Leveraging MobiLe TechnoLogies in MaTernaL and newborn heaLTh
trAnsForming heAlth  coverage of effective services at the household 
system cAPAcity and community levels, places where delays can 
The third category of mhealth efforts is aimed be reduced. additionally, services that turn existing 
at making improvements in inadequate levels of systems for monitoring and evaluation reporting 
resources and poor infrastructure that limit health from paper-based into electronic or mobile-based 
system capacity and performance for delivering cannot only speed up monitoring, surveillance, and 
mnh services. aforementioned examples in detection from weeks or months to real-time, but 
the previous section regarding how mhealth can also enhance accountability for health system 
strengthens human resource capacity are strengthening. since these have been described 
applicable here as well. for example, services that earlier, this section will detail existing mhealth efforts 
equip community-based health worker cadres that can improve the governance and introduce 
with mobile tools can extend the physical space supply chain and clinical process efficiencies, as 
of health facilities, which can then augment shown in table 3.
22
trAnsForming heAlth system cAPAcity   Leveraging MobiLe TechnoLogies in MaTernaL and newborn heaLTh
table 3. mhealth programs and strategies that strengthen health system capacity.f
mheAlth ProgrAms And strAtegies
intervention
supply chain •	 sms for life (ministry of health and social welfare national malaria Control programme, 
Management novartis, medicine for malaria venture, swiss agency for development, vodacom, psi 
Tanzania, vodafone, ibm, roll back malaria partnership secretariat; Tanzania) employs 
mobile phone, short message service, and electronic mapping technologies to accurately 
track and support review of reported weekly stock levels of artemisinin combination therapy 
and quinine injectables. This information helps eliminate stock-outs and improves access to 
essential medicines by allowing district-level medical officers to allocate malaria treatments 
to where they are most needed, as well as coordinate emergency deliveries to health 
facilities if necessary. results of a pilot in three districts of rural Tanzania, involving 128 
health facilities and covering a population of 1.2 million, reported a decline in the stock-out 
rate from 26 percent of health facilities to 0.8 percent over a 21-week period. following a 
request from the Tanzanian ministry of health, sms for Life has been extended to all 5,099 
health facilities in Tanzania. The program is a partnership with novartis, vodafone solutions 
and the roll back malaria initiative. 
•	 mtrac (uganda ministry of health, uniCef, find; Uganda) employs text-based 
messaging to track disease outbreaks and medication supplies. Community health 
workers at district health centers submit weekly data reports that are sent to district-
level and national stakeholders who follow up on the outcomes; this creates a clear line 
of performance accountability. The initial pilot reported a response rate of approximately 
90 percent from the 170 health facilities in two districts of uganda. The program was 
transferred from the initial pilot partners find (foundation for innovative new diagnostics) 
and the millennium villages project to the ugandan government in 2011, which is now in 
the process of rolling out the program nationwide through 5,000 health facilities and 8,000 
community-based drug dispensaries. a key factor contributing to its success was the 
incorporation of sustainability and scalability factors into the initial design and development. 
clinical diagnostic •	 sms Printers to Accelerate return of test results for early infant 
results reporting diagnosis of hiv/Aids, smArt, (Clinton health access initiative, federal ministry of 
health of nigeria; Nigeria) employs sms-driven printers that connect referral laboratories 
to community clinics via global service for mobile Communications (gsm) mobile networks 
and a simple database application to reduce the turnaround time in laboratories returning 
results of critical blood tests for hiv-exposed infants to clinics. The only consumable required 
is the thermal print paper. a pilot in nigeria that reduced the turnaround time from 33 to 14 
days led to plans for the national scale-up of the project. The government is committing 
financial resources to the expansion of the service. future plans for expansion include 
automating and analyzing results and adding tests for other conditions to the system. The 
estimated cost for the printers is between $300 and $500 depending on suppliers.
f. for a more comprehensive list of mhealth programs and strategies, visit the database on the health unbound website http://www.healthunbound.org/
23
trAnsForming heAlth system cAPAcity   Leveraging MobiLe TechnoLogies in MaTernaL and newborn heaLTh 
mheAlth ProgrAms And strAtegies
intervention
e-governance •	 e-mAmtA (health and family welfare department, government of gujarat; national rural 
health system; India) consists of an online registration system combined with a call center 
to track pregnant women, infants, and children attending government-run health centers in 
the state of gujarat to improve the reliability and accuracy of state-reported data related to 
maternal and child health services and outcomes. The program ensures receipt of proper 
medical services and vaccinations, and supports the identification of every pregnant mother 
who visits a government health facility, and monitoring from conception through 42 days 
after delivery. The call center officials frequently call the pregnant mother to ensure that 
she is receiving proper medical attention. Children are monitored for a period of five years 
to ensure receipt of immunizations. The indian government has adopted the system for 
replication in other states.
•	 mubuzima (rwanda ministry of health, phones for health, usaid; Rwanda) is a system 
using interactive voice response through cell phones to enable community health workers 
to provide in real time monthly data related to community health indicators, such as the 
number of women who delivered at home or in a health facility in a given month, case 
management of sick children, and nutritional and vaccination status. These data are 
immediately processed, and health actors at all levels of the health system can access data 
updates and plan appropriate interventions aimed at reducing maternal and child mortality 
and reaching other health policy goals. The data are also used to supervise community 
health workers and to provide small incentive payments based on their performance. The 
ministry of health was able to negotiate deep discounts, which reduced the costs of airtime 
by 82 percent, for sms and voice messaging with the mobile phone operators. in the future, 
it is envisioned that the system will provide decision support directly to community health 
workers to enhance the delivery of maternal and child health services. mubuzima has been 
developed in collaboration with the ministry of health and supported by the phones for 
health, a public-private partnership. 
professional •	 mdnetwork (vodafone, mTn; Ghana and Liberia) is a free mobile phone network for 
knowledge professional doctor-to-doctor communications as a result of a partnership between mdnet, 
networks now switchboard, and the local telecom operator, vodafone. The service addresses a need 
to share best practices and provide physicians in rural areas with expert knowledge through 
peer-to-peer knowledge transfer. The launch of the service in ghana in 2008 created the 
first countrywide mobile doctor network in africa. The program has allowed the ghana 
medical association to easily send bulk text messages to all physicians in ghana, improving 
countrywide emergency response capabilities and communication. since its inception, 
more than 1,900 physicians in ghana have registered for the mdnet program and have 
logged more than three million calls. in ghana, mdnet has generated nearly $1,300,000 in 
revenue for the local telecom operator vodafone since 2008. The service was also launched 
in Liberia in august 2008 and has networked 100 percent of physicians working in Liberia, 
and is being introduced in Tanzania.
24
trAnsForming heAlth system cAPAcity   Leveraging MobiLe TechnoLogies in MaTernaL and newborn heaLTh
LiTeracy and inequiTies 
in woMen’s access To 
MobiLe phones reMain 
key issues in The design 
and iMpLeMenTaTion of 
mheaLTh services
oPPortunities For mheAlth in lessons that have emerged across mhealth 
mAternAl And newborn heAlth interventions in mnh and that highlight what 
The opportunities offered through mobile has been learned by the global community are 
technologies in addressing unmet needs and in described below.
removing traditional geographic and economic •	 technology design should address user 
barriers to care are great. existing mhealth needs. for example, when compared to text 
interventions focus primarily on acute, life- messages, voice-based solutions are often more 
threatening situations;12 however, mhealth can effective in optimizing the reach and impact of 
yield a larger impact on mnh outcomes in LmiCs mhealth services particularly in an environment 
if further leveraged at multiple points along the where illiteracy levels are high. additionally, it is 
continuum of care, such as when addressing family important to contextualize content of the information 
planning or the period between labor and the being transmitted, while taking into consideration 
immediate 49 hours after giving birth.d local cultures when designing interventions.
•	 solutions should leverage available 
with this focus on the continuum of care, mhealth resources to maximize impact. mobile 
opportunities for mnh include approaches that technology solutions should be consistent with 
address family planning and increase contraceptive local technology and health policy environments 
prevalence, incentivize women to attend centers to have optimal impact on augmenting established 
providing skilled care during and after childbirth. care practices. This improves the likelihood that 
Other mhealth interventions with potential include mhealth solutions will better contribute to health 
remote monitoring of high-risk pregnant women priorities and complement existing practices while 
with wireless fetal monitors and empowering minimizing the potential for disruption. in the future, 
frontline health workers with case management it is probable that advances achieved through 
and clinical decision support tools to provide mhealth interventions will drive developments in 
integrated, evidence-based care management. in public policy and health practices.
LmiCs, mobile technology can help meet mdg 
targets by supporting the delivery of complementary •	 technology is one element of the whole 
patient-support information-based services. These solution. in addition to the technology itself, 
could include information services that support the social factors, market-based incentives, and 
prevention of mother-to-child transmission of hiv/ regulatory frameworks must be considered. 
aids services, along with other services related incorporating these will ultimately influence 
to communicable diseases, such as tuberculosis successful user interaction with technology, the 
and malaria, known to contribute to maternal and benefits to be derived, the rate of adoption and 
newborn mortality. diffusion, and the degree of impact on health 
outcomes. failure to achieve adequate attention 
even though mhealth projects identified in this in the planning phase may lead to mobile 
brief are currently in the design and test phase solutions falling short of their potential.
or early stages of implementation and have not •	 open solutions minimize the technical 
been in operation long enough to be evaluated and economic risks in design. Open-source 
for impact on health outcomes, there are many software solutions, standardized user and system 
lessons learned that should be considered when requirements, and the sharing of resources based 
integrating a mobile-mediated project. The on experiences with technology can facilitate 
 saving Lives at birth: a grand Challenge for development (http://www.savinglivesatbirth.net)
26
oPPortunities For mheAlth in mAternAl And newborn heAlth Leveraging MobiLe TechnoLogies in MaTernaL and newborn heaLTh
greater interoperability among information systems. and approaches that can work at scale and 
They can also support the development of cost- how to translate success into reproducible but 
effective and low-risk approaches to design and context-specific strategies. because of this, key 
development, and increase the prospect for local recommendations for building a sustainable and 
ownership, adaptation, and management in the scalable mhealth program are comprised of a 
implementation of mhealth solutions. combination of policies, strategies, and guidelines 
•	 strong partnerships across sectors breed that align health system needs and priorities with 
success for sustaining development efforts. technology’s capabilities and user preferences. in 
partnerships that engage a broad range of particular, the recognition of mobile technology’s 
stakeholders across the health system and other potential to improve mnh, along with solid evidence 
sectors are more likely to ensure successful of mhealth’s broader impacts on health, is critical 
outcomes and the incorporation of a rigorous for advancing policy and investment in the field. 
evaluation framework. for a more conducive increased investment and supportive policy are not 
policy environment and to assure that projects likely until the evidence base is strengthened and 
are consistent with health system priorities and strategies for successfully sustaining interventions at 
resources, involving the government is particularly scale are outlined.
important. success also depends on the 
development of in-country program capacity in The programs of recent recipients of catalytic 
technology development, project management, funding grants from the mhealth alliance highlight 
and monitoring and evaluation. the various approaches to scale up. for example, 
the smarT program has proposed the design 
and deployment of a centralized computing 
AdvAncing mobile heAlth in infrastructure that will help expedite sharing and 
mAternAl And newborn heAlth follow up of laboratory test results, in addition 
advancing mhealth in the mnh context requires to real-time tracking of program data. dimagi is 
addressing challenges related not only to tailoring currently planning to accelerate, scale up, and 
the technology to human, social, and cultural amplify the impact of its CommCare-asha case 
factors, but also to market mechanisms and management mobile-mediated solution that enrolls, 
regulatory and legal policy frameworks that can supports, and tracks the clients and activities 
ultimately determine the successful user interaction of community health workers. The grameen 
with the technology, the benefits perceived, the foundation has indicated that it will introduce a fee-
rate of market adoption and diffusion across the for-service model for its moTeCh project in urban 
population, as well as the degree of impact on areas, which will subsidize services for the poor 
health outcomes that can be realized. living in rural areas.
Currently, the mhealth global landscape contains 
a large number of pilot projects that report largely 
favorable and positive outcomes on usability but fail 
to offer comprehensive project assessment reports 
that provide definitive evidence of the impact on 
health outcomes. furthermore, there is a lack 
of evidence regarding the kinds of interventions 
 saving Lives at birth: a grand Challenge for development (http://www.savinglivesatbirth.net)
27
AdvAncing mobile heAlth in mAternAl And newborn heAlth Leveraging MobiLe TechnoLogies in MaTernaL and newborn heaLTh
coMbining MobiLe 
TechnoLogies wiTh 
exisTing heaLTh sysTeM 
resources offers 
significanT poTenTiaL 
To provide woMen and 
newborns wiTh adequaTe 
and appropriaTe care
technology, design,  each “siloed” application lacks the standardization 
And imPlementAtion and integration to support interoperability and 
The first category of advancing mhealth in information sharing along the continuum of care. 
mnh emphasizes the technology, design, and mhealth should also be designed and implemented 
implementation of programs. in many LmiCs, the in a way that it can begin to move beyond the 
majority of mhealth applications rely on basic vertical orientation and single-solution focus 
wireless, cellular telephony as a technically efficient adopted by many interventions to date. focus 
and culturally responsive means to support the should shift toward integration solutions within 
supply and demand sides of health services. broader health system and technological contexts. 
however, the penetration of mobile broadband intervention examples would include the prevention 
still remains low and outside the economic and of malaria to reduce mortality in pregnant women in 
technological reach of many. developing countries, as well as health promotion 
and disease prevention in the management of 
basic text and voice functionality and real-time chronic conditions that play a role in maternal health 
communication capacity of mobile devices offer outcomes in higher income countries. in programs 
the broadest range of potential benefits in many that integrate mhealth solutions with other mobile 
countries. Literacy and inequities in women’s initiatives in other sectors, such as banking and 
access to mobile phones remain key issues in the agriculture, the value of services can be enhanced  
design and implementation of mhealth services, if services were bundled for the end users. This 
and for the former, voice-based messages or could aid in scaling up services or programs.
interactive response are the better alternatives to 
communicate information to end users who may The current evidence reflects user preferences 
be illiterate. innovation also needs to be seen and less on work efficiency, cost-effectiveness, 
as an iterative, non-linear process and the more systems-level impact, and clinical outcomes. in 
successful interventions are likely to be those that order to develop this evidence base, rCTs on 
can remain flexible and adaptable to the quickly- mhealth programs are necessary, as well as 
evolving nature of technology. finally, mhealth the development of more agile research study 
interventions need to be designed as an extension designs and methodologies. These need to be 
and augmentation of existing information and tailored toward the rapidly evolving technology 
communication technology capabilities to produce and overcome the delays inherent in the gold 
the greatest systemic benefits. standard rCT. The development of methods to 
analyze streaming, tagged, complex, and layered 
when designing mhealth for mnh, it is important data generated from mhealth interventions will 
to avoid interventions that have too narrow a focus be necessary. donors should also transfer the 
and are not designed in the context of a larger responsibility for evaluation from program managers 
health system and as part of an ehealth information to independent evaluation specialists.
system. a consequence of the detached, 
standalone nature of mhealth interventions is 
that many have been evaluated only as single 
deployments rather than as parts of integrated, 
comprehensive systems of broader ehealth 
deployment. The fragmented nature of mhealth 
interventions is seen as a major rate-limiting step 
in the advancement and scaling of the field since 
29
technology, design, And imPlementAtion  Leveraging MobiLe TechnoLogies in MaTernaL and newborn heaLTh
scAling And sustAining health systems seamlessly. This will align health 
with regard to the particular barriers to scale and information systems and other technology-based 
sustainability and gaps in knowledge encountered initiatives to maximize effectiveness. The scale-up 
by mhealth programs, there is accruing of mhealth within national health agendas should 
evidence, but there is also emerging evidence on also be broadly supported across all relevant 
characteristics that have helped some mhealth government ministries and agencies, as well as by 
programs become successful. Capitalizing on what all departments within the ministry of health.13 
others have learned from implementation to date 
and building from this rapidly developing field will be Public Policy
crucial in realizing the full potential of mhealth. government leadership and national ehealth policies 
can offer a solid foundation for mhealth deployment, 
factors that have been critical in extending a particularly in creating and supporting ehealth 
project’s lifetime past the duration of a pilot project architectures and standards for data interoperability, 
include planning for long-term sustainability through as well as standardizing measures that are used 
business models during the design phase, strong in evaluation techniques for assessing mhealth 
strategic partnerships, a clear understanding impact. national governments can also be influential 
of each stakeholder’s role and incentive for by building in-country technology planning and 
participation, and the ability to conduct rigorous management capacities to support the introduction 
evaluation to provide evidence of demonstrable of technology into health services at scale, and 
impact on health outcomes. monitoring and through promoting initiatives that remove barriers to 
evaluation requires the development of more agile women’s use of mobile technology, particularly their 
research study designs and methodologies that ability to afford phones and pay for services.
recognize the rapidly evolving technology. 
as key stakeholders, governments play a critical 
although most programs are provided at minimal role in the integration and advancement of 
or no cost to the user, bringing a program to mhealth in mnh. with public-private partnerships, 
national scale on a sustained basis in low-resource government involvement can provide critical support 
settings will require innovative financing models, to programs, ensure the strategic alignment of 
and governments will have a critical role to play as mhealth solutions with health system priorities, 
key stakeholders. The financing models will need and balance risk and benefits for all stakeholders. 
to remove barriers to use, particularly affordability The policy infrastructure to support investment 
of mobile phones for women and the cost of and create a market environment conducive to 
services. The programs will also need to engage the broad-scale adoption of mhealth into mnh 
private partners to ensure basic operational costs services remains presently underdeveloped.14 One 
are covered. approaches to engagement that are component of mhealth which can be catalyzed by 
under consideration include bundling mhealth with governments is encouraging rigorous evaluation of 
other “mservices,” placement of product marketing mobile interventions. 
in messages, direct sponsorship, and tiered user 
pricing, such as the mobiles for health initiative in The scale and scope of mhealth activity is unevenly 
bangladesh. meanwhile, governmental support distributed and represented across LmiCs, making 
can strengthen the potential of mhealth through meaningful comparison difficult. The fact that 
public health policy and development of standards countries as diverse as rwanda and bangladesh 
and architectures that guide the creation of ehealth lead in mhealth activity while Liberia and brazil 
frameworks for mhealth systems to interact with lag behind cannot be explained on the basis of 
30
scAling And sustAining  Leveraging MobiLe TechnoLogies in MaTernaL and newborn heaLTh
health, development, and technology indicators technologies would enhance efficiency and reduce 
alone. differences can emerge for any number of cost. for now, mhealth only provides limited 
reasons, but government leadership and national evidence balanced by optimism about the potential 
ehealth policies play key roles in explaining for broader impact. evaluation will need to be 
differences among countries. governments incorporated into the project management life cycle 
need to become more involved in building in- to better ensure quality and address the need for 
country technology planning and management evidence of efficiencies and effectiveness. until that 
capacity. as access to health data on a systems evidence base gets stronger it is not likely that policy 
level improves policymakers’ ability to use it for or investment in the field will change dramatically.
program management, planning and evaluation 
to drive improvements in women and child health, The shortage of funding to reduce maternal and 
governments may become more aware of the neonatal mortality is a significant challenge. The 
strategic importance of mhealth in national health world health Organization estimates that it will 
systems planning. a multi-sectoral response to the take an additional $10 billion annually to ensure 
design of systems-level solutions is likely to produce universal coverage of maternal, neonatal, and child 
sustainable health benefits, particularly in light of the health interventions to achieve mdgs 4 and 5,16 
impact of low socio-economic status on access to and that the lack of leadership and political will to 
health care. implement proven interventions at the country level 
is seen as a major impediment to success. despite 
projects of the world health Organization’s global donors’ interest in mobile technology’s potential, 
Observatory for ehealth reflect a groundswell of they remain cautious about increasing funding 
activity in mhealth, the dominant form being small- for mhealth projects, and their skepticism and 
scale pilot projects that address single issues in fatigue will persist until more rigorous evaluation, 
information sharing and access.15 Limited, larger evidence of impact, and demonstration of scalable 
mhealth implementations tend to be supported and sustainable models emerge. as a result, many 
by broad public-private partnerships. while it is developing countries will maintain a significant gap 
anticipated that large-scale and complex mhealth between minimum requirements and resources 
programs will become more common as the field available unless alternative financing mechanisms 
matures, strategies and policies that integrate are identified. recommendations include using 
ehealth and mhealth interoperability into health proceeds from the sale of portions of the mobile 
services are being advocated. standards and spectrum or taxes generated through mobile 
interoperable technologies, ideally using open services. similar initiatives that have already been 
architectures, are critical. an international framework proven in other areas of global health, such as the 
for evaluation, including meaningful and measurable international solidarity Levy on airline tickets for hiv/
indicators, would help data collection. The use aids, have raised billions of dollars to date.17
of standardized information and communication 
31
Public Policy Leveraging MobiLe TechnoLogies in MaTernaL and newborn heaLTh
TechnoLogies To Make This 
happen exisT Today, Making 
The vision of advancing 
progress in MaTernaL 
and neonaTaL heaLTh 
indicaTors in The near 
fuTure highLy achievabLe.
conclusion Leveraging MobiLe TechnoLogies in MaTernaL and newborn heaLTh
conclusion technology offers, while solid evidence of the broader 
impact of mhealth on improving maternal and 
in mnh, combining mobile technologies with 
neonatal health outcomes is eagerly awaited to serve 
existing health system resources offers significant 
as a catalyst in advancing policy and investment in 
potential to provide women and newborns with 
the field. The ability to conduct rigorous evaluation 
adequate and appropriate care through interventions 
and provide evidence of demonstrable impact is 
that (1) stimulate demand for available services, 
the crucial catalyst that will advance policy and 
(2) strengthen human resource capacity, and (3) 
investment in the field and lead to the successful 
transform health system capacity. These can then 
scaling and sustaining of mhealth interventions. 
lead to greater efficiencies in care delivery and 
management practices as described throughout 
as addressed in this report, the lack of supportive 
this report. in summary, interventions that are able 
national policy for information and communications 
to stimulate demand for available services include 
technologies in health care can at times impede the 
using mobile phone features to increase awareness 
alignment of health system needs and priorities with 
of health issues and to offer patient-support 
technology capabilities. This underscores the urgency 
services, as well as incentives that can remove 
for policymakers to advance policy frameworks 
financial-related barriers for either out-of-pocket 
appropriately and promote an environment that 
expenses or transportation costs, which if reduced 
uses mobile technology for optimal impact on mnh 
can increase both service access and utilization, 
outcomes. governments can play a critical role 
respectively. for strengthening the capacity of human 
through the formulation of public health policy and by 
resources, there are new opportunities being offered 
developing standards and architectures that guide 
from growing mobile telephony, such as patient 
the development of ehealth frameworks for mhealth 
tracking and management, as well as point-of-care 
systems to interact with health systems seamlessly. 
decision support applications that make it easier for 
by doing so, the technical elements of mhealth 
community-based health workers to follow existing 
projects will be in alignment with egovernment, 
guidelines. Lastly, from the examples provided, we 
health information systems, and other initiatives that 
have seen the ability of mobile phones to transform 
seek to leverage information technology to improve 
health system capacity in ways that can lead to more 
the public’s well being and health.
efficient delivery of care and management practices, 
particularly efforts that focus on tracking and 
mapping of diseases and drug stock levels through mobile devices and networks hold strong potential to 
mobile networks, as well as mobile-phone-based accelerate progress toward maternal and neonatal 
monitoring and evaluation systems or education and health outcomes worldwide, accelerating progress 
training services for health workers. also, because toward mdgs 4 and 5. although strategic efforts 
maternal and neonatal death events are hard to and investments are necessary to deploy mhealth 
estimate and monitoring quality varies tremendously, solutions properly to facilitate lessons learned from 
mobile phones can fill the gaps in incomplete and pilots to national scale, there are measurable gains 
unknown data, which can in turn be used to inform that stand to be made in the coverage and quality 
the selection of appropriate interventions to reduce of interventions already proven to be effective. The 
maternal and newborn mortality in different contexts. catalytic impact of these investments will likely 
translate into clear survival benefits for mothers 
and newborns at risk of dying from preventable 
from such examples provided in this report, we have 
and curable diseases each year. in addition to 
shown preliminary results that are promising for the 
reducing the delays that prevent timely access 
field of mnh; however, if mhealth efforts continue 
and utilization of needed services for mothers and 
to be integrated, they must be appropriately tailored 
newborns, strategic integration of mhealth at the 
to the country contexts and their epidemiological 
most appropriate delivery points along the maternal-
profiles, health system capabilities, and opportunities 
newborn continuum of care will strengthen health 
for strengthening existing technical, social, and 
systems and the capacity of frontline health workers 
economic barriers to mnh interventions. additionally, 
who deliver life-saving interventions in the most 
as more and more evidence accrues, which it will 
remote, hard-to-reach populations globally. The 
quickly, it will become ever more important to learn 
knowledge, systems, and technologies to make this 
rapidly from existing projects and put forth higher 
happen exist today, making the vision of advancing 
quality evidence so that the full potential of mobile 
progress in maternal and neonatal health indicators 
technologies can be reached in the field of mnh. 
in the near future highly achievable.
for now, existing mhealth efforts are supported by 
the recognition of the larger potential that mobile 
33
concLusion  Leveraging MobiLe TechnoLogies in MaTernaL and newborn heaLTh
reFerences 
1. uniCef. state of the world’s Children 2009: maternal and newborn health. new york, ny: uniCef; 2009.
2. uniCef. Levels & Trends in Child mortality. report 2011: estimates developed by the un inter-agency 
group for Child mortality estimation: united nations Children’s fund; 2011.
3. Lawn Je, Cousens s, Zupan J, for the Lancet neonatal survival steering Team. 4 million neonatal deaths: 
when? where? why? The Lancet. 2005; 365: 891-900.
4. global Campaign for the health millennium development goals. innovating for every woman, every child. 
Oslo, norway: ministry of foreign affairs; 2011.
5. international Communications union (iTu). The world in 2011: iCT facts and figures; 2011.
6. united nations. The millennium development goals report 2011. new york: united nations; 2011.
7. world health Organization, uniCef. Countdown to 2015 decade report (2000-2010): Taking stock of 
maternal, newborn and child survival. geneva, switzerland: world health Organization; 2010.
8. bhutta Za, Chopra m, axelson h, berman p, boerma T, bryce J, et al. Countdown to 2015 decade report 
(2000–10): taking stock of maternal, newborn, and child survival. The Lancet. 2010; 375: 2032-44.
9. Thaddeus s, maine d. Too far to walk: maternal mortality in context. social science & medicine. 1994; 
38(8): 1091-110.
10.mehl g, world health Organization. using mobile technologies to improve family planning, maternal health 
and newborn services in the developing world. shOps and mhealth alliance hold Online Conference. 
Online; 2010.
11.Cole-Lewis h, kershaw T. Text messaging as a tool for behavior change in disease prevention and 
management. epidemiol rev. 2010; 32: 56-69.
12.noordam aC, kuepper bm, stekelenburg J, milen a. improvement of maternal health services through 
the use of mobile phones. Tropical medicine and international health. 2011; 16(5): 622-6.
13.Lemaire J. scaling up mobile health: elements necessary for the successful scale up of mhealth in 
developing countries: advanced development for africa; 2011.
14.Tamrat T, kachnowski s. special delivery: an analysis of mhealth in maternal and newborn health 
programs and their outcomes around the world. matern Child health J. 2011.
15.world health Organization. mhealth: new horizons for health through mobile technologies. geneva, 
switzerland: world health Organization,; 2011.
16.bill and melinda gates foundation. maternal, newborn, and Child health fact sheet. 2012 [cited July 20, 
2012]; available from: http://www.gatesfoundation.org/maternalnewbornandchildhealth/pages/default.aspx
17.Taskforce on innovative international financing for health systems. more money for health, and more 
health for the money: final report. geneva, switzerland: international health partnership; 2009.
34
reFerences  Leveraging MobiLe TechnoLogies in MaTernaL and newborn heaLTh

The mHealth Alliance champions the use of mobile technologies to improve health throughout the world. Working with diverse partners to  
integrate mHealth into multiple sectors, the Allinace serves as a convener for the mHealth community. The mHealth Alliance also hosts Health 
Unbound (HUB), a global online community for resource sharing and collaborative solution generation. For more information, visit mHealthAlliance.org.
