TC111:	Technology	for	Monitoring	and	Evaluation
Share	this:
 Tweet  Share 0  Share 0
> TC111:	Technology	for	Monitoring	and
All	courses Evaluation
 	$495.00
 	4	weeks
How	do	you	use	technology	to	get	insight	from	information?	Whether	you	work	for	a	small	nonprofit,	large
government	agency,	or	private	sector	firm,	the	demand	to	capture	and	visualize	quantifiable	results	has	never
been	greater.	This	four	week	online	certificate	course	will	focus	on	building	skills	and	strategies	to	better	collect,
manage,	analyze	and	visualize	data	using	a	variety	of	ICT	tools.
Course	Description
A	number	of	Information	Communication	Technologies	(ICTs)	have	been	developed	to	address	these	needs	such
as	social	media	analytics	tools,	mapping	and	data	visualization	software,	mobile	data	collection	systems	and	more.
Understanding	the	tools	and	best	practices	available	for	gathering	information,	applying	it	to	your	project
challenges,	and	assessing	the	results	is	necessary	for	project	success.
This	four	week	online	certificate	course	will	feature	live	interactive	guest	expert	presentations	with	leading	M&E
practitioners,	software	developers,	and	data	scientists.	It	will	also	include	a	unique	hands-on	learning	environment
with	animated	videos,	technology	demos,	practical	activities,	networking	events,	immersive	simulations	and	more.
For	a	more	detailed	syllabus,	please	click	here.
Course	Topics	and	Featured	Tech
1.	 Introduction	to	Tech	for	M&E:	Overview	of	types	of	M&E	and	technologies	that	can	be	used,	data
responsibility,	and	big	data
2.	 Data	collection:	SMS,	phone	apps,	data	collection	for	qualitative	and	quantitative	data,	and	data	storage
3.	 Data	Analysis:	Data	visualization,	mapping,	and	dashboards
4.	 Integrating	Technology-Enabled	M&E:	Human	centered	design,	real-time	M&E,	and	impact	evaluation
Course	Objectives
At	the	conclusion	of	the	course,	participants	will	be	able	to:
Critically	analyze	both	the	opportunities	and	the	pitfalls	that	emerge	when	working	with	technology	to	carry
out	monitoring	and	evaluation	work
Connect	relevant	development	theories	to	the	technological	strategies	and	tools	discussed	in	the	course
Manage	specific	software	platforms	and	tools	for	monitoring	and	evaluation	activities
Design	dynamic	and	effective	strategies	for	using	tools	and	platforms	improve	monitoring	and	evaluation
efforts
Develop	critical	self-confidence	for	working	with	technology	to	address	monitoring	and	evaluation	challenges
Course	Methodology
This	course	is	delivered	entirely	online	over	a	period	of	four	weeks.
This	course	features	several	live	interactive	expert	presentations	each	week	with	leading	practitioners,
software	developers,	academics,	and	donors.
Every	live	event	is	recorded	and	archived	for	you	to	watch	later.
This	course	also	features	a	unique	hands-on	learning	environment	with	animated	videos,	technology	demos,
practical	activities,	networking	events,	office	hours,	participant	presentations,	immersive	simulations,	and
more.
TechChange	recommends	budgeting	a	minimum	commitment	of	5-7	hours	per	week	and	scheduling	time	for
the	course	around	your	existing	obligations.
Participants	will	have	access	to	all	course	content	for	at	least	4	months	after	course	completion	so	the
material	can	be	completed	and	revisited	later.
Price
$395	if	application	and	payment	is	submitted	by	May	30,	2018
$445	if	application	and	payment	is	submitted	by	June	30,	2018
$495	if	application	and	payment	is	submitted	by	course	start	date
Group	discount	rates	available.	For	more	details,	please	contact	us	at	social	[at]	techchange.org.	If	you	are	not
happy	with	your	course	experience	for	any	reason,	TechChange	is	happy	to	discuss	refunds.
This	course	is	a	part	of	our	Technology	for	Monitoring	and	Evaluation	diploma	program.	Interested	in	learning
about	more	courses?	Browse	through	our	diploma	catalog	here,	or	check	out	our	main	catalog	and	FAQ	section!
Next	Session
None	upcoming...
Change
Contact:	techsupport	[at]	techchange.org
Terms	of	Use
Privacy	Policy
Policies
©	2012-2019	TechChange
