OVERVIEW OF THE CANADIAN PROOF OF VACCINATION
Monika Kumari
Senior Director, Special Projects
Public Health Agency of Canada
November 2021
1
Introduction
What is the Canadian Proof of Vaccination Credential 
Program?
2
The Canadian Proof of Vaccination Credential Program
• Canada recognizes that the safe reopening of economies and communities includes international 
travel. 
• In response to a need to facilitate the restart international travel while recognizing the evolving 
epidemiological context, the Government of Canada, in collaboration with the Canadian provinces and 
territories, have launched the Canadian COVID-19 proof of vaccination credential (PVC) for international 
travel. 
• The Canadian PVC is:
• a standardized and interoperable credential, based on the SMART Health Card specifications.
• a factual statement of the holder’s vaccination history that can be used by border officials to 
determine what public health measures may be applied to that individual.
• client-focused and protects privacy.
• As vaccination data in Canada is held by the provinces and territories, the Canadian PVC is issued at the 
provincial/territorial level, but has a common look and feel with a Canada wordmark to ensure the 
document is easily recognized by foreign borders as Canadian. 
• Eleven provinces and territories have began to issue the Canadian PVC, with two remaining provinces 
planning to issue by end of November 2021.
• Canada is currently sharing the Canadian PVC specimen through the diplomatic channel to seek 
foreign recognition and acceptance of the Canadian document.
3
Overview: The Canadian PVC
What people will have in hand when traveling
4
A Canadian standard for PVC: The SMART Health Card
PHAC has aligned on a Canadian standard for all Canadian provinces and territories building on SMART Health Cards specifications to 
create a consistent approach in Canada and as well as for adoption among international entities
Standard selected – SMART Health Cards
The 2D QR code follows the SMART Health Cards framework from the Vaccine Credential Initiative (VCI):
• Open source QR code specs widely available and recognized
• Speed of execution through libraries and other open-source accelerators – for both issuers and verifiers
• A growing list of trusted issuers on the Common Trust Network
• Portability to native mobile phone health/COVID passes
The QR code holds all the data elements. As such:
• Both personal and vaccination records are included
• The individual owns the digital certificate
• No call backs needed to provincial or territorial registries
• Allows for inclusion of COVID-19 test records as well, future phases
5
Benefits of working towards a Canadian standard - SMART
Enduring given that it would be a neutral, factual document that would never need to be revoked
(and new vaccination events could be added)
Flexible given the ability to set different rules depending on the verifier / foreign border (rich dataset
displayed vs. thumbs-up/thumbs-down); can be easily updated as vaccine science evolves
Maximizes accessibility via a paper or electronic format (can be printed home or in any service centre);
verification process can occur offline
Readily available & easily verifiable by third parties
The adoption of the standard by all provinces and territories supports interoperability between them (e.g., 
interprovincial travel)
Supports domestic use cases for provinces and territories who wish to leverage this tool
SMART Health Card Framework is based on HL7 ® FHIR which is the industry standard for health records
Common-look-and-feel makes it easier for foreign borders to recognize Canadian PVCs issued by provinces 
and territories
Detailed dataset aligned with international travel requirements.
6
Canadian PVC – Common Look and Feel 
Province and territories issued PVCs standardize health information following the SMART specification. The 
following figures show the Canadian ‘look-and-feel’ PDF issued by Yukon embedding a SMART Health Card QR 
code:
PVC – Canadian Look and Feel specifications PVC – Tech specs
7
What goes in the PVC?
FHIR Resource
VaccinationCredentialPatient
• PVCs are designed to embed vaccination events in 
1 User information priority. Based on the current design more than five 
vaccination events have been confirmed to fit in a 
1 single SMART Health Card QR code.
Data Elements • However, if the province or territory at their 
Given Name(s) discretion includes additional non-vaccination 
Family Name information in the QR code, it is possible that 
Birthdate
more than one QR code may be required.
FHIR Resource
VaccinationCredentialImmunization • Human readable content related to non-vaccination 
information e.g. tests, can be printed on a second 
2 First vaccine page (optional Province/Territory-specific page), 
if required. Provinces and Territories have been 
2 FHIR Resource instructed to ensure the QR code(s) remains 
VaccinationCredentialImmunization
fully compatible with the SMART Health 
3 3 Second vaccine Cards specifications. 
• Provinces and territories have been producing PVC 
Data Elements (x2) samples for compliance testing to ensure 
Security functionality and alignment with the specifications. 
Vaccine Code
Occurrence Date
Lot Number
Performer Name
Vaccination Status
Vaccine Manufacturer
8
Verifying the Canadian PVC
(1) Authenticity 
To confirm if the PVC was issued by recognized provinces and territories or federal agencies of Canada:
• Verifiers can use the VCI Directory/Common Trust Network to confirm registered issuers
– At present, Canada is still in the process of onboarding its provinces and territories to the VCI Directory or Common Trust Network 
(which will be merging into one trust entity shortly). 
• Alternatively, the verifier will need to know Canada’s white-listed public URLs from trusted Canadian issuers (federal, 
provincial or territorial governments). 
(2) SMART Health Card Compliant
• A complete PVC should include all mandatory SMART Health Card data elements and align with the Canadian common 
look-and-feel.
• PVCs are designed to embed vaccination events in priority, with most recent at top. 
• Human readable content related to non-vaccination information can be printed on an optional second page by the 
province/territory of issuance
(3) Vaccine Codes
• Canadian PVCs will include vaccination information using the CVX code. In some cases, a SNOMED code may also follow 
the CVX code.
9
The SMART Health Card Ecosystem
10
Where are SMART Health Cards used?
A growing ecosystem has developed around the SMART Health Cards standard
Issuers Holders Verifiers
US states
(California, New York, Hawai‘i, Louisiana, Microsoft, CommonsPass, PathCheck, 
Utah, New Jersey, etc.); Walmart; 8 Canadian Airlines (JetBlue, Hawaiian Airlines, 
Apple (iOS 15), Samsung Pay 
provinces and territories (Quebec, Yukon, Swiss International Airlines, Virgin 
US, Google
Saskatchewan etc.) with more US States and Atlantic, United Airlines, Lufthansa)
Canadian provinces coming online in the next 
few months
11
Update on the iOS ecosystem
Apple has adopted SMART Health Cards to allow iPhone 
user to store their COVID-19 vaccination record in Apple 
Health.
How do you share your SMART Health Card?
• Verification can be done in person by scanning the 
SMART Health Card in the Apple Wallet (iOS 15.1 beta)
• Verification can be done remotely using the new 
“verifiable health record” feature of Apple HealthKit
Canadian PVCs are compatible with iOS 15 and can be 
scanned with the Camera app.
12
Update on the Android ecosystem
On Android, multiple solutions have emerged to manage verifiable 
COVID-19 vaccination records:
• Google’s Covid Cards allow the Google Pay wallet to store and 
display SMART Health Cards just like Apple Wallet
• Some of the US State implementations, including California are 
natively supporting Google Pay. Google’s Covid Cards also 
supports a much wider variety of credentials beyond SHCs but are 
currently only available in US and Australia.
• The CommonHealth app available for Android can also play the 
same role as Apple Health to hold vaccination records
13
Resources and References 
Being based on the SMART Health Cards standard, the proof of vaccine certificate is supported by a growing open source 
ecosystem with a number of resources that can be used to issue and validate SMART Health Cards. The following lists publicly 
available resources:
• Landing page of the SMART Health Cards specifications: https://spec.smarthealth.cards/
• Vaccination Credential Bundle Specification: Refer to http://build.fhir.org/ig/dvci/vaccine-credential-
ig/branches/main/StructureDefinition-vaccination-credential-bundle.html for VCI spec when building the issuance of the 
vaccine certificate
• Reference implementation: https://github.com/smart-on-fhir/health-cards/
• VCI Testing appliance: Verifier Portal (smarthealth.cards)
• SMART Health Cards validation SDK (from Microsoft): https://github.com/microsoft/health-cards-validation-SDK
• Libraries for SMART Health Cards: https://github.com/smart-on-fhir/health-cards/wiki/Libraries-for-SMART-Health-Cards
• COVID-19 CVX Vaccine Codes: https://www.cdc.gov/vaccines/programs/iis/COVID-19-related-codes.html
14
Contacts
For more general information about the Canadian Proof of Vaccination, please contact: 
For more technical information about the Canadian Proof of Vaccination, please contact: 
15
