The three components to 
the mHealth application 
are synergistic in providing 
a comprehensive array 
of tools and a supportive 
supervisory framework for 
HSAs to do their jobs well.
mHEALTH  
for Integrated Community Case Management
IMPLEMENTATION DATE:  July 2012 to December 2016 
Improving the quality of child health care at the primary level 
through integrated decision-support tools
Malawi is among nine low-income countries that successfully reduced its under-five mortality rate by 60 
percent or more between 1990 and 2011.1, 2 Despite this progress, large numbers of children continue to 
die unnecessarily from conditions that are easily preventable and treatable.  A large proportion of children 
in Malawi are still at increased risk of mortality due to common childhood infections. The leading causes 
of under-five mortality in Malawi are malaria (13 percent),  AIDS (13 percent), pneumonia (11 percent), 
diarrhea (7 percent), and neonatal conditions (31 percent). The Ministry of Health (MOH) has been 
collaborating with partners to scale up a package of high-impact interventions to reduce under-five child 
mortality since 2007 under the Accelerated Child Survival and Development (ACSD) strategy. These 
efforts have included integrated community case management (iCCM) in hard-to-reach (HTR) areas to 
complement fixed or scheduled facility-based services. To improve the quality of care provided to under-
five children, D-tree International is providing mHealth to support the implementation of iCCM.
About mHealth for iCCM
Th e primary end-users of the mHealth application framework for the HSAs to do their jobs well and enable are community health workers (CHWs) in Malawi, improvement on access and quality of care at the primary level 
called health surveillance assistants (HSAs). There are three of health care. 
components to the mHealth application, each of which The first component of the iCCM application captures 
strengthens the ability of HSAs to deliver effective and all elements of the village register used by the HSA. The 
efficient care. These components are synergistic in providing application has built-in functionalities that support HSAs to 
a comprehensive array of tools and a supportive supervisory register children between the ages of two and 59 months only 
64  n  LOGISTICS
D-tree International
and adhere to standard protocols. It supports HSAs to make Much positive feedback was recorded during HSA and 
the appropriate decisions on treatment and enables them to caregiver interviews. HSAs felt more confident using the 
accurately report on time. The mHealth application therefore iCCM application. They also felt a reduction in frequency of 
enforces adherence to clinical protocols and iCCM holistically. visits by the same children as compared to before, which they 
The second component of the application is the supervisory attributed to the comprehensiveness of the assessment and 
tool for those who are managing and supervising HSAs. It care given to the child when using the phone. HSAs using the 
is based on the new routine supervision checklist developed phone expressed knowledge gain as a result of the prompts, 
by the (MOH) and Save the Children and focuses on a advice, and counseling messages they receive from the 
few key indicators of performance by the HSAs. The tool application. HSAs also expressed improved follow-up rates 
facilitates both collection and interpretation of data and has for cases. However, they were concerned with double entry of 
a dashboard that enables users to see at a glance the status of data as they use both the phone and the paper registers.
the work being done by HSAs.
The third component links the iCCM application to the Lessons Learned 
logistics management system to improve the availability 
of needed drugs at the rural clinics where HSAs see patients. n It takes time and effort to train and generate interest 
This work has been coordinated with the existing John Snow among stakeholders to use data generated through the 
Inc. (JSI) cStock program to improve the use of cStock in implementation of mHealth applications.
tracking drug inventories. D-tree International developed a 
n The involvement of communities in managing phones 
simple user interface within the application through which is critical to their sustainability.
health workers can report stock levels and then submitted the 
data to cStock. n The implementation of mHealth is not a panacea 
to fix all problems within the health system. It is, and 
should be, part of an integrated system in order to 
Evaluation and Results achieve greater results.
D-tree International carried out an evaluation to determine 
the clinical effectiveness of the electronic iCCM. A Conclusion 
mixed approach was used to collect both quantitative 
and qualitative data. The results showed similar or higher The project has trained over 350 HSAs and 15 supervisors 
scores in assessment, identification of danger signs, referrals across Malawi and equipped them with mobile phones with 
(diagnosis), treatment, and counseling among HSAs using the mHealth iCCM application. There are plans to train 
the mobile application. These are the key elements in the over 1,000 HSAs and supervisors, one-third of the total in 
management of under-five child illnesses. the country. The project has built capacity within the MOH 
in mHealth by training trainers and champions to provide 
Adherence to assessment using the iCCM application was 90 support to the system, and mHealth has been added to the 
percent compared to 91 percent among those using paper. national eHealth strategy. More importantly, the mHealth 
With the phone application, all questions are asked and application is improving quality of care for under-five children 
recorded before going into the next phase, requiring the HSA due to strict adherence of assessment protocols by health 
to go through the complete assessment. Phone users correctly workers. Malawi is on its way to becoming a leader in the 
identified and recorded 100 percent of the danger signs, wide-scale embrace and use of mHealth activities to strengthen 
while only 83 percent of the danger signs were correctly the health system. n
identified and picked by paper users. Adherence to treatment 
guidelines was lower among paper users (62 percent) 
than phone users (73 percent). While the phone provides 
the recommended treatment, the actual treatment given 
depends on the availability of needed drugs and supplies. Geographic Coverage:  Ntchisi and Dedza Districts, Malawi
Sixty percent of cases were referred appropriately in the Implementation Partners: D-tree International, Ministry of 
intervention group compared to 48 percent in the control Health, Malawi (IMCI Unit), Things Prime 
group. Counseling and treatment advice were also seen to be Donor: Barr Foundation
higher in the phone users than the paper users at 92 percent Contact Information: Eric Saforo, Country Director, D-tree 
compared to 83 percent. International – Malawi, esaforo@d-tree.org 
mHEALTH COMPENDIUM  VOLUME 5  n  65
