Amplifying the Impact: 
Examining the intersection of Mobile Health and Mobile Finance
0C:1
Amplifying the Impact:  
Examining the Intersection of Mobile  
Health and Mobile Finance
A discussion guide for collaborative insight presented by the World Economic Forum, 
in partnership with the mHealth Alliance
Amplifying the Impact:  
Examining the intersection of Mobile Health and Mobile Finance
0C:2
“Opportunities multiply 
 as they are seized.”
                —Sun Tzu
Amplifying the Impact: 
Examining the intersection of Mobile Health and Mobile Finance
01
Introduction:
In looking at the rapidly expanding adoption of  
mobile communications, one of the most 
promising opportunities for positive socio-
economic change lies in the scaling of mobile 
health and mobile financial services (MFS). In 
fact, more people today have access to a mobile 
phone than to clean water or the electrical grid. 1 
By 2012, it is estimated that there will be 1.7 
billion people who have mobile phones but no 
bank account. Of those individuals, approximately 
1 billion will also lack access to healthcare 
systems. 2 
Providing services in an affordable and sustainable 
manner for these individuals is a significant  
challenge. While reduced costs and advances  
in network coverage are accelerating, the 
underlying business models to sustain this growth 
are unclear.
Amplifying the Impact:  
Examining the intersection of Mobile Health and Mobile Finance
02
It goes without saying that the issues of extreme infrastructure and distribution networks?
poverty are highly complex and interconnected. 4. How will the various points of policy coor- Defining e-/mHealth and Mobile  
The World Health Organization (WHO) cites  dination work across sector domains? Financial Services
inadequate healthcare financing mechanisms 
as one of the two biggest challenges to improving Synergies Between mHealth and Mobile financial services (MFS) is an  
health outcomes for the poor.3 Both mHealth Mobile Financial Services umbrella term, often referred to as  
and MFS are nascent industries and fragmented mobile money. MFS uses a “mobile 
along multiple dimensions. While there are now At its core, the mobile communications plat- wallet” or a separate electronic money 
well over 5 billion mobile subscribers in the form reduces the time, distance and cost for account used for payments other than 
world, it arguably is still at subscale in terms  delivering information. As such, providers in prepaid or post-paid mobile airtime. 
of the deployment of value-added services on the healthcare and finance industries have a Within MFS, there are three main cat-
a global basis. globally efficient, innovative and cost-effective egories: mobile payments, mobile credit/
channel for delivering new services.5 For banks, savings/insurance and mobile banking.
As an example, mobile finance has achieved the mobile platform creates innovative ways to 
commercial scale (i.e. 1 million or more users) deliver convenient branchless banking solutions mHealth is loosely defined in this paper 
in less than one out of 10 deployments globally. to geographically remote areas. Once in place, as the use of information and commu-
While there has been widespread adoption these financial services enable the creation nication technology to provide better 
in the countries of Kenya and the Philippines of new cost structures and “micro-sevices”. access to health services for practitioners 
there are more than 100 deployments that Mobile-based remittances, micro-insurance and patients. Payments in mHealth 
have not reached this level of scale.4 and savings accounts can all be offered to roughly fall into three main categories, 
those at lower socio-economic levels. those for health services and supplies, 
Mobile Health efforts are also highly fragmented. those associated with systems admin-
Because of the lack of platform standardization, Because payments are also a vital component istration and those associated with use 
many providers are building discreet and throughout the healthcare delivery continuum, of the electronic healthcare record and 
independent systems from the ground up. As a a means to securely, reliably and cost-effectively aggregated data.
result, systems are costly, inefficient, unable to transact is valued by both industry sectors. 
achieve scale and often not interoperable. Along with the need to accelerate transactions, 
both industries have common users, digital  Mobile Financial Services for  
The aim of this paper is to help reduce some  infrastructure elements, business processes Providers 
of these uncertainties and reinforce dialogue and policy concerns. Recognizing these syner-
on how the mobile communications platform gies and working cross-sector, stakeholders Salary Disbursement: Healthcare 
can be leveraged to strengthen mutually positive in both industries are positioned to achieve employers can pay a healthcare worker auto-
outcomes related to both financial inclusion greater impact, ultimately establishing a more matically into the healthcare worker’s mobile 
and health. With user-centric solutions that  robust ecosystem for servicing the needs of financial service account rather than paying in 
leverage common technologies, new efficiencies the poor. cash or cheque, which is both cumbersome 
and capabilities can be created that serve to and costly to manage.
accelerate global scale. Driving Demand: Mobile Financial 
Services Spur mHealth Adoption Healthcare providers face the challenge of how 
Unlocking this potential will require the following to pay unbanked and remote healthcare workers 
questions to be addressed: Mobile financial services represent a tool that in a timely and safe manner. In rural areas, 
1. What will be the best method to drive facilitates remote payments for healthcare healthcare workers often spend time walking 
awareness and adoption of the self-rein- services for those with and without bank to other localities to pick up cash when they 
forcing dynamics of “wealth and health”? accounts. By leveraging MFS for healthcare are paid. The time spent on administrative 
Who will lead these efforts? services, key stakeholders in the continuum of tasks could be better used serving patients. 
2. How will the integration and interoperability care can benefit from improvements in quality, 
of disparate technologies across multiple accessibility and cost. MFS can apply to both Additionally, the potential of fraud (“cash leakage”) 
industry and public sector domains occur? providers of health services as well as patients. associated with salary disbursement to remote 
3. Who will build and manage the common employees is greater when there is no access 
Amplifying the Impact: 
Examining the intersection of Mobile Health and Mobile Finance
03
the question of how to motivate people  
to participate.
Vouchers or Conditional Aid: Mobile
financial services can be the settlement 
mechanism between payers and providers 
of healthcare services or products given to 
patients who use vouchers.
In the area of food dissemination, for example, 
mobile-enabled systems for food voucher reg-
istration, claim and settlement are used by the 
World Food Programme. In this system, World 
Food Programme workers identify and register 
eligible recipients for food. 
mHealth and MFS are inextricably linked by common building blocks and cross-sector dependencies 
(Source: mPay Connect) Upon registration, the recipient receives a 
scratch card with a code, which they use to 
to a banking infrastructure. In Afghanistan, through cheque and cash. Automating the  claim food at nearby retailers. To verify the 
when mobile financial services infrastructure calculation and payout processes by combining transaction, the retailer submits the code into 
was implemented for salary disbursement of mHealth data with the mobile platform creates a mobile phone and receives verification from 
national police in lieu of cash, it became known a way to reduce the complexity and scale new the system. When the retailer provides the 
that at least 10% of the payments had been capabilities. food and performs the transaction, the system 
going to “ghost policemen” and that middlemen automatically settles the payment between the 
were pocketing the difference. During this An example of this is a public-private initiative World Food Programme and the retailer by 
time, most policemen believed they received in Tanzania, where an “SMS for Life” program moving the money between mobile financial 
bonuses to their salaries, unaware of the fraud was established targeting data collection to services accounts. 
rampant throughout.6 reduce pharmaceutical stock-outs for anti-
malaria drugs. The programme used SMS as This automated system has significantly reduced 
Healthcare workers paid in cash in emerging the method for data collection and motivated the paperwork burden for all entities in the 
markets experience similar issues. Even in the pharmaceutical supply-chain workers to submit supply chain while also motivating suppliers to 
absence of fraud, the time and cost of cash inventory information via mobile phones. participate, as payment settlement occurs in 
disbursal of salaries create additional admin- minutes rather than months. Such a system 
istrative costs that burden the viability and In the absence of mobile financial services to can be applied to healthcare services as well.
sustainability of healthcare business models. provide payments, they motivated key personnel 
to participate by pushing airtime minutes as a Supply Chain Settlement and Credit: 
Performance-based Funding (PBF): bonus to workers for accurate data input. By Supply chain participants can settle payment 
Providers of performance-based funding can combining ICT for reporting of inventory and electronically between their mobile financial 
pay healthcare workers electronically into their motivating data submitters through a proto- service accounts. For example, this type of 
mobile financial services account based on currency of airtime, the six-month trial reduced payment settlement can be used in the phar-
services that were performed on patients. stock-out rates from 95% to 6%. maceutical supply chain to increase the speed 
of payment settlement. In addition, providing 
As performance-based funding becomes more Due to this effort, 300,000 more people were access to credit to buyers within the supply 
prevalent, those organizations paying caregivers able to receive anti-malaria treatment in 150 chain will reduce inventory stock-outs often 
are burdened with complicated management health facilities servicing 226 villages.7 In this caused by lack of funds.8 While it remains to 
of variable payouts to caregivers. The system example, e- and mHealth addressed the ques- be seen whether implementing mobile financial 
quickly becomes too cumbersome to manage tion of how to make systems more efficient, services in drug supply chains can assist in 
costs effectively, particularly if done manually while mobile financial services addressed  reducing counterfeit drugs, what is certain is 
Amplifying the Impact:  
Examining the intersection of Mobile Health and Mobile Finance
04
that when drugs are identified as counterfeit, for the poor in Bangladesh, India and South In Kenya, 56% of women give birth at home, 
digital money trails will assist in more effectively Africa.9 mostly due to lack of access and economic 
locating criminals. means to pay for delivery the in healthcare  
facilities.12 Home birth increases maternal and 
natal mortality rates. Those who seek better 
Digital Efficiencies healthcare and deliver their child in hospitals 
Digitization leads to increases in productivity and transparency and  risk the fate of imprisonment if they cannot  
decreases in crime and human error afford payment. As was noted by the Los  
Angeles times in 2009, an increase in cases of 
Productivity Gains: The use of ICT and digitization of data and processes saves time on cash-starved public hospitals detaining patients 
13 
administrative tasks in healthcare and financial services. Whether it is the cost savings as- over unpaid bills spurred outrage in Kenya.
sociated with retrieving patient data in a timely fashion or the time saved not having to walk 
to a bank, the economic benefits are significant due to reduced shoe leather and opportu- One provider is addressing this issue through 
nity costs. In addition, digitizing manual processes and data reduces errors that ultimately various methods. On the logistics and access 
adversely affect productivity. side, they are developing a maternal health 
clinic system of vans that can be standardized, 
Improved Transparency: Digitization of patient medical treatments and money move- replicated and brought to expectant, low-income 
ment creates a level of transparency that can reduce fraud and theft by creating an audit- urban mothers. 
able digital trail and reducing the number of participants in the value chain. For example, 
digital money facilitates direct payments from the payer to the remote recipient of payment, On the financial side, this provider is assisting 
cutting out the middle man handling cash. This, in turn, ensures that less money is pocketed, or families with financial planning for upcoming 
“leaked” during the transaction. In addition, accessing patient data directly from the source delivery by providing a prepaid savings ac-
further reduces the chances of incorrect or missing healthcare information used for making count. The patients can move money into this 
diagnoses. savings account any time and anywhere using 
their mobile phones to trigger a money transfer 
using Kenya’s mobile money transfer system, 
Mobile Financial Services for  It has also been suggested that mobile money m-Pesa. The same account can be used to 
Patients systems like m-Pesa in Kenya may play a pay delivery costs to the clinic. 
significant role in reducing risk: as noted  
Mobile Pre-paid Savings: The majority by research from Georgetown University  In another example, a hospital began to issue 
of the world’s population has no access to “…households who have access to m-Pesa prepaid cards to expectant mothers, leveraging 
healthcare insurance. Access to mobile-based and are near an agent point are better able m-Pesa so patients could move funds to their 
savings may assist with this issue. Patients can to maintain the level of consumption expen- prepaid savings cards.
14 At the time of hospital 
accrue assets in a prepaid mobile savings acc- ditures, and in particular food consumption, delivery, patients use prepaid cards to pay for 
ount to prepare for upcoming healthcare costs. in the face of negative income shocks. On their healthcare services at the hospital. 
the other hand, households without access 
Unlike cash stored under the mattress, these to m-Pesa appear to be less able to protect Mobile Micro-Insurance: In addition to 
accounts provide a safe, reliable place to store themselves from such adverse events.” 10 savings accounts, patients can pay for micro-
and accrue their assets out of harm’s way. They insurance premiums through a mobile phone 
also can establish a financial history, which can There are also examples of mobile financial and receive claims into the mobile financial 
be used by financial service providers for future services programs with prepaid savings being services account. By taking the friction out of 
credit offerings. tested within the context of maternal health. saving and making regular payments, oppor-
For example, in Kenya only 5% of the population tunities are created for individuals to manage 
New financial services, such as mobile-enabled has medical insurance. Kenyans employed in small amounts of money more effectively.
savings accounts, assist patients in financial the formal sector pay for mandatory health 
planning and saving for future healthcare needs. coverage, but 11 million adults work in the In the Philippines, the national insurer introduced 
Serious injury and funerals are cited as the top informal sector with no such insurance.11 SMS payments of insurance premiums on a 
frequent event causing financial emergency fractionalized basis. This enabled individuals to 
Amplifying the Impact: 
Examining the intersection of Mobile Health and Mobile Finance
05
Future Uses of Mobile Financial 
Maternal Health Services for mHealth
The Case of Maternal Health
As mHealth continues to gain momentum and 
Maternal health could greatly benefit from the use of mobile financial services. Along the more advanced remote services are offered, 
continuum of the 14-month cycle of healthcare, there are key points where mobile financial electronic payments will be needed to support 
access could address key issues in the patient, provider or service, and HR or administrative these services. Today, there are one- and two-
levels of support. way communications and information-based 
mHealth services in emerging markets, such 
Pre-Pregnancy: During the pre-pregnancy phase of care, patients can receive education as health hotlines. 
on family planning, sexually transmitted diseases and other healthcare matters through 
their mobile phone, paying for such services through airtime top-up minutes to the mobile These services are often free of charge or rely  
network operator or through MFS to the third-party provider of these services.  on de facto airtime top-up systems as the 
method of payment whereby a payer purchases 
Pregnancy: During the pregnancy phase of care, MFS can be used for remote payment additional airtime minutes to pay for the 
and settlement of testing, lab work and remote diagnostics. MFS can be used as the method mHealth service or receives payment through 
of supply chain payments for prenatal vitamins. In the future, healthcare providers may airtime minutes.
use MFS to pay for remote access to a pregnant mother’s electronic healthcare records. 
Patients can receive conditional cash transfers for participating in healthcare services  This system works well for low-value purchases 
offered to pregnant mothers and healthcare workers can receive performance-based (equivalent of one rupee per day). However, as 
funding for successfully completing various healthcare services for the patient. For those the mHealth industry matures in these markets 
pregnant mothers without insurance, prepaid savings accounts can be offered in preparation and the services offered become more sophis-
for upcoming delivery expenses. ticated, the value of the services will increase 
such that one rupee payments through airtime 
Birth: MFS can be used for direct payment, co-payment or for third-party settlement of all will not suffice. At the point, mobile financial 
healthcare services associated with birth, from ambulatory transport to hospital care. services and more robust third-party settlement 
systems will be required to enable payment.15
Post-Natal: Voucher-based or direct mobile payments can be triggered via mobile for services 
associated with post-natal care, such as infant immunizations. In the case of voucher  For example, in the future, as patients begin to 
payments, a mother could sign up for post-natal services and receive a scratch card or receive diagnostic care through decision support 
identification code which she could then present to the immunization clinic. That clinic would systems enabled through a mobile phone, how 
 send that code using their mHealth application to the provider for verification. If the code is will payment be made between the user and 
verified, the clinic would provide the services and receive immediate payment by the third- provider? Similarly, if a field healthcare worker 
party payer for the performed service through the mobile financial services system. requests expert clinical diagnostics through the 
mobile phone, how will payment of that service 
be made? Neither cash nor banking systems 
pay smaller amounts of money on a weekly/ and payouts significantly reduces the admin- can support remote money movement of  
monthly basis, rather than larger payments istrative costs associated with providing insur- unbanked people. Mobile financial services will 
on a quarterly or half-yearly basis. With lower ance to these customers. be the method to enable and settle these types 
costs and greater convenience, participation of mHealth transactional payments.
rates increased. Conditional Cash Transfers: Patients 
can receive conditional cash transfers instantly Driving Demand: mHealth spurs 
In Bangladesh, health micro-insurance is and electronically into their mobile financial Mobile Financial Services
provided to poor patients who pay yearly pre- services account. Fast, safe and efficient pay-
miums. Co-payments are made by the patients ment motivates patients to participate in the Still in the early stages of development, there 
upon visits to health centres. MFS can be used healthcare system. are a number of uncertainties on the business 
in the future in lieu of cash for these payments. models of mobile finance services. With more 
Using a mobile phone for insurance payments  than 164 MFS initiatives deployed worldwide, 
Amplifying the Impact:  
Examining the intersection of Mobile Health and Mobile Finance
06
There is surprisingly little known about the 
complex needs of the poor, although they 
represent approximately 40% of the world 
population. According to The Portfolios of the 
Poor, “Large surveys give snapshots of living 
conditions. They help analysts count the num-
ber of poor people worldwide and measure 
what they typically consume during a year. But 
they offer limited insight into how the poor  
actually live their lives week by week – how 
they create strategies, weigh trade-offs and 
seize opportunities.” 17 
The nuances surrounding culture, socio-eco-
Uses of MFS for future mHealth applications  (Source: mHealth Alliance and mPay Connect) nomic status, access and literacy are complex 
and can only be appreciated at the personal 
only 10 have achieved a subscriber-base of The Same End-users and community level. Those who interact with 
more than 1 million users.16 As such, there is a In terms of serving their end-users at the end-users in the field have a wealth of under-
widely recognized need for a strong use case base of the pyramid, the mHealth and mobile standing that is required for service providers 
to spur adoption and unlock greater capital finance sectors have overlapping constituencies. to adequately tailor services to meet the needs 
flows. As such, there are potential cross-sector  of their end-users. 
efficiency gains in better understanding  
As one of the most important industries globally, customer needs. 
health services may spur mobile money adop-
tion in markets with lagging mobile financial 
services uptake. 
To motivate new users, enterprises and  
governments to adopt a payment system, 
there must be significant value and a compelling 
reason to change. Receiving money is a moti-
vator to sign up for a system. Payers sending 
the money become the “influencers” in the  
system, virally signing up receivers of payments. 
Key stakeholders in the healthcare industry  
can act as the influencers that spur sign-up 
and usage of the mobile financial services  
system by using it for salary disbursements,  
performance-based funding, conditional cash 
transfers and conditional aid. 
 
Sharing Common Building Blocks
Both the finance and health sectors share 
common customers, infrastructure, business 
processes and policy concerns. These shared 
elements, if addressed in an integrated and 
holistic manner, can serve to reduce inefficiencies 
and costs.  
Amplifying the Impact: 
Examining the intersection of Mobile Health and Mobile Finance
07
Common Building Blocks:  
Technology Infrastructure 
As ICT-based solutions, mHealth and mobile 
financial services share a number of common 
infrastructure elements that can be leveraged. 
By sharing a common underlying technology 
platform, not only do both sectors save on 
operational expenses, but the ability of their 
systems to scale and handle additional com-
plexity is extended.
Front-end Efficiencies: Given that both 
financial and health systems leverage the  
mobile handset, the usability, accessibility and 
Better information sharing creates a richer understanding of the individual  (Source: mPay Connect)
Some of the key questions on end-users include:
•	 What are the differences between rural The Efficiencies of User Centricity 
and urban dwellers in the region?
As patterns of behaviour and needs of the poor become better known within communities, 
•	 What are the degrees of health clinic and 
both MFS and mHealth benefit from cross-sector knowledge to build better services that 
bank access? 
tailor to their needs. For example, a microfinance institution that provides micro-credit for 
•	 Who are the influencers in the community 
Raina Kapur understands that she is an influencer in her community, works many hours on 
who can spur adoption? 
her business, and has a strong track record of micro-credit repayment. Her mobile operator 
•	 What are the financial and health literacy 
knows that she is a heavy user of SMS and uses her phone frequently, but may not know that 
levels of the end-users? 
her phone is used to conduct her entrepreneurial endeavours that are financed through her MFI. 
•	 What role does gender play in mobile ac-
cess and use of such services? 
At the same time, her healthcare worker knows she is pregnant and is prescribed with 
prenatal vitamins. A holistic snapshot of Raina could reveal that she is an ideal candidate 
Collectively, the financial services, communi-
for mobile financial services for healthcare since she is mobile-savvy, needs to plan for 
cations and health sectors have a common 
upcoming delivery costs through a prepaid savings account, has a strong financial history 
opportunity to develop a richer understanding 
of micro-credit repayment, is a time-constrained entrepreneur and needs an easy and safe 
of their end-users. From a digital perspective, 
method to purchase her vitamins. Because she is an influencer in her community, she may 
analytics on the data (and metadata) generated 
also help others to adopt MFS and mHealth services. 
in the use of these services can help stakeholders 
within the mHealth and MFS ecosystem to 
Access to additional cross-sector data can assist with profiling customers for credit and 
better understand individuals, their needs,  
reducing insurance risk. Some firms are now investigating new modelling techniques of 
and behaviours. 
mobile usage to help determine credit worthiness for segments of the population with no 
credit histories. If mobile usage could be an indicator, could healthcare patterns be as well? 
Of course, the principles and trust frameworks 
Could a consistent pattern of healthcare usage combined with steady usage of money 
for the sharing and usage of personal data 
transfers suggest a lifestyle that should have access to premium insurance and credit? 
must be addressed by all stakeholders. It will 
be critical to understand and agree upon what 
In addition, combining mHealth data collected in the field through the mobile phone can 
aspects of data can be shared for optimizing 
provide more robust actuarial data for determining insurance risk. The benefits of better 
health and financial services while also main-
actuarial data provide for more efficient forecasting for design of benefits, reimbursements 
taining customer rights and the security/stability 
and government-proposed standards on healthcare costs. Of course, defining customer 
of financial and health delivery systems.
rights and establishing frameworks around data privacy will be vital to these efforts. 
 
Amplifying the Impact:  
Examining the intersection of Mobile Health and Mobile Finance
08
reliability of applications is vital to ensure  
adoption. Both sectors are impacted by the 
user’s preferred mobile user interface, their 
understanding of the device, the affordability  
of the mobile phone service (device, data and 
voice network, and tariff structure) and the 
accessibility to a reliable electricity grid for 
recharging phones. 
Back-end Platforms: There are com-
monalities in the back-end requirements for 
mHealth and MFS systems. Both e- and 
mHealth and mobile financial service rely on ID 
management, authentication, fraud detection Example: ID Management  (Source: mPay Connect)
and security for their platforms. By understanding 
common requirements between mHealth and 2. How does one authenticate and ensure  of activities is a growing area of focus. 
MFS, back-end systems can be built to leverage t hat the person is who they say they are?
these common building blocks. Standardizing 3. How does one verify that it was really the Common Building Blocks: Similar 
these common areas at the platform level will person stated who received treatment at Business Operations and Business 
enable cross-industry cost savings and the clinic X? Model Elements 
possibility for easier integration among service 4. How does one ensure that the insurance 
providers within and between both industries firm, the payment settlement system Both sectors gain advantages by leveraging 
in the future. and medical clinic all recognize the same common business operations. In addition to 
person as the same individual and that the cost savings associated with sharing  
The historical lack of electronic healthcare co-payment is made accordingly? operations and infrastructure, both industries 
management systems and financial services 5. How does one ensure there are not may benefit from pricing that takes into  
infrastructure in many emerging markets may redundant, fraudulent or misspelled account the needs of both. 
provide a possible advantage when creating data entries of the person’s name in the 
cross-sector platforms rather than integrating mHealth and MFS systems? Business Operations – “Last Mile” 
legacy systems. This will enable superior cost Human Agent Network: In providing 
benefits, decreased time to commercialize and For the delivery of personalized services, the services to the poor, both industries still require 
better ability to integrate MFS with healthcare secure, reliable and confidential validation, “last mile”, in-person relationships to reach 
payments throughout the continuum of care.18 authentication and management of identity their customers. Often referred to as agent 
Donors and governments have the potential to systems is critical. Absent these core enablers, networks for telecommunications operators or 
play an important role in bringing together the the opportunity for error, corruption and fraud community health workers for mHealth, they 
key stakeholders to define a common technol- is rampant. For example, a recent survey done have a high degree of local knowledge and the 
ogy framework that can benefit all relevant by the Food and Supplies department of Delhi trust of the community. Along with providing 
stakeholders. government on ration cards revealed that, in feedback and insights for tailoring the design of 
the absence of a robust ID system, over 1.7 appropriate and affordable services, these 
ID management is one example of an element million ration cards were being issued to bogus individuals can act as the liaisons to educate, 
in the technology platform that can be leveraged individuals. In fact, they found 901 different train and register users for services. 
by multiple entities. records for the same name and address.19 
In some cases, these trusted agents perform 
As various entities deliver services to the same An open issue for discussion, however, is if the mobile functions on behalf of the customer, 
individual, each organization faces the chal- one common ID system is needed. The role of who may not have the level of literacy to be 
lenging questions regarding identity, including: shared trust frameworks that provide different able to complete the task themselves. In addition, 
1. How does one ensure that this person actors the ability to provide different levels of they perform certain in-person services. For  
exists? authentication and control for different classes instance, in the absence of extremely expensive 
Amplifying the Impact: 
Examining the intersection of Mobile Health and Mobile Finance
09
ATMs, mobile network operator (MNO) agents 
act as “human ATMs”, taking cash-in and Efficiency gains in cross-sector agent operations: Given that both mHealth and 
disbursing cash-out of the MFS system. MFS require field personnel to interact with the same user base, there are opportunities to 
identify common or redundant tasks that can be done by a shared resource. For example, 
Microfinance institutions use their agent the functions of signing up users, checking their ID and registering the mobile numbers19 
networks to disburse and collect microfinance may be points of redundancy that can be done by one rather than two or three separate 
loans. In mHealth, community healthcare workers agent networks. In addition, there may be opportunities to do cross-sector training with 
and traditional healers provide healthcare these agents to educate them on the various mHealth and MFS services. 
screening to patients.
Healthcare workers could augment their income by providing cash-in and cash-out services 
Business Model: Both mHealth and MFS where appropriate. Organizations are now beginning to test this concept. In India, there are 
share common concerns regarding business examples where healthcare workers act both as a healthcare liaison and as the registrant 
issues on revenue models, cost structures, for micro-insurance services using a handheld device.
sustainability and scale. In serving the lower 
socio-economic sectors, service providers are Efficiency gains in business models: Both MFS and mHealth are inherently depen-
still challenged to achieve sustainable business dent on affordable pricing. Naturally, this can either have a positive or negative effect on 
models. What is the pricing structure and who adoption. Pricing may be effective for person-to-person money transfers but ineffective for 
pays for services for people earning less delivering mHealth. For example, if the end-user fees for transferring money exceed the 
than US$ 2/day? Individually a new venture price for receiving a particular mHealth service, the value breaks down. 
in mHealth or MFS can be custom built and 
achieve some level of profitability. But scaling 
these individual pilots on a global basis remains 
a long-term challenge. 
For service providers that are not facility-based 
mobile network operators, how do the various 
fees and tariffs associated with voice, text and 
data affect end-user adoption rates? Developing 
a balanced pricing structure so the fees imposed 
by the incumbent industry do not constrain 
others is an open issue and a constraint on 
achieving scale.
Both in mHealth and in MFS, the question of 
who leads is non-trivial. In healthcare, who 
should maintain and host the electronic health-
care record is difficult to answer and may be 
determined in part by evolving policy on who 
“owns” the health record (and can move its 
location/hosting) and who determines who has 
access to the record. 
Similarly, who leads in MFS varies from one 
market to the next. In the case of MFS, regula-
tory policies are being developed to clarify 
the role that financial institutions and mobile 
operators can play in rolling out such services. 
In different markets, varying business models 
Amplifying the Impact:  
Examining the intersection of Mobile Health and Mobile Finance
10
will ultimately prevail based on regulatory policy knowledge in their own realm, but not in other Who is liable in cross-sector indus-
guidance, motivations and concerns. domains. Legacy policy frameworks, lack of tries? Both MFS and mHealth are faced 
knowledge cross-sector and limited flexibility with challenges regarding the liability of actors 
Common Building Blocks: Similar can be immense systemic constraints in within the value chain. Mobile network operators 
Policy Concerns policy-making. (MNOs), healthcare service providers, e-money 
As innovative technology-based services, both 
mHealth and MFS benefit from policy and Key Stakeholders
regulatory frameworks that promote incen- Key Stakeholders in mHealth and MFS
tives for competition, investment and innovation 
on a cross-sector basis. Overregulation typically mHealth and MFS have a number of ecosystem constituents, which include policy-makers, 
constrains large-scale investment and innovation. large corporations, donor communities and agent networks.
While there are no one-size-fits-all solutions, it 
is important to recognize the value of shared Policy-Makers: Core concerns to policy-makers for mHealth and MFS involve the degree 
learnings for helping policy-makers arrive at of regulatory policy to enact to ensure adequate safeguards for health and finance without 
solutions which meet their unique needs. stifling innovation and free market competition. 
The traditional, siloed approach to policy-making Constituent parties involved include ministries associated with:
by different ministries may not only hinder, but •	 Communications: Focused on broadband data, data encryption, security (networks, 
actually reverse intended goals. For example, devices, adoption and utilization), privacy and reliability of networks
in South Africa in 2004, the Ministry of Finance, •	 Central Bank: Focused on money supplies, banking regulations, consumer privacy, money 
in an effort to increase financial access within laundering and terrorism financing concerns, and electronic money transfer regulations
the country, instituted a proportional regulatory •	 Health: Focused on enabling ubiquitous, affordable access to healthcare based on 
policy to account registration. The circular  population needs assessment and consumer healthcare information privacy
relaxed the documentation needed to open 
low-transaction volume (mobile money) accounts. Private Sector Large Corporations:
•	 Mobile Network Operators (MNOs) seek to launch value-added services to 
As a result, the large numbers of the population bolster revenues and reduce churn in their customer bases. From one market to the 
without a formal address were able to register next, MNOs will have very different perspectives on their role in offering value-added 
for financial accounts for the first time. However, services as simply a distributor of such services to full ownership of the value chain 
the ministry involved with telecommunications, associated with that service. What constitutes competitive advantage is quite different 
in response to increased mobile-triggered from one operator to the next and one region to the next. 
bomb threats, passed a 2009 amendment •	 Companies in Health Services seek to leverage mHealth and MFS as enablers 
targeting electronic data interception with  to their existing health services businesses. Pharmaceutical companies, for example, 
increased document requirements for any want to enable traceability of drugs in the supply chain to minimize fraud and coun-
mobile network operator or mobile phone  terfeiting while also seeking efficient and low-cost payments settlement to bolster 
distributor providing SIM or mobile phones. return on investment. Insurance companies view mHealth as a method for superior 
The lack of inter-agency coordination, in this data collection and dissemination to increase healthcare success and reduce risk of 
instance, led to a reversal of momentum illness while MFS is used for efficient and low-cost payment settlement with provid-
intended to increase financial access through ers of healthcare in the field. Healthcare providers seek to provide the highest quality 
mobile financial services for the poor and led healthcare ubiquitously. In doing so, they seek the ability to leverage ICT remotely for 
one mobile network operator to cease efforts information sharing for services and to motivate healthcare workers and patients to 
in registering new customers. What arm of participate in the system through programmes such as conditional cash transfers. 
government ultimately makes decisions in They further try to reduce administrative resource burdens by leveraging ICT.
cross-sector matters? Furthermore, the level of •	 Mobile Money Providers are third-parties, mobile operators, or financial institutions 
interdisciplinary knowledge required to enact that provide mobile financial services to mobile subscribers. Typically, the success of 
meaningful policies is greater than in the past, such systems relies on network effect and achieving significant scale. Large corpora-
and challenges regulators who have deep 
Amplifying the Impact: 
Examining the intersection of Mobile Health and Mobile Finance
11
For example, in MFS, a common practice is to 
Key Stakeholders (continued) treat risks with proportional regulatory policies 
around customer documentation at registration. 
tions are well capitalized to drive such efforts, although innovation is often stymied Accounts with lower transaction volume limits, 
by the size of the organization. Start-ups often move at the fastest pace to drive  perceived as lower risk for money laundering 
innovation, but lack the resources to achieve scale quickly. Banks look to participate and terrorism financing, may require relaxed 
in the growing market of “banking the unbanked” by acting as the wholesale holder data requirements on the user for account 
of aggregate funds or a retail partner to mobile network operators or other third party registration. Such proportionality could apply to 
providers in reaching unbanked segments. Various models are being tested around healthcare services and the level of requirements 
acquisition, partnership and joint ventures among these various constituents to bring imposed on service providers based on the 
MFS to market. established criticality of care to be provided. 
Donor Communities: Donors provide grants for mHealth and MFS programmes that In addition, it may become important to consider 
enable access to critical health and financial services for the poor. By supporting efforts to the possibility of organizational alignment with 
pilot and commercialize mHealth and MFS initiatives, donors strive to achieve their missions, policy decision-making that is horizontal in 
whether the missions involve increasing the health or financial quality of life for the poor. nature, cutting across multiple sectors rather 
than vertically-focused within one industry. 
Health Service Agents (Community Healthcare Workers and Traditional Healers): Without a doubt, the level of coordination, 
mHealth provides access to expert advice for community healthcare workers and enables knowledge transfer and collaboration among 
them to efficiently transmit critical aggregate data back to centralized facilities for analysis. disparate policy-making entities will be increas-
MFS enables healthcare workers to received prompt payment for salary and services per- ingly crucial.
formed while reducing “leakage” associated with fraud due to lack of traceability of cash.
Conclusion and Next Steps
Mobile Financial Services Agents (MNO Agents, MFI Agents and Others): This paper set out to identify synergies between 
Independent airtime top-up agents are often the points for cash-in and cash-out of mobile the financial services and health industries as 
financial services systems driven by mobile operators. MFI community workers, retailers, a way to improve the health and wealth of the 
remittance operators and post office workers are other forms of agents that can reach rural poor. By understanding the interdependences 
communities and act as cash-in and cash-out points. These agents are motivated by the among mHealth and mobile financial services, 
commissions they receive for exchanging cash into digital mobile money and vice versa. cross-sector efficiencies, innovative delivery 
options and increased end-user adoption were 
some of the key benefits. Scaling together,  
issuers and banks all have distinct areas of and consumer protections. A richer under-
the socio-economic benefits amplify one  
competence. standing of who has rights to access and  
another.
share such information, the types of data that 
However, the boundaries distinguishing where can be analyzed and the policies governing 
Going forward, it will be critical to address the 
one service begins and the other ends has customer rights are in their nascent stages. 
following key questions to realize the synergies 
become murky. A few key uncertainties in this 
area include: Proportionality: A Conceptual between the evolving mHealth and mobile 
•	 If financial or medical SMS messages are Framework for Managing the Risks financial service ecosystems: 
not received, is the mobile network opera- and Complexities of Innovation. 1. What is the best method to drive these   As 
efficiency gains? Who will lead these efforts?
tor liable for the adverse consequences? MFS and mHealth sectors begin to tackle 
2. Who will build and manage the common 
•	 Does an application on a mobile phone questions of proportional customer documen-
infrastructure and distribution networks?
also require device certification? tation, liability within complex ecosystems and 
3. How will the various cross-sector policy 
•	 Can a mobile network operator be held customer protections, these policies should 
frameworks be coordinated and harmonized? 
liable for malpractice in the event of a support one another. As such, it will become 
4. How will integration and interoperability of 
security breach? increasingly important for regulatory bodies to 
disparate technologies across multiple in-
be knowledgeable of how their counterparts 
dustry and public sector domains occur? 
The digitization of healthcare and financial have tackled similar issues. 
How will these efforts be driven? What will 
services also leads to questions of data access 
Amplifying the Impact:  
Examining the intersection of Mobile Health and Mobile Finance
12
be the policies regarding customer data 
privacy rights?
If key stakeholders within the mHealth and 
MFS sectors work together to take advantage 
of the efficiencies and innovations that can be 
created with a balanced ecosystem, we will 
advance one step towards realizing the vision 
of “curing the world’s poor for less than a dollar 
a day.” 20 
“Continuous effort, not  
 strength or intelligence,  
 is the key to unlocking  
 our potential.”
 
   —Winston Churchill
Amplifying the Impact:  
Examining the intersection of Mobile Health and Mobile Finance
14
1 “…1.5 billion people worldwide live without access to  16 GSMA Development Fund Mobile Money Tracker, 
 electricity and many more whose energy services are either   December 2010.
 sporadic or cost-prohibitive,” New York Times, “World  
 Bank Pressured on Clean Energy,” 11 October 2010. 17 Portfolios of the Poor, Daryl Collins, Jonathan Morduch,  
 Stuart Rutherford, Orlanda Ruthven.
2 CGAP, “Health Issues,” Anup Shah, 2 October 2010.
18 Note that one area specific to e-/and mHealth in the
3 “Strategy on Health Care Financing for Countries of the   platform function that is not directly addressed in MFS is  
 Western Pacific and South-East Asia Regions (2006–  Access Control due to the different levels of data rights  
 2010),” World Health Organization.  and constituents associated with access to health care  
 records.
4 GSM Association, Mobile Money Deployment Tracker,  
 2010. 19 “Ration card scam: Govt probe to gun for PDS mafia,”  
 Express News Service Posted: 9 July 2008.
5 “Mobile penetration rates are forecast to rise from 46%  
 in 2008 to 95% by 2013 according to a new survey of 34  20 “Narayana Hrudayala Heart Hospital: Cardiac Care for the  
 emerging market countries,” Tariff Consultancy Ltd. By   Poor,” Tarun Khanna, V. Kasturi Rangan, and Merlina  
 2013 there will be well over five billion mobile phones glob  Manocaran. Harvard Business Review, 25 April 2006.
 ally. In contrast, there will be only 2 billion computers.  
 “CGAP Banking on Mobiles: Why, How, and For  Whom?”  
 CGAP October, 2008.
6 “M-Paisa: Ending Afghan Corruption, One Text at a Time,”  
 Monty Munford, 17 October 2010.
7 Vodafone interview.
 
8 Drug counterfeiting is a particularly serious issue in the  
 pharmaceutical industry. Mobile systems such as Sproxil  
 are now being used to identify counterfeit drugs by en- 
 abling supply chain participants and patients to send a text  
 message through their mobile phone that contains the  
 code on the drug packaging for verification of authenticity.  
 To the extent that payments are made electronically rather  
 than in cash, combining systems like Sproxil with mobile  
 financial service payments provides the ability to pinpoint  
 who paid, who purchased, and where counterfeiting issues  
 may have arisen throughout the supply chain. 
9 Portfolios of the Poor, Daryl Collins, Jonathan Morduch,  
 Stuart Rutherford, Orlanda Ruthven. 
10 “m-Pesa Marches on,” on Financial Access Initiative by  
 Jake Kendall, 28 October 2010.
11 “Kenya: Medical Smart Card Extended to Maternal  
 Care,” Susan Anyangu-Amu, 15 August 2010.
12 Ibid.
13 “In Kenya, Patients held hostage to Medical Bills,”  
 Los Angeles Times, 28 June 2009.
14 “Kenya: Medical Smart Card Extended to Maternal Care”  
 by Susan Anyangu-Amu, 15 August 2010. Copyright 2011 by the World Economic Forum All rights 
reserved. No part of this publication may be reproduced, 
15 Note: It is also important to understand that airtime minutes stored in a retrieval system, or transmitted in any form  
  is not currently recognized as a true currency and, therefore,  or by any means, electronic, mechanical, photocopying  
 has significant regulatory limitations as the de facto method  or otherwise without the prior permission of the World 
 of payment beyond certain uses. Economic Forum.
Special thanks to:
Kaosar Afsana, MD, MPH, PhD Ashok Kaul 
Associate Director, Health Programme Vice President, Healthcare Convergence Nick Pearson 
BRAC Wireless Life Sciences Alliance Founder 
Jacaranda Health
Samuel Agutu Ramesh Kesanupalli 
Managing Director, CEO Chief Technology Officer Jody Ranck, PhD 
Changamka Validity Inc. Executive Team Member 
mHealth Alliance
Ben Bellows, MPH, PhD Gavin Krugel 
Associate and Program Manager Senior Director Joel Selanikio, M.D. 
Population Council GSM Association Director 
DataDyne.org
Peter Berman, MSc., Ph.D Raina Kumra 
Lead Health Economist, HDNHE Senior New Media Advisor, Office of eDi- Mary Taylor 
The World Bank plomacy- Diplomatic Innovations Division Senior Program Officer 
United States Department of State Gates Foundation
Mohini Bhavsar 
Researcher Alain B. Labrique, MHS, MS, PhD Ken Warman 
MobileActive.org Assistant Professor, Department of Inter- Senior Program Officer 
national Health & Department of Epide- Gates Foundation
Alison Bloch, MBA, MPH miology (jt.), Program in Global Disease 
Managing Partner, mHealth Epidemiology and Control Tim Wood 
Arc Spring Group Johns Hopkins Bloomberg School of Pub- Director, Mobile Health Innovation, ICT Innovation 
lic Health and Centers for Disease Control Grameen Foundation
Karl Brown 
and Prevention
Associate Director, Applied Technology Thierry Zylberberg 
Rockefeller Ben Lyon Executive Vice President, Head of Orange 
Executive Director Healthcare Division 
Joaquim Croca 
Frontline SMS: Credit France Telecom
Head of Vodafone Health Solutions 
Vodafone Brad Magrath At the World Economic Forum
Regional Director 
Jacques De Vos 
Mobile Transactions Professor Klaus Schwab
Director, Business Development 
Executive Chairman
GeoMed MIT Rakesh Mahajan 
Vice President, Marketing and Head of Olivier Raynaud
Melissa Densmore 
VAS & Incubation Senior Director, Head of Global Health and 
PhD Candidate 
Bharti Airtel Limited Healthcare Industries
UC Berkeley School of Information
Kerry McDermett William Hoffman
Rose Donna 
Expert Advisor, National Broadband Task Associate Director, Head of Telecommuni-
Director 
Force, Office of Strategic Planning and cations Industry
DataDyne.org
Policy Analysis 
Jonathan Donner, Ph.D National Federal Communications Commission At the mHealth Alliance
Researcher, Emerging Markets Group 
Patricia N. Mechael, PhD MHS David Aylward, JD 
Microsoft Research, India
Director of Strategic Application of Mobile Executive Director 
Daniel Feikin, MD Technology for Public Health and Development mHealth Alliance
Johns Hopkins, Bloomberg School of Center for Global Health and Economic 
Public Health and Centers for Disease Development, Earth Institute, Columbia 
Clive Smith 
Executive Team Member 
Control and Prevention University
mHealth Alliance
Harry Greenspun, M.D. Robin Miller  
Executive Director and Chief Medical Officer Senior Consultant Special Acknowledgement To: 
Dell Healthcare Services Dalberg – Global Development Advisors Ms. Menekse Gencer of mPay Connect for 
her support and authoring of this paper
Vicky Hausman  Josh Nesbit 
Associate Partner Executive Director 
Dalberg – Global Development Advisors Frontline SMS: Medic
mHealth Alliance World Economic Forum
1800 Massachusetts Avenue, N.W. 91- 93 route de la Capite
4th Floor CH – 1223 Cologny/Geneva
Washington, DC 20036 Switzerland
Tel. +1 202.887.9040 Tel.: +41 (0) 22 869 1212
info@mhealthalliance.org Fax: +41 (0) 22 786 2744
www.mhealthalliance.org E-mail: contact@weforum.org
www.weforum.org
