The State of 
Standards and 
Interoperability 
for mHealth 
among Low- and Middle-Income Countries
Jonathan D. Payne 
mHeaLtH aLLIanCe 
MarCH 2013
Photo credit: Grameen Foundation

Table of Contents
3 acknowledgements 
4 executive Summary 
7 acronyms 
8 Background 
11 Methodology 
11  Literature Review 
12  Key Informant Interviews 
13 Overview of Health Informatics Standards and Interoperability 
13  Stakeholder Map 
16  Health Informatics Standards 
18  The Standardization Gap 
18  Interoperability 
19  eHealth Architecture 
21 Literature review 
21  Overview 
21  Analysis of Literature and Systematic Reviews 
21   Marcelo, 2012 – Health Informatics for Development 
23   Garg and Brewer, 2012 – Telemedicine Security Standards 
23   Ludwig – Home Telehealth Information Systems Architecture 
24  Supplementary Articles Review 
27 Key Informant Interviews 
27  Results 
27   1. Perceptions of the past and future of interoperability efforts 
28   2. Perceptions of health informatics standards 
29   3. mHealth relative to eHealth 
30   4. The pivotal role of donors 
31   5. Role of other stakeholders in health informatics standards uptake 
33 Discussion of Gaps and Opportunities 
33  1. Building capacity and increasing standards access 
34  2. Filling in standards gaps for adoption among LMICs 
36  3. LMIC engagement and mediation 
36  4. Promoting coordination and alignment 
37  5. Strengthening mHealth and eHealth governance 
39 Conclusion 
41 appendix a – Key Informant Interview List 
42 references 
Acknowledgements
I would like to express my sincere gratitude to Patty Mechael, the Executive Director of the mHealth 
Alliance, whose deep expertise and leadership in mobile health have helped to bring the challenging 
questions of scale and impact to the forefront. This report would not have been possible without the 
mHealth Alliance, hosted by the United Nations Foundation, and the tireless work of Avrille Hanzel, 
Mandy Sugrue and Bill Philbrick. I would also like to express my appreciation to Beatriz Leao and Chris 
Seebregts, whose work at the forefront of mHealth and eHealth standards and interoperability in many 
parts of the world fashioned much of the intellectual underpinning for this report.
Special thanks are due to Ramesh Krishnamurthy of the World Health Organization whose outstanding 
leadership in the field, conversations, and careful reviews contributed many important concepts to 
this report.
Acknowledgement and gratitude are owed to the many individuals who provided both their time and 
invaluable input to this report through interviews: Alex Pavluck (Task Force for Global Health), Alvin 
Marcelo (Philippine Health Insurance Corporation), Andrew Grant (Sherbrooke University), Bart Stidham 
(Thoughtworks), Beatriz de Faria Leao (Consultant), Bob Jolliffe (Consultant), Catherine Chronaki (HL7 
International), Catherine Omaswa (eHealth Society of Uganda), Chris Bailey (World Health Organization), 
Chris Seebregts (Jembi Health Systems), Chuck Parker (Continua Health Alliance), Craig Frederichs 
(GSMA), Darius Jazayeri (OpenMRS), David Hutchful (Grameen), Derek Ritz (Consultant), Erica Kochi 
(UNICEF), Frederick Kristensen (NORAD), Fredrik Winsnes (NetHope), Hamish Fraser (Harvard Medical 
School), Hani Eskandar (ITU), Jeff Wishnie (Thought Works), Joaquin Blaya (eHealth Systems), John 
Ritter (HL7 International), Jonathan Jackson (Dimagi), Karl Brown (Rockefeller Foundation), Kelly 
Keisling (NetHOPE), Liz Peloso (Consultant), Matt Berg (Earth Institute), Michael Kleeman (University 
of California, Davis), Najeeb Al-Shorbaji (World Health Organization),  Neal Lesh (Dimagi), and Richard 
Gakuba (Government of Rwanda).
Finally, many thanks to the reviewers, including Adam Slote (USAID), Alvin Marcelo (PhilHealth), Beatriz 
Leao (Consultant), Bill Philbrick (mHealth Alliance), Catherine Chronaki (HL7 International), Catherine 
Omaswa (Government of Uganda), Chaitali Sinha (IDRC), Chris Seebregts (Jembi), Derek Ritz (Consultant), 
Isaac Holman (Medic Mobile), John Ritter (HL7 International), Kate Wilson (PATH), Ken Warman (Gates 
Foundation), Lincoln Moura (International Medical Informatics Association), Patty Mechael (mHealth 
Alliance), Ramesh Krishnamurthy (WHO), Rosemary Foster (Consultant), Rowena Luk (Dimagi), Sean 
Blaschke (UNICEF), and Shariq Khoja (mHealth Alliance).
2 The State of Standards and Interoperability for mHealth among Low- and Middle-Income Countries
ome Countries
The State of Standards and 
Interoperability for mHealth among 
Low- and Middle-Income Countries
    mHealth Alliance  March 2013 3
Executive Summary
The mHealth Alliance commissioned this report to review the state of health informatics standards 
and interoperability with respect to the use of mobile health among low- and middle-income countries 
(LMICs) with the aim of identifying critical gaps and opportunities to support the scale up of mHealth. 
The intended audience for this report is stakeholders developing or employing health informatics stan-
dards, and implementers and vendors seeking to interoperate systems. This report provides guidance 
for how the above stakeholders may align efforts around the use of standards to achieve interoperable 
mHealth at scale. 
This report is based on three sources of information: (1) a landscape scan of current initiatives and gray 
literature related to mHealth standards and interoperability; (2) a review of academic articles examining 
the use of standards to achieve interoperability within mHealth; and (3) unstructured informal inter-
views with 33 informants who directly or indirectly influence the uptake of health informatics standards 
and the structure of the national ICT environment.
Improved continuity of care across provider, place, and time is one of the great promises of mHealth, 
but this can only be achieved if information is readily available at the right place and time, regardless 
of how or on what information system it was collected. Interoperability of data in such heterogeneous 
environments is enabled through the application health informatics standards within the context of a 
strategic eHealth framework. Such a framework must address critical issues of governance, infrastruc-
ture, architecture, workforce capacity, policy, and financing.
There are many organizations actively developing standards and standards implementation guidelines 
to achieve interoperability within a specific health domain, such as the International Organization for 
Standardization (ISO), Health Level 7 International, and Integrating the Healthcare Enterprise. The World 
Health Organization and International Telecommunications Union play both normative and informa-
tional roles with respect to standards development and dissemination. While standards development 
organizations (SDOs) have historically focused on high-income country health systems, due to greater 
readiness to adopt and substantial government and private industry investment, there is a notable 
broadening of scope to accommodate LMIC needs, as evidenced through the formation of LMIC-focused 
working groups and the 2012 ISO publication of the Capacity-based eHealth Architecture Roadmap.
Yet significant gaps exist in the capacity and participation of LMICs in the development and adoption 
of health informatics standards. The largest challenges are lack of local informatics human resource 
capacity and insufficient investment into standards activities, which prevents productive engagement 
with international standards development organizations (SDOs). 
mHealth is a subset of eHealth and, as such, many of the issues surrounding the scale up and harmo-
nization of eHealth are the same for mHealth, such as the need for national eHealth strategies and 
stronger eHealth governance. mHealth within LMICs also presents unique challenges, including limited 
bandwidth and infrastructure, reliance on insecure or unreliable messaging protocols such as the short 
messaging service (SMS), and the shift towards non-clinical and community-based workers delivering 
new types of services and in new settings. 
4 The State of Standards and Interoperability for mHealth among Low- and Middle-Income Countries
While the body of academic literature related to mHealth and standards has grown over the last decade, 
the literature review indicated that there have been no evaluations of the comparative advantages of 
using health informatics standards to achieve interoperability of eHealth and mHealth systems focused 
on LMICs. However, at the time of publication, there were very few scaled-up and interoperable imple-
mentations to be evaluated, so this result was not unexpected. LMIC-focused articles were generally 
descriptive in nature, often advocating for global alignment around standards, interoperability, and 
capacity issues. Studies assessing the comparative advantages of specific video compression and 
security protocols have been published and should be applied to future telemedicine deployments. 
There remains a gap in the evaluation of the use of specific packages of standards to achieve specific 
health system or health information system goals.
Key informants noted a recent shift in the global eHealth discourse, in that most LMICs have developed 
or are developing national eHealth strategies and that interoperability was nearly universally accepted 
as a key element of these strategies. Governments were considered to have the most important role 
in influencing the design and requirements of mobile and electronic health systems implemented in 
each of their countries, and local implementers and development partners generally wanted a more 
robust and enabling regulatory environment in place to provide this guidance and lower investment 
risk. Donors were viewed as playing a pivotal role in providing financial incentives to shift the market 
in favor of interoperable systems. Key informants acknowledged that health informatics workforce 
capacity was lacking among all stakeholders aside from SDOs, but that SDOs generally had little expe-
rience in LMICs.
The gaps and opportunities with respect to the use of standards to achieve interoperable mHealth at 
scale can be categorized into five buckets: (1) Building capacity and increasing standards access; (2) 
Filling in standards gaps for adoption among LMICs; (3) LMIC engagement and mediation; (4) Promoting 
coordination and alignment; and (5) Strengthening mHealth and eHealth governance. More details 
about each of these categories are provided below.
1. All stakeholders other than SDOs generally lacked capacity in health informatics expertise, although 
the shortage was most severe among LMIC governments and local implementers. Capacity deficien-
cies may be addressed by establishing formal health informatics training and education programs, 
better informing local decision and policy makers of the strategic implications of adopting standards 
and interoperability best practices, improving donors and implementers’ ability to strategically invest 
in an interoperable health system, empowering local professionals and professional organizations, and 
addressing barriers to standards access.
2. Most existing health informatics standards can be repurposed without alteration in LMIC contexts, 
although adaptation and possibly new standards development may be necessary in some cases in order 
to support unique LMIC business requirements and new mHealth use cases. The development of a 
mHealth reference architecture will provide critical guidance on the design of mobile health informa-
tion systems that is consistent and compatible with other reference architectures. Implementation 
guides are needed to assist LMIC governments and implementers in the adaptation of standards for 
local contexts.
    mHealth Alliance  March 2013 5
3. Bridging the standardization gap in the short-term means ensuring that LMIC requirements are 
represented in health informatics standards. Implementers and development partners with experience 
working in specific regions can and should, in partnership with governments and SDOs, collate and 
contribute LMIC requirements to the standards development process to ensure that the final product 
is applicable globally. The long-term solution to the standards gap is for LMICs to engage productively 
in the standards development process as participating members. Regional eHealth standardization 
collaboratives, established by local governments and in partnership with academic institutions, private 
sector, SDOs and other international organizations, may be an effective mechanism for joint regional 
learning, engagement with the international standards community, and a valuable step on the way 
towards forming independent national standards bodies.
4. Mechanisms to promote coordination and alignment between governments and their partners are 
needed to broker the social and institutional relationships neccesary for interoperability among and 
between other stakeholder types. Guidelines should be developed to help donors strategically invest 
in technology implementations and platforms that align with country priorities and international best 
practices. Regional eHealth standardization collaboratives could serve as an effective forum for iden-
tification and development of local priorities and standards requirements. Methods should be explored 
for requiring standards compliance in grants, possibly through certification, which would serve to shift 
market incentives to favor interoperability. 
5. As mobile health systems move towards scale, existing guidelines and strategies will need to be 
revised to reflect new demands on (1) Executive sponsorship;  (2) National leadership of eHealth 
programs; (3) eHealth standards adoption and implementation; (4) Development of eHealth capability 
and capacity; (5) eHealth financing and performance management; and (6) eHealth planning and archi-
tecture maintenance. Regulations regarding standards adoption and interoperability of mHealth and 
eHealth systems will play a key role in shifting market dynamics to favor interoperability.
Three crosscutting recommendations were identified that are intended to frame subsequent dialogue 
around near-term opportunities for the global community to address these challenges in a more coor-
dinated fashion: 
1)  Shift market dynamics to incentivize interoperability, primarily through regulatory and financing 
mechanisms; 
2)  Align investments and implementations with national and regional eHealth strategies; and 
3) Establish regional eHealth standardization collaboratives to facilitate pooling of resources and 
expertise and to serve as focal point for standards activities in a region.
6 The State of Standards and Interoperability for mHealth among Low- and Middle-Income Countries
Acronyms
 Acronym Description
 CEN European Committee for Standardization
 CHW Community Health Worker
 DICOM Digital Imaging and Communications in Medicine
 EHR Electronic Health Record
 ESA European Space Agency
 FLW Front Line Worker
 GOe Global Observatory for eHealth
 GPRS General Packet Radio Services
 GPS Global Positioning System
 GSMA Groupe Speciale Mobile Association
 HIS Health Information System
 ICT Information and Communications Technology
 IEEE Institute of Electrical and Electronics Engineers
 IHE Integrating the Healthcare Enterprise
 ISO International Organization for Standardization
 ITU International Telecommunications Union
 LMIC Low- and Middle-Income Country
 MNO Mobile Network Operator
 NGO Non-Governmental Organization
 NIH US National Institutes of Health
 SDO Standards Development Organization
 SMS Short Messaging Service
 UN United Nations
 USAID United States Agency for International Development
 USSD Unstructured Supplementary Service Data
 WHO World Health Organization
    mHealth Alliance  March 2013 7
Background
Mobile health, or “mHealth,” refers to the use of mobile telecommunication and multimedia technologies 
to support service delivery and health systems.1 mHealth is a subset of eHealth, which the World Health 
Organization (WHO) defines as the use of information and communications technologies for health.2 
Mobile technology is being used increasingly to augment health service delivery throughout the world. 
As mHealth projects scale up, integration of mobile health programs and applications into the broader 
health information system becomes essential.
Even in high-income economies, health systems are struggling to realize the full potential of informa-
tion and communications technology (ICT) to strengthen health systems and support care delivery, 
due, in part, to limited technological and institutional interoperability. The promise of a connected and 
interoperable health system is that regardless of how data is collected, the right information is avail-
able to the right person, in the right place, and at the right time. With the advent of mobile health, there 
is an even greater need to ensure reliability of services, availability of information, and patient privacy 
and confidentiality. In particular, continuity of care across provider, time, and institution requires that 
information is shared, trusted, and secured. Low- and middle-income countries (LMICs) have perhaps 
the greatest potential to extend health systems’ reach by using mHealth to integrate remote workers 
and patients into the health system. Interoperability in such heterogeneous environments necessitates 
improved governance and alignment at the national and international levels, and greater diffusion of 
existing health informatics standards, adaptation of standards to LMIC contexts, and, in some cases, 
development of new standards. 
Standardization at the national level can only be achieved by aligning efforts of international and 
bilateral institutions, standards development organizations (SDOs), donors, mobile network operators 
(MNOs), and other private sector actors with local government and health system priorities. The stan-
dardization gap means that representatives from developing countries are not at the table contributing 
their unique requirements for the use of ICT or standards utilization to the standards development 
process.3 Furthermore, even if LMIC requirements are represented in health informatics standards, 
there is a large gap between development of a standard and effective adoption of that standard. High 
cost of standards adoption, lack of prioritization, and limited local health informatics capacity remains 
a significant challenge in many countries.
While mHealth-enabled interventions have been documented in countries with eHealth ecosystems 
at all levels of maturity, interventions expected to have the greatest impact rely on more advanced 
ICT infrastructure. For example, countries with limited ICT infrastructure and expertise may be able to 
leverage mobile networks’ short messaging service (SMS), or text messages, to send automated alerts 
and appointment reminders to remote health workers. But, the same countries may find that network 
reliability prohibits expansion of telemedicine services beyond city centers.
The WHO and International Telecommunications Union (ITU) describe the national context for eHealth 
development in terms of the ICt environment, which represents the physical infrastructure and market 
adoption of components that utilize the infrastructure, and the ICt enabling environment, which 
consists of governance, policy, standards, human resources, and other aspects that are critical in the 
scaling of ICTs (Figure 1).4
8 The State of Standards and Interoperability for mHealth among Low- and Middle-Income Countries
National Context for eHealth Development
                 Scali ng - u  p s ann do  i inat
tegra
und t  i fo one , cat os
 cr
e t-e
t, ffe
en cti
nm vo enir es
nv
Mainstreaming
Scaling up
Developing and Building up
emerging enabling environment for ehealth establisheD enabling environment for ehealth
Early adaption
Experimentation
Figure 1. WHO-ITU National eHealth Strategy Toolkit
    mHealth Alliance  March 2013 9
                
          
                      St
th
re
al
ngthe
or e
He ning
 f  eH
as
e ea
 c lte h e
 th ne ab
ak li
m n, g 
re e
emerging iCt environment establisheD iCt environment
Strengthening infrastructu
d innovat
ion
an
curi
ty 
y, s
e
riv
ac
r p
s f
o
ci
e
i
ol
, ps
Numerous global health and health informatics organizations have cited interoperability as a major 
obstacle to the meaningful use of ICTs at scale (see references2,5,27). Development of a national stan-
dards and interoperability framework provides the context and forum for the multi-sectoral engagement 
necessary to address these issues in a deeply interconnected health system. Guidelines for this 
process are described in several key documents, including the 2012 National eHealth Strategy Toolkit 
developed by the WHO and the ITU.4
The mHealth Alliance Business Plan5, developed with Dalberg in 2011, identified limited technological 
integration and interoperability amongst mobile and electronic health systems as a key barrier to 
scaling mHealth. The report further identified key issues that contributed to limited technological inte-
gration and interoperability:
1)  Lack of alignment on standards
2)  Limited opportunities for collaboration
3)  Limited collaboration or communication across other mServices (e.g. mobile banking, mobile 
education)
4)  Limited guidance from donors and governments on which standards to use
The mHealth Alliance commissioned this follow-up report to identify critical gaps, as well as opportuni-
ties, with respect to the current state of health informatics standards and interoperability to support the 
scale of mHealth systems. The audience for this report includes stakeholders developing or employing 
health informatics standards, policy makers creating eHealth guidelines, national standards bodies or 
professional organizations, and implementers or vendors seeking to interoperate systems. 
Findings are broken into the following sections:
1)  a conceptual framework for approaching the complex space 
of standards, technical integration, and interoperability;
2)  an assessment and catalogue of key obstacles that 
are preventing mHealth from achieving scale;
3)  a review of published and gray literature 
related to the use of health informatics 
standards and interoperability within 
mHealth in LMICs;
4)  results and analysis of key informant 
interviews; and
5)  a discussion of opportunities and strat-
egies for addressing key obstacles.
10 The State of Standards and Interoperability for mHealth among Low- and Middle-Income Countries
Photo Credit: Photographer name here
Methodology
Information contained in this report was derived from three sources:
1)  Landscape scan of current initiatives and gray literature produced by multi- and bi-lateral insti-
tutions, governments, and major implementing organizations, etc;
2)  Published literature review of peer-reviewed journals; and
3)  Key informant interviews of individuals representing a cross-section of institutions and stake-
holders involved in the scale up of mobile health programs, including donors, policy makers, 
mobile network operators, academics, implementers, and technology developers.
While every effort was made to present a balanced and objective view of the current state of standards 
and interoperability with respect to mHealth, there is a bias and subjectivity that is both unavoidable 
and useful for representing stakeholders’ diverse engagement with the field.
Literature review
The literature review consisted of a search in PubMed for scientific published articles that contained 
both a “mobile health” term and a “standards” or “interoperability” term. References in the articles were 
followed to identify additional relevant materials. “Mobile health” search terms included: 
•  mHealth
•  mHealth
•  mobile health
•  mobile phones
•  mobile technology
•  telemedicine
•  telehealth
The “standards” and “interoperability” search terms included:
•  standardization
•  standard(s)
•  interoperability
•  integration
•  architecture
No crosscutting systematic reviews of mHealth standards and interoperability were found, which would 
have provided a lower time bound for the literature search. Therefore, the search was restricted to 
articles published in the year 2002 or later based on the assumption that this timeframe would capture 
the vast majority of articles in the still nascent field of mobile health. 
    mHealth Alliance  March 2013 11
Photo Credit: Photographer name here
A total of 2,154 published articles from peer-reviewed sources were identified in PubMed and by 
following references. All articles were then screened for their relevance to the subject of this report. 
The exclusion criteria used for screening were as follows:
• Literature proposing a reference architecture without specific mention of mobile health were 
excluded. Articles describing specific clinical interventions that used mobile devices, evalua-
tions of mobile health interventions measuring health outcomes, or particular software products 
or platforms were excluded, unless addressing particular standards or interoperability issues. 
Articles covering the “quantified self,” implanted or embedded sensors and sensor networks, 
implantable devices, social or peer-to-peer networks, grid networks, or public health databases 
such as genetics or surveillance were also excluded. Articles discussing standards related to the 
health effects of electromagnetic radiation from mobile devices were also excluded.
• Articles that use “telemedicine” to refer to the use of internet-based video conferencing to 
connect a clinician to a remote patient were excluded, unless standards were a primary focus, as 
were literature and programs that leveraged information and communication technology infra-
structure to link traditional computers as opposed to mobile devices.
Note that while this literature review was methodical, it was not a systematic review in the strict sense. 
Also note that full versions of articles were not accessed unless available for free or judged to contain 
relevant insights not available in the abstract alone.
Key Informant Interviews
A total of 33 key informants were interviewed by phone or in person between May 8 and September 
3, 2012. Informants represent a non-random convenience sampling of a broad range of stakeholders 
engaged in mHealth standards and interoperability. Interviewees were categorized as follows:
•  Mobile Network Operators (1)
•  Standards Development Organizations (4)
•  NGOs / Implementers (4)
•  Technology Developers (9)
•  Researchers / Academics (3)
•  Donors (5)
•  Multinational Organizations (5)
•  Government (2)
Of the key informants, 5 (15%) were female, and 28 (85%) were male, 15 (45%) were US-based, and 7 (21%) 
represented LMICs. Refer to Appendix A for the full list of interviewees.
12 The State of Standards and Interoperability for mHealth among Low- and Middle-Income Countries
Overview of Health 
Informatics Standards  
and Interoperability
the field of health informatics standards and interoperability is expansive and touches on 
hardware, infrastructure, software, semantics, social and institutional structures, and the 
interactions between each of these. this section describes the stakeholders involved in the 
development and harmonization of health informatics standards, provides working defini-
tions for standards and interoperability, and presents a comprehensive eHealth architecture 
as proposed by the International Organization for Standardization (ISO).
Stakeholder Map
There are a number of organizations developing or contributing to the development and use of health 
informatics standards globally. Several key organizations are listed below:
•  ISO technical Committee 215 (ISO tC 215) develops standards across all areas of health infor-
matics. It is divided into working groups that focus specifically on data structures, architecture, 
interoperability, devices, privacy and security. TC 215 is the governing body of the Public Health 
task Force (PHtF), which was established to improve the uptake of health informatics standards 
among low-income countries.6
•  Health Level 7 International (HL7) develops standards for the interoperability of health informa-
tion technology. Examples include the HL7 Electronic Health Record Functional Model and the 
HL7 Clinical Document Architecture.
•  european Committee for normalization (Cen) tC 251 is the health information technology 
technical committee of the European Union SDO. ISO TC 215 and CEN TC 251 regularly work jointly 
in standards development efforts.
•  CDISC (Clinical Data Interchange Standards Consortium) develops standards for the interoper-
ability of medical research information and related systems. Examples of standards include the 
Study Data Tabulation Model (SDTM), Standard for Exchange of Non-clinical Data (SEND), and 
Analysis Data Model (ADaM).
•  GS-1 develops standards related to supply-chains and their management. The GS-1 System is 
comprised of standards for Barcodes for identification, eCom for business messaging standards, 
GDSN (global data synchronization network), and EPCGlobal for tracking.
•  IHtSDO (International Health terminology Standardization Organization) owns and maintains 
SNOMED CT, which stands for Systematized nomenclature of Medicine – Clinical terms. This 
is the most comprehensive terminology dictionary for diseases, clinical findings and symptoms, 
procedures, etc.
    mHealth Alliance  March 2013 13
•  IHe (Integrating the Healthcare enterprise) is an industry and professional organization working 
to improve information sharing between healthcare information systems. Note that IHE is not a 
SDO, rather it creates profiles for developers and users, such as the Cardiology or Laboratory 
profiles, to guide implementers and vendors on standards compliance necessary to achieve a 
specified level of interoperability within a domain.
The seven organizations above comprise the Joint Initiative on SDO Global Health Informatics 
Standardization, commonly known as the Joint Initiative Council (JIC). The JIC was organized 
to facilitate coordination and harmonization of standards development activities. The JIC provides an 
important mechanism for joint publication of standards by two or more SDOs and a forum for resolving 
conflicts.
There are several organizations that play important roles in the field of health informatics that are not 
directly linked to the JIC:
• International telecommunications Union (ItU) is the United Nations agency responsible for 
information and communications technology. ITU has specific arms for Standardization (ITU-T) 
and for the Development Sector (ITU-D). 
•  World Health Organization (WHO) plays an important leadership role in both standards develop-
ment and in interoperability priority setting and standards dissemination. The WHO maintains 
and produces the WHO Family of International Classifications (FIC) to provide a common, global 
framework and language for health information. The FIC includes the International Classification 
of Diseases (ICD), International Classification of Function, Disability and Health (ICF), and 
International Classification of Health Interventions (ICHI). The WHO also developed the stan-
dard for Statistical Data and Metadata Exchange – Health Domain (SDMX-HD) for exchange of 
monitoring and evaluation data. The WHO also has several entities that interact with the stan-
dards space through leadership and prioritization, guideline development, and convening. These 
include the Department of Knowledge Management and Sharing, Department of Health Statistics 
and Health Information, and the Global Observatory for eHealth (GOe), which provides valuable 
information to support governments on the strategic adoption of electronic health information 
systems. GOe has published reports on key eHealth topics, including eHealth country profiles7, tele-
medicine8, mHealth2, safety and security9, legal frameworks10, and management of patient information11. 
• International Medical Informatics association (IMIa) is a member organization for national or 
regional informatics associations that promotes the effective use of informatics within health-
care, the dissemination of knowledge and health informatics education, and translation of 
research into practice. IMIA has significant representation throughout the world, including 
LMICs. IMIA Working Groups on Standards, Health Informatics for Development and Education 
deal directly with eHealth in LMIC countries.
•  Public Health Data Standards Consortium (PHDSC) is a US-based member organization that 
aims to empower healthcare and public health communities with health information technology 
standards to improve individual and community health. PHDSC contributes to international stan-
dards development efforts and is engaged in development of standards curricula.
14 The State of Standards and Interoperability for mHealth among Low- and Middle-Income Countries
•  Continua Health alliance is a non-profit industry organization of more than 220 healthcare and 
technology companies worldwide focusing on interoperable personal connected health devices 
and solutions. Continua provides product certification and industry recommendations to SDOs.
•  african Union eHealth expert Group is a member project that is making recommendations for the 
harmonization of eHealth across the African continent and drafting the document “African Union 
eHealth Development to Support the Africa Health Strategy: 2007-2015”. This group represents 
many of the key local health informatics experts.
In 2005, the WHO General Assembly adopted a resolution promoting the use of eHealth to achieve 
health system goals among all member states.12 The Regional WHO Committee for Africa adopted a 
similar resolution in 2010, with key recommendations for African states:13
•  Establish national eHealth strategies and implement monitoring and evaluation systems to 
track progress
•  Strengthen national political commitment, leadership and coordination by establishing intersec-
toral support mechanisms for eHealth
•  Establish a conducive policy environment
•  Build out infrastructure and establish services for eHealth (e.g. Internet connectivity and online 
resources)
•  Develop human capacity for eHealth by establishing sustainable education and training opportunities
•  Set up sustainable financing for eHealth infrastructure and ICT integration, and encourage 
private sector engagement
Several global initiatives build off the above commitments across multiple programmatic areas. The 
Commission on Information and Accountability for Women’s and Children’s Health was established in 
2011 to “improve global reporting, oversight and accountability for women’s and children’s health.” 
Integration of ICTs into national health information systems and adoption of technical standards are 
key recommendations of the commission.14 The Innovation Working Group and Every Woman Every 
Child movement are investing into mobile and electronic tools to accelerate progress towards reduc-
tions in maternal and child mortality. Innovative technologies, including mobile phones and SMS, are 
also a key focus of the UN Commission on Life-Saving Commodities for Women and Children’s Health 
for their role in facilitating access to selected products and in complementing and informing service 
delivery. The WHO is garnering support for a global resolution specifically on eHealth standards and 
interoperability with the goal of adoption and harmonization.
The health informatics standards community has begun to mobilize resources to increase the accessi-
bility of standards, to address limited adoption of standards among LMICs, and to fill mHealth standards 
gaps. The Standards Knowledge Management Tool (SKMT Glossary), supported by the Joint Initiative 
Council, is a free web-based portal that serves as a single point of reference for all published standards 
and definitions from JIC members and other relevant documents such as WHO publications.1 The Health 
Informatics Wiki combines information from national eHealth case studies with the SKMT Glossary to 
1  www.skmtglossary.org 
    mHealth Alliance  March 2013 15
assist in identification of standards relevant to a particular health system context.2 Several efforts, 
including the Public Health Task Force at ISO and the Africa Initiative of HL7’s International Mentoring 
Committee, specifically aim to increase standards capacity and adoption among LMICs. HL7, IHE, and 
HIMSS have formed distinct mHealth task forces or working groups to address unique standards gaps 
related to the use of mobile and smart devices within health care. SDO efforts are expected to result in 
the development of a reference architecture and domain profiles for using mHealth in health systems at 
various levels of maturity and health domains, and integrating it with other health information systems, 
including electronic health records, laboratory information management systems, or district health 
information systems.
Health Informatics Standards
ISO defines a standard as the following:
 “A standard is a document that provides requirements, specifications, guidelines or characteris-
tics that can be used consistently to ensure that materials, products, processes and services are 
fit for their purpose.”15
There are several ways to classify and scope health informatics standards. For the purposes of this 
report, we use the divisions of ISO Technical Committee 215 on Health Informatics (ISO TC 215), which 
are broken into working groups as follows:16
•  architecture (Working Groups 1 and 8) – Definitions, templates, data sets. Standardized models 
of the functions and conformance criteria associated with a system that is platform agnostic 
(e.g., HL7 Electronic Health Record System Functional Model), including definition of business 
requirements and data structures. 
• Data interchange (Working Groups 2 and 7) – Harmonization and adaptation of clinical and 
administrative messages for system and device interoperability. 
•  Semantic content (Working Group 3) – Develops standards for the representation of termino-
logical resources, such as health concepts and data. 
• Security, safety and privacy (Working Group 4) – Confidentiality, integrity and availability, 
accountability, security management, and information systems safety. 
•  Pharmacy and medicines business (Working Group 5) – Develops standards for interoperability 
of e-pharmacy systems and other medicines applications.
It is important to clarify that ISO standards are considered “open” according to the following definition: 
a) the entire contents of each standard may be obtained; b) each standard was developed and defined 
as part of an open, transparent process; and c) ISO standards are not subject to sudden changes as 
modifications are sent through a pre-defined systematic review. However, “open” ISO standards are 
generally not free.
2  www.hiwiki.org 
16 The State of Standards and Interoperability for mHealth among Low- and Middle-Income Countries
70
70 54
55
60
50 29
40 36 20 24
30 15 11
9
20 9 8 10
10 3
4 2
0
2 0 Co
 untries 1
 IMIA 0
 ISO TC 215 
P ISO TC 215 
O HL7
Figure 2. ISO, HL7 and IMIA membership categorized by country economic grouping as of September 2011.
eCOnOMIC 
GrOUPInG ISO tC 215 P ISO tC 215 O HL7 IMIa
LIC Kenya Zimbabwe - Burundi, Malawi, Mali, togo
LMIC armenia, Honduras,  Mongolia, Ukraine - Cameroon, Côte d’Ivoire, Ghana,  
 Philippines   Honduras, nigeria, Pakistan, 
    Philippines, Sri Lanka, Ukraine
UMIC Brazil, China, Iran, argentina, Bulgaria,  argentina, Bosnia  argentina, Bosnia and
 Malaysia, Mexico, Colombia, ecuador,  and Herzegovina,  Herzegovina, Brazil, 
 russian Federation, Kazakhstan,  Brazil, China,  Chile, China, Cuba, 
 South africa,  romania, Serbia,  Colombia, Mexico,  Iran, Mexico, Peru, 
 tunisia, turkey thailand romania, russian romania, South africa, 
   Federation, turkey,  thailand, turkey, 
   Uruguay Uruguay, Venezuala
Figure 3.  LIC, LMIC, UMIC standards organization membership.
GeOGraPHIC reGIOn COUntrIeS ISO tC 215 P ISO tC 215 O HL7 IMIa
Sub-Saharan africa 43 1 1 0 7
South asia 8 1 0 0 3
europe & Central asia 23 3 5 4 4
east asia & Pacific 24 4 2 1 3
Latin america & Caribbean 29 2 3 5 8
Middle east & north africa 13 2 0 0 1
Other 75 21 11 24 31
tOtaL 215 33 6 33 57
Figure 4. ISO, HL7 and IMIA membership categorized by geographic region.
    mHealth Alliance  March 2013 17
LIC LMIC UMIC HIC
the Standardization Gap
Significant gaps exist in the capacity and participation of LMICs in the development and adoption of 
health informatics standards. This is due to an interrelated set of factors, including: lack of local infor-
matics human resource capacity and high complexity of standards; low prioritization by governments, 
vendors, and implementers; limited access to existing standards; limited funding for engagement with 
international SDOs; absence of national standards bodies; and inadequate ICT infrastructure for stan-
dards participation. These challenges, as well as potential solutions, are laid out in the 2009 ITU-T 
Bridging the Standardization Gap.3
Low- and middle-income countries have limited representation and membership in international stan-
dards organizations, which limits stakeholders’ ability to contribute their unique requirements to the 
standards development process. Within ISO TC 215, there are two membership types: Participating 
members (P-members) are full members and are requested to vote on every proposed standard; 
Observing members (O-members) may contribute but are not permitted to vote. Figure 2 illustrates the 
marked difference in representation of low-, lower-middle-, upper-middle-, and high-income country 
membership in ISO TC 215, HL7 International, and IMIA.17,18 Figure 3 lists specific country membership 
in standards organizations for LIC, LMIC, and UMIC. Figure 4 groups country membership according to 
geographic region. Note that while IMIA is not an SDO, it is included in these charts because its greater 
penetration among low-income countries and among target geographic regions makes it a natural 
forum for health informatics activities in these countries.
The majority of standards are available for purchase, through licensing or through SDO membership. 
HL7 recently announced that it intended to make a majority of its standards available for free19, but 
since most SDO revenue comes from standards sales or membership, new business models may be 
needed before other SDOs will follow suit.
Interoperability
Interoperability broadly refers to the ability for entities within a system to interact, while standards 
define the entities and their interactions. Defining interoperability is important because it “shapes the 
scope of the problem and thus the response in terms of policy, resources, and priorities.”20 The defini-
tion adopted by HIMSS provides a useful starting point:
 “Interoperability means the ability of health information systems to work together within and 
across organizational boundaries in order to advance the effective delivery of healthcare for 
individuals and communities.”21
In 2007, HL7 surveyed leading health informatics institutions globally to further define interoperability 
and identified three broad categories: technical, semantic, and process.22 To these three, Palfrey and 
Gasser propose a fourth layer of “institutional interoperability” to capture interactions between societal 
systems.23 For the purposes of this report, we refer to the following four interoperability layers:
1)  technical Interoperability – the physical conveyance of a payload or the transmission and 
reception of information at the level of hardware
2)  Semantic Interoperability – the ability of information shared by systems to be understood
18 The State of Standards and Interoperability for mHealth among Low- and Middle-Income Countries
3)  Process Interoperability – the communication of information in a time-, event-, and sequence-
oriented manner to optimize and coordinate the work processes of a care team
4)  Institutional Interoperability – the structured interaction of societal systems, involving organi-
zational models, policy and governance, trade agreements, and systems of law
While the eHealth community has prioritized technical and semantic interoperability for some time, 
process interoperability was not formally adopted as a standardized approach by SDOs until 2007. 
Institutional interoperability is often beyond the scope of purely eHealth-oriented interoperability 
discussions, but is included here, as many gaps and recommendations pertain to agreements between 
the global, regional, sub-regional, national, or sub-national institutions that shape the eHealth 
ecosystem.
The Integrating the Healthcare Enterprises initiative (IHE) proposes that Security be included as 
a distinct interoperability layer (separate from institutional or legal), given its critical importance in 
protecting and enabling interactions.24 While security is not broken out into a separate layer in this 
report, the need for an integrated security framework for mHealth, telehealth, and eHealth to enable 
interoperability is echoed throughout the literature and in stakeholder interviews. 
eHealth architecture
mHealth at scale must rely heavily on other health information systems, such as electronic health 
record systems, electronic facility registries or health management information systems. As such, 
mHealth must be considered within the context of the broader eHealth architecture. The approach 
taken in this report is that mHealth is the subset of eHealth that includes mobile phones, other mobile 
devices, and services delivered via telecommunications networks, the software, platforms, devices, and 
infrastructure that are used by the mobile device to support health system activities, and all supporting 
eHealth systems and standards. eHealth is defined more broadly as the application of information and 
communications technologies to health service delivery and supporting health system functions.
ISO TC 215 published the Technical Report (TR) 14639 “Part 1: Capacity-based eHealth architecture 
roadmap: Overview of national eHealth initiatives” in August 2012.25 This important document has been 
widely used by the Public Health Task Force of ISO as it presents case studies of the national eHealth 
architectures implemented by Australia, Brazil, Canada, India, and Kenya, and describes a national 
eHealth architecture framework, nicknamed the “Parthenon” (see Figure 5). The Parthenon was derived 
from an original graphic developed by Dr. Richard Gakuba, National eHealth Coordinator for Rwanda, as 
part of the Rwanda National eHealth Architecture initiative. The document recognizes that international 
standards typically describe systems at a high level of maturity and advocates for the development of 
a roadmap to guide countries in moving from a low to medium to high level of maturity. ISO TC 215 is 
expected to publish “Part 2: Architectural components and maturity model” in early 2013. Concurrent 
national eHealth architecture efforts in Brazil, Rwanda, and South Africa utilized similar frameworks as 
the one presented here. It is a key recommendation of this report that the framework presented in 
ISO tr 14639-1 be adopted by the international community to structure dialogue, investments, and 
development of mobile and electronic health components. Note that as an ISO standard, this report 
is available for purchase, although ISO TC 215 has submitted a request to the ISO central secretariat to 
make this standard available free of charge.
    mHealth Alliance  March 2013 19
Informed health policy 
Improved access to care
evidence-based practice
Informed health service planning
efficiency, productivity, cost-effectiveness
Improved quality of care — to individuals & populations
HeaLtH PrOCeSS DOMaIn COMPOnentS
Patient Path – supporting continuity of care
GOVernanCe & 
natIOnaL OWnerSHIP
Executive 
sponsorship
National leadership 
of eHealth program
eHealth standards 
adoption & 
implementation
HS planning, monitoring & evaluation
FOUnDatIOn – eHeaLtH InFOStrUCtUre
Development of 
EHR & health Identification Data interchange 
Clinical terminology eHealth capability 
information registries interoperability 
& classifications & capacity
repositories & directories & accessibility
Consent/access Census, population 
Privacy, security 
control & workflow information & 
& safety regime
management data warehouse eHealth financing 
& performance 
management
FOUnDatIOn – ICt InFraStrUCtUre
Local access Electronic ICT processing ICT professional 
to ICT equipment communications and storage & technical 
and facilities infrastructure services support eHealth planning  
& architecture  
maintenance
Standards, methods, guidelines, frameworks
Figure 5. National eHealth Architecture from ISO Technical Report 14639-1 – Capacity-based  
eHealth architecture roadmap – Part 1: Overview of national eHealth initiatives.
20 The State of Standards and Interoperability for mHealth among Low- and Middle-Income Countries
Community-based services
Primary care services
Hospital/institutional services
Public health & disease surveillance
Emergency response
Diagnostic services
Pharmacy services
Healthcare supply chain
Human resources in health
Health finance and insurance
Vital records collection & management
Environmental monitoring
Knowledge management & eLearning
Literature Review
Overview
the following literature review was performed to assess how mHealth 
standards and interoperability have been addressed in academic and gray 
literature, and to identify the gaps. 
The academic community plays an important role in evaluating the benefits of employing mobile and 
electronic health systems to facilitate the delivery of health services, and there is a growing body 
of evidence to support their use.26 Yet, evaluations of the comparative value of adopting specific 
health informatics standards in support of mHealth programs were uncommon. This is not unexpected, 
however, as there are very few scaled-up, interoperable implementations to be evaluated at the time 
of publication.
While there has been an upsurge of scientific articles in the past decade on mHealth standards and 
interoperability, the majority were focused on high-income settings and narrowly on telemedicine or 
home telehealth. Peer-reviewed articles that looked at LMIC settings were generally descriptive in 
nature, often advocating for global alignment around eHealth standards, interoperability, or capacity 
issues.62 However, a scan of gray literature uncovered numerous LMIC-focused documents describing 
international, national, or sub-national efforts to support local actors in LMICs to tackle standards and 
interoperability challenges.
The review indicates that the integration of mHealth into the eHealth ecosystem is an inadequately 
defined problem space. The issue is exacerbated by the realities of working in developing health 
systems, which often includes limited resources, poor infrastructure, and the absence of an existing 
eHealth infrastructure with which to integrate.
analysis of Literature and Systematic reviews
Three literature reviews addressed specific sub-topics within mHealth standards and interoperability: 
(1) health informatics for development; (2) telehealth security standards; and (3) home telehealth 
information system architecture. 
Marcelo, 2012 – Health Informatics for Development
A literature review in 2012 by A. Marcelo, A. Adejumo, and D. Luna (hereafter Marcelo) examined efforts 
to build health informatics capacity within low- and middle-income countries and proposed a roadmap 
to “fast track” uptake of health informatics for development.27 The review identified 77 articles that fit 
the search criteria of “health informatics” and “development”, of which only 9 focused on African or 
Asian countries. 
    mHealth Alliance  March 2013 21
The authors described the state of health informatics capacity in three regions:
•  Health informatics in Latin america is generally led by the private sector, rather than ministries of 
health, leading to poor coordination between health informatics stakeholders and proliferation of 
proprietary systems. Argentina, Brazil, and Uruguay have medical informatics training initiatives, 
and Ministries of Health from Brazil and Chile have formally engaged in standards development 
and adoption, but the rest of the region has progressed more slowly.
•  africa has experienced an increase in health informatics activity in recent years due to increased 
interest in ICT projects, but implementations are fragmented, small, and generally led by the 
donor community rather than local stakeholders. Poor infrastructure, including unreliable elec-
tric power, is a primary obstacle. Africa is among the fastest growing mobile phone markets in 
the world.
•  Despite presence of local expertise, governments in asia have been slow to adopt recommended 
health informatics standards. Geography, diversity of languages, and limited investments into 
health informatics all contribute to slow adoption and the lack of regional efforts.
Marcelo described the cyclical nature of how poor infrastructure limits the growth of local capacity, 
which in turn limits infrastructure development. Use of proprietary software systems, lack of national 
privacy frameworks, and lack of standards adoption were identified as key obstacles to the develop-
ment of local health informatics ecosystems.
Marcelo proposes a three-pronged strategy to fast track the development of local health informatics 
capacity: establishing partnerships, adopting standards, and leveraging mobile health. Partnering with 
established global health informatics institutions (e.g., a collaboration agreement between a local and 
foreign university) will accelerate the rate of knowledge transfer to low- and middle-income coun-
tries. Pairing training with implementations will ensure that informatics practices are contextualized 
and incentivize involvement for both parties. One notable example is the Pan-Asian Collaboration for 
Evidence-based eHealth Adoption and Application (PANaCeA) formed by the International Development 
Research Centre of Canada (IDRC) and Aga Khan University. PANaCeA has funded eight projects since 
February 2007 to generate evidence for the use of eHealth within the Asian context.
The second recommendation made by Marcelo is to adopt standards for interoperability during the 
formative period of the ICT infrastructure and health informatics ecosystem. Mature standards did 
not exist when high-income economies began developing eHealth systems, which has contributed 
to fragmented systems and poor interoperability. LMICs have the opportunity to avoid this by proac-
tively defining their unique functional requirements and developing enterprise architectures to guide 
ecosystem development. The exchange of indicator definitions and data for aggregating reporting, 
possibly using the SDMX-HD standard developed by the WHO, and standardized geographic codes 
are emerging standards categories that have the potential to impact developing world health systems.
The final recommendation made by Marcelo is to leverage mobile phones for health. The pervasiveness 
and well-understood interfaces of mobile phones provides new opportunities for decentralized data 
collection and reporting. 
22 The State of Standards and Interoperability for mHealth among Low- and Middle-Income Countries
Garg and Brewer, 2012 – Telemedicine Security Standards
Garg and Brewer, 201228, in February 2011, performed a systematic review of 58 articles raising serious 
concerns around security and privacy standards utilization within telemedicine. Articles represented 
11 high-income and 2 middle-income countries. Despite the availability of mature privacy standards, 
including the Health Information Portability and Accountability Act (HIPAA) in the United States and HL7 
that is widely used in Europe, not a single article specifically tested security. 61% of articles proposed 
solutions for specific security issues, but few exploited a comprehensive security framework, which 
must address privacy, data integrity, authentication, authorization, and reliability. A limited number of 
articles provided details of security protocols implemented, and several that did so used protocols that 
were outdated or that had known flaws.
Garg and Brewer note that telemedicine presents some security requirements 
that are not common to other forms of health information technology, in 
particular the reliability, availability, and usability of systems. These 
issues must be addressed before telemedicine can be consis-
tently used in lieu of in-person clinical encounters. Telemedicine 
researchers are encouraged to collaborate closely with security 
experts to address numerous gaps in telemedicine security.
Ludwig – Home Telehealth Information Systems Architecture
Standards organizations have not yet endorsed a reference 
architecture for home telehealth information systems. Ludwig et 
al (hereafter “Ludwig”)29 reviewed 22 articles to develop a nomen-
clature for the information and communications technologies that 
support home telehealth services as a preliminary step in development 
of a reference architecture. Architectures to support telehealth informa-
tion systems differ from traditional architectures in two important ways:
• Home telehealth services are sensor-enhanced. This means that devices in the 
patient’s home or those worn by the patient are automatically generating data and integrating 
that data into a health information system.
• Home telehealth services are trans-institutional, which means that two or more distinct legal 
entities are involved in managing a patient’s care, raising questions about ownership, security, 
duplicative data stores, and assignment of responsibility.
Ludwig presents a nomenclature broken into six categories: users, services, operating organizations, 
information flow, geographical reach, and architectural paradigm. While this nomenclature targeted 
home-telehealth within high-income countries, the nomenclature may be expanded to incorporate 
other aspects of mHealth or provide a template for developing a similar nomenclature within specific 
mHealth subsets.
    mHealth Alliance  March 2013 23
Photo credit: MAMA (Mobile Alliance for Maternal Action)
Supplementary articles review
In total, 2,154 published articles from peer-reviewed sources matched the above search criteria, 
although the majority of articles were duplicative or fell within the exclusion criteria. After screening, 
46 published articles met the search criteria.
It is important to note that there were a large number of articles covering the topics of eHealth stan-
dards and interoperability without explicit mention of mobile health or a variation of the term. A search 
on PubMed for eHealth related terms with a standards or interoperability term resulted in well over 
5,000 articles prior to screening. Many standards previously used exclusively in the context of eHealth 
are also applicable within mHealth (e.g., standardized vocabularies, security protocols, etc.), while others 
require adaptation to support different form factors or use cases. Given the overlap between eHealth 
and mHealth, it is probable that many articles that are pertinent to the topic of mHealth standards and 
interoperability were not identified due to this difference in classification.
The goal of the review was to explore how mHealth standards and interoperability were being addressed 
in scientific literature. The breakdown below provides a snapshot:
•  3 articles were literature reviews looking at (1) health informatics for development (2) telemedicine 
security standards and (3) home telehealth information system architecture. No crosscutting litera-
ture reviews were found that examined mHealth standards and interoperability more broadly.
•  24% of published articles targeted low- and/or middle-income countries or were global in scope, 
63% targeted high-income countries, and 15% addressed technical standards with no specific 
country target. LMICs referred to specifically included Philippines, Uganda, and Uruguay (note 
that articles may fall in more than one category). For an LMIC example, Margolis et al present a 
countrywide EHR implementation with prominent use of health informatics standards, including 
terminology services and telemedicine applications.30
•  9% proposed a new standard or assessed the relevancy of a standard based on a specific use case.31
•  15% proposed or described an implementation of one or more standards for a specific use 
case. 32,33,34,35 For example, Constantinescu et al demonstrated the use of standards-based 
protocols to deliver multimedia-rich content to mobile handsets from EHR, diagnostic imaging 
repositories, and other systems.36
•  30% of articles focused on mHealth security or privacy. DD Luxton et al also identifies the lack 
of security standards as a key obstacle to supporting “ubiquitous use of mobile health technolo-
gies.” 37 P. Pharow et al advocated for development of a standards-based interoperable security 
infrastructure.38 Koster et al “[introduced] end-to-end security requirements and [presented] a 
design for consent management in the context of the Continua Health Alliance architecture.”39 
Adoption of standards supporting identity management within eHealth and telemedicine are far 
behind the maturity of the standards.40
•  2 articles specifically recommended that the health informatics community revise the definition 
of interoperability to better address an overarching security framework in the context of inter-
connected systems. 24,41 
24 The State of Standards and Interoperability for mHealth among Low- and Middle-Income Countries
•  9 articles (20%) made explicit mention of HL7 standards33,34,35,42,43,, 3 (7%) of IHE profiles42, 
4 (9%) of DICOM42,44, and 6 (13%) of ISO/IEEE 11073 family of standards for medical device 
interoperability45,46,47,48.
• 3 articles proposed chronic disease, in particular diabetes, as the use case for interoperability 
within a heterogeneous environment of patient or home-based health devices. 35,49,50
•  6 articles focused on development of home telehealth networks capable of integrating informa-
tion from heterogeneous sources, including personal health devices and sensors.51,52,53
•  2 articles did the challenging work of proposing how a group of related standards can be used in 
conjunction to achieve interoperability within a heterogeneous environment of health systems 
and devices. Mense et al proposed development of a framework for leveraging international 
standards ISO/IEEE 11073, HL7, IHE, CEN 13606 to integrate data from a mixed environment of 
proprietary devices.54
•  Several examples of standards-based software components and platforms specifically address 
the issue of intelligently integrating information from multiple personal health devices, including 
mobile phones.55,56,57 Middleware components were the most common integration architecture 
proposed. While these tools employ standards, many of the interfacing components and related 
processes remain proprietary. Special care is needed to handle variance in the accuracy, bias, 
and availability of data from these sources.
•  Blobel presented an architectural framework to support a lifelong patient record that is scalable, 
flexible, portable, secure, and integrates data from heterogeneous sources. The architecture 
must follow the ISO reference model for open distributing processing (ISO RM-ODP). Examples 
include Australian GEHR, openEHR initiative, CEN ENV 13606 “Electronic Health Record communi-
cation”, and HL7 version 3 (specifically HL7 v3 Reference Implementation Model, HL7 Development 
Framework, and HL7 Clinical Document Architecture). 
•  While no articles evaluated the patient or health system impact of the use of standards or 
systems integration, Mechael et al described the design of an impact evaluation of mHealth 
within the existing eHealth architecture already in use by the Millennium Villages Project.58
As expected, the number of relevant articles increased in recent years, with 81% of the articles being 
published after 2007 (Figure 3).
Count of Publications by Year
12
10
8
6
4
2
0
 2002 2003 2004 2005 2006 2007 2008 2009 2010 2011 2012
Figure 3. Number of publications included in the literature review by year.
    mHealth Alliance  March 2013 25
The Telemedicine Alliance, a consortium comprised of the ESA, WHO, and ITU formed in 2002, identified 
interoperability as the “main showstopper” in eHealth implementation.59 Indeed, the preponderance of 
articles reviewed stated the need for mHealth standards and interoperability in order for mHealth proj-
ects to lead to improved health system performance at scale. Specific concerns included:
•  Lack of standards compliance or awareness
•  Lack of technical compatibility or interoperability between systems60,61
•  Lack of mechanisms for collaborative investments into eHealth62
•  Inadequate local health informatics expertise27
•  Widespread use of proprietary systems and databases
•  Reference architectures and ontologies lack new mHealth use cases63
• Increase in the volume and quality of data as devices used by frontline workers (FLWs) and 
patients are integrated into health information systems
M. Ackerman et al also identified interoperability of data among telehealth systems and integration with 
other electronic systems, such as EHR, as key obstacles to effective use and analysis of telehealth, and 
a potential source of dissatisfaction among patients. 64 The article makes several recommendations to 
the US National Institutes of Health that may be translatable to governmental institutions in resource-
constrained settings:
•  Conduct multi-stakeholder meetings with 
focused deliverables and provide funding oppor-
tunities for convening
•  Fund innovative research to develop, 
assess, and support telehealth-related 
tools and technologies, with a focus on 
translational platforms
•  Fund implementation research 
to improve delivery, use, and adop-
tion of telehealth technologies
•  Create a central information 
resource compiling free telehealth 
software and resources
26 The State of Standards and Interoperability for mHealth among Low- and Middle-Income Countries
Photo credit: United Nations, Eric Kanalstein
Key Informant Interviews
Key informants were interviewed to inform the gaps analysis and to gauge 
how each stakeholder group uniquely perceives and engages with mHealth 
standards and interoperability.
results
1. Perceptions of the past and future of interoperability efforts
Interoperability efforts are not new and opinions on the effectiveness of past efforts were mixed. A 
common sentiment was that interoperability has turned out to be far more challenging than expected. 
Some key informants believed that in the past, there was not a strong enough central force to achieve 
the necessary coordination across a variety of stakeholders. Several cited that the lack of a common 
definition for interoperability and the lack of common measures for success for interoperability contrib-
uted to an overall perception that interoperability efforts were ineffectual. Some informants pointed 
to the fact that there are few examples of major eHealth and mHealth projects that are interoperable. 
There was concern that this may lead to lower participation and reduced confidence in the eventual 
success of future high-level efforts.
There was an alternative view that prior interoperability efforts were successful, just not in the way that 
was expected. As one informant said, 
 When the conversation first started, it was trying to explain what interoperability was and 
“what a standard is and why these are important…but now it is almost universally accepted that interoperability is needed. You have governments writing this into their strategies.
The sentiment was that the conversations of the last decade had, in a way, set the stage for t”oday’s 
major interoperability efforts, such as those seen in the Rwanda Health Enterprise Architecture initia-
tive and the MoTech Suite. 
Interoperability was on the agenda of stakeholders of all types, from governments and standards 
developers, to vendors and donors. The most common need for interoperability was that tools could 
share critical health information. For most stakeholders, the drivers behind this were: the difficulty 
interfacing systems of different types, from different vendors, or collected from different health worker 
types; aggregating individual patient data for district- or national-level reporting; and comparing data 
from several similar projects by different implementers funded by different donors. Donors and imple-
menters were also interested in the ability to repurpose software components developed in one setting 
in another context. 
    mHealth Alliance  March 2013 27
Among vendors, the idea that systems should interoperate has resistance from some entities who 
have legitimate competitive or cost-effectiveness interests. In some cases, market pressures actually 
reward non-standards-based efforts for differentiating themselves. Innovation grants may inadver-
tently encourage new developments or incompatible technologies, and they rarely carry the budgets 
necessary to support standards compliance. In a competitive market, vendors can achieve lock-in by 
intentionally not adopting standards.
As one key informant noted, “interoperability is a reflection of social and institutional relationships,” 
yet many initiatives in the space have focused solely on the technological aspects. Another informant 
commented, “There is no one who has any degree of interoperability accidentally.”
Lack of clarity of the necessary steps and the costs of achieving interoperability were commons themes. 
2. Perceptions of health informatics standards
 Standards are a bit like doing plumbing – technically challenging, critical to get right, no 
“one wants to do it.While all key informants agreed that standards play a valuable normative role, there was a wide” range 
of opinions of the relevance and levels of knowledge of health informatics standards. An issue cited by 
many informants was the perception of the lack of relevance of standards to pilots and to LMIC projects. 
 There is this idea that the use cases are so different that existing standards are not rele-
“vant, at least not without major adaptation.The fact that LMIC countries have little representation among SDOs helped to reinforce the i”dea of 
“developing country exceptionalism.” Other informants suggested that LMIC and HIC environments are 
more similar than they are different.
 It’s suggesting that these environments are so fundamentally different that there’s never 
“going to be convergence. If you look at other domains, financial markets, how they build and run airports and shipping…that doesn’t hold at all.
Most informants agreed that increased engagement of LMICs among SDOs is needed, but that do”es not 
necessarily equate to developing new standards for LMIC-specific approaches to problems that have 
already been solved for HICs. An interviewee stated, “LMICs no longer start with a blank sheet of paper; 
they start instead with guidance.”
Informants proposed two potential solutions to this issue: one, the development of implementation 
guides to assist implementers in employing specific international standards; and, two, creating a 
compendium of standards and their use cases to help users understand which standards are relevant 
to meeting particular requirements. Capacity building and training on standards was recommended for 
ministries of health, implementers, and donors, in particular, to encourage prioritization of standards-
based approaches, to increase awareness of what standards exist, and to improve stakeholders’ ability 
to effectively adopt.
28 The State of Standards and Interoperability for mHealth among Low- and Middle-Income Countries
Limited access by LMICs to published health informatics standards was a common theme, in part because 
the majority of standards are only available for purchase and, more importantly, the cost of adoption is 
high. Interestingly, most informants were not aware of the price of standards (which can be as little as 
100USD, although many are much more expensive). Many key informants called for “open standards” 
and stated the need for global leaders to step up and advocate for standards to be made available for 
free. As one informant stated, “Openness is not historically a part of the international standards devel-
opment process,” and only recently have major SDOs taken this issue on. One informant recommended 
an interesting alternative that may bypass the issue – development of open-source software compo-
nents that are based on closed international standards, but made available as public good.
Key informants recognized the difficulty of balancing between pragmatism and standards-compliance. 
Ideas that are common in mHealth, such as pilots, prototyping, minimum viable products, and quick 
iteration of software, were all seen as being in competition with standards-based approaches, which 
require careful architecting and design. Others suggested that going through the process of developing 
or implementing a homegrown solution helps people understand the need and value of standards-
based solutions. One technology and standards developer acknowledged that it often does not make 
sense to adopt complex representations described by international standards first. While there are 
“lightweight” versions of certain standards that exist just for this purpose (e.g., Green CDA), informants 
agreed that more lightweight versions are essential if standards are to become widespread for mHealth 
and among LMICs.
One key informant suggested that the split between pragmatism and standards-compliance was a false 
dichotomy, and that you should always “optimize for pragmatism.” In other words, the realities of a 
specific business need and context must always be accommodated, while still meeting an acceptable 
level of compliance with international standards. Key informants noted the lack of appropriate forums 
to discuss balance points with the broader community.
While there was the expectation that some new standards are needed and that some existing stan-
dards will need to be adapted to support mHealth within LMICs, key informants stated that an eHealth 
reference architecture that adequately addressed mobile clients is the critical first step since it serves 
as a framework for future standards work. Stakeholders from SDOs made it clear that until a mHealth 
reference architecture is developed, it will not be clear what the gaps are in health informatics stan-
dards in order to enable mHealth to interoperate with other health information systems. From the HL7 
standpoint, this means identifying the linkages between the mHealth architecture and the existing 
Electronic Health Record, Personal Health Record, and Public Health profiles.
3. mHealth relative to eHealth
There was unanimous agreement that the global community should not address mHealth independently 
from eHealth. Two notable quotes:
• “There is no mHealth without eHealth.”
• “We do not make a distinction between m and e in terms of health data standards.”
    mHealth Alliance  March 2013 29
Yet, there was lack of clarity about the actual standards and interoperability issues that are particular 
to mHealth. In other words, steps should be taken to determine how to approach the broader eHealth 
ecosystem through the lens of mHealth. This was regarded as a “critical” or “central” issue by several 
informants.
Informants from SDOs concurred that they had yet to agree on what new standards development or adap-
tation was needed to accommodate requirements for mHealth usage worldwide, but they also did not 
necessarily see this as a unique problem. As one SDO informant stated, each actor throughout the health 
system will have their own definition of what mHealth is, and it may not be the same from country to 
country. Elucidating ambiguities and developing consensus on the definition of mHealth from each partic-
ular stakeholder’s point of view is part of the process of developing a mHealth reference architecture.
4. The pivotal role of donors
Donors were seen as being key drivers of eHealth interoperability in the future, but also as having 
contributed to the existing fragmented eHealth environment. One key informant put it very succinctly:
“ If there is always funding for a silo, then a silo will always be built.Some interviewees placed much of the burden for a shift towards eHea”lth interoperability on donors 
because of their ability to influence market dynamics and incentives in favor of platforms, vendors, 
governments, and implementers that agree to employ standards and meet specified interoperability 
requirements. One mechanism proposed was to include language in requests for proposals (RFPs) 
requiring demonstrated compliance with interoperability requirements or adequate justification for 
non-compliance.
While this sounds promising, others were skeptical, noting that interoperability is only funded when it is 
needed to support a specific health problem, meaning that interoperability is not often funded directly. 
Two interviewees pointed to the fact that no donor has funded the development of a robust inter-
face between mobile phones used by community health workers and commonly used electronic health 
record systems, despite the fact that it was defined as an important obstacle several years ago. Some 
informants noted that donors do not often have sufficient expertise in standards and interoperability 
to accept much risk in their investments into the space. As one donor said:
 We’re not very sophisticated on [interoperability]. We have no in-house competency in 
“interoperability and do not have a clear position on it…We expect those that we fund to be able to make decisions about interoperability.
The lack of coordination and alignment between donors was a common topic. An informant brou”ght up 
the common example of two projects addressing the same health priority within the same ministry of 
health being entirely incompatible because separate donors funded them. A donor acknowledged that 
there are no accepted modalities to jointly fund interoperability efforts at the ministry level across 
multiple independent donor projects. Many informants recognized the need for a global forum for 
donors to achieve alignment amongst themselves and with governments, SDOs, and implementers. 
30 The State of Standards and Interoperability for mHealth among Low- and Middle-Income Countries
Three informants proposed independent certification of mHealth and eHealth software as a possible 
mechanism that donors could use to ensure their investments met objective measures for stan-
dards and interoperability compliance. In addition, funding of “camps” or “product suites” that can be 
marketed as integrated packages was suggested as a pragmatic way forward. This would be similar to 
the lines of products from Apple or Microsoft, which have very little interoperability with each other, but 
are highly integrated internally.
5. Role of other stakeholders in health informatics standards uptake
Each stakeholder has different priorities, incentives, and capacity with respect to standards and 
interoperability. 
Governments were considered to be the primary target for standards adoption efforts, as they are the 
primary organizational beneficiaries of interoperable systems and they ultimately have the potential 
to serve as gatekeepers for eHealth deployments within their health systems. Interviewees acknowl-
edged that there are many obstacles to LMICs effectively adopting standards and interoperability best 
practices. Specific obstacles included: a general dearth of experience and expertise with standards; 
lack of prioritization and understanding of the need for standards; limited resources for standards 
activities; under-empowered national standards bodies (if they exist at all); and little participation in 
the international standards process. One government representative said:
 I can’t overemphasize the need for governance, for eHealth strategy, standards, and 
“implementation monitoring (compliance). That has been our greatest thorn here…This is where ministers (not abstract ministries) must take leadership (or must actively delegate) or else any eHealth governance activity will fizzle out…
Several interviewees lauded the trend towards developing national eHealth strategies among” LMICs 
with appropriate mention of standards and interoperability, but noted that many countries are strug-
gling to operationalize these strategies due to the same issues listed above. While international efforts 
to increase uptake of standards among LMICs will be helpful, several indicated that there is no replace-
ment for national forums to make standards relevant to country efforts. Given the influence donors 
have on national health systems, donors must align their activities and RFPs with countries’ actual 
eHealth priorities.
The technology developers and vendors tended to be very familiar with important information tech-
nology standards, such as JSON, XML, or REST, but less familiar with health informatics standards, 
even in cases where those standards are built off the same technology (i.e., JSON, XML, and REST). The 
technology developers tend to be focused on a single platform, and, as one developer said, “standards 
are only considered relevant when interfacing with another information system,” which is typically the 
responsibility of the implementer or government, not the technology developer.
Several informants noted that many of the interoperability issues are technologically simple, but that 
there is no one directly funding it. Referring to designing an interface between mobiles and electronic 
medical records, one developer commented that if a donor required it in order to apply for a RFP, or if it 
were funded directly, “it could be ready in a month.” 
    mHealth Alliance  March 2013 31
Even if funding were available, the market incentives may encourage development of non-interoper-
able systems. One informant noted:
 As long as this is true that if I have more money and can go faster it will become a de facto 
“standard, then those seeking market share or product stacks will have a disincentive to adopt.The competitive advantage to building proprietary systems may never go away, but governm”ents, 
donors, and other payers have the ability to shift market dynamics in such a way that compliance is 
rewarded, for example, by facilitating access to a larger customer base. In some cases, this actually 
lowers risk for vendors—and implementers—by providing assurance of long-term market compatibility. 
Implementers most frequently cited real world mHealth interoperability struggles, as they often have 
the responsibility for making multiple systems work on the ground. Implementers have been quicker to 
adopt innovative mHealth solutions than governments, which means they have felt the growing pains 
of a nascent field. Implementers have also been among the first to adopt stan-
dards and to work towards interoperable systems. Implementers 
cited issues of insufficient capacity, lack of awareness of rele-
vant standards for interoperation, limited mechanisms 
to align technology approaches with government or 
other local implementers, and inability to divert 
limited grant funding towards development of 
generic software interfaces. 
academics and researchers noted that 
the lack of common terminology and 
interoperable systems was a key 
obstacle in comparing results across 
projects, thus limiting their ability 
to perform evaluations. The paucity 
of existing interoperable deploy-
ments has prevented the evaluation 
of the comparative effectiveness of 
adopting health informatics standards. 
Multinational organizations were most 
concerned with aggregation of health 
information from heterogeneous sources 
and challenges of coordinating a large 
community of diverse stakeholders.
32 The State of Standards and Interoperability for mHealth among Low- and Middle-Income Countries
Photo credit: Josh Nesbit
Discussion of Gaps  
and Opportunities
the gaps and opportunities with respect to the use of standards to achieve 
interoperable mHealth at scale can be categorized into five buckets: (1) Building 
capacity and increasing standards access; (2) Filling in standards gaps for 
LMICs; (3) LMIC engagement and mediation; (4) Promoting coordination and 
alignment; and (5) Strengthening mHealth and eHealth governance.
1. Building capacity and increasing standards access
Building up of health informatics capacity and ensuring access to international standards are critical 
components of an overarching strategy for the increased uptake of health informatics standards and 
interoperability best practices. Each stakeholder involved in mHealth has capacity needs, but the 
shortage is felt more acutely by LMIC governments and local implementers. Capacity can only be built 
through a mix of short- and long-term efforts. 
Establish formal health informatics training and education programs – The global eHealth community 
can support institutionalization of health informatics programs at universities and technical colleges 
within LMICs, and establish scholarships to degree-granting programs or certificate courses at foreign 
institutions. Formal training programs can be supplemented by online eHealth technical training courses 
around interoperability, standards, tools, implementation guides, case studies, etc. Education is a long-
term approach. In the short-term, a mechanism for providing access to international health informatics 
expertise could ameliorate the workforce shortage.
Inform local decision and policy makers of the implications of adopting (or not adopting) standards and 
interoperability best practices – While this constituency does not need technical standards training, 
better information is needed about the costs, best practices, and governance of mHealth and eHealth 
infrastructure. LMIC governments will need to prioritize national standardization and harmonization 
activities, in part by empowering and funding national standards bodies. Decision makers also need 
increased awareness of which standards can be employed for particular scenarios and guidance on 
how to select between multiple options and adapt for local needs. Implementation guides will be a key 
component of this, coupled with in-country workshops and regional events organized in collaboration 
with the WHO, SDOs, and other key stakeholders. The WHO is pursuing a global resolution on health 
information sharing and standards harmonization that will help guide policy makers in this process. 
Improve donors and implementers’ ability to strategically invest in an interoperable health system – 
Similar to local policy makers, donors, implementers and other stakeholders are also in need of additional 
capacity in order to make more strategic investment decisions and to select appropriate standards and 
platforms. Many of the same strategies can be used with this group.
    mHealth Alliance  March 2013 33
Photo credit: Josh Nesbit
Empower local professionals and professional organizations – Professional organizations, such as IMIA, 
play an important role in building and retaining local expertise. Road shows hosted in LMICs organized 
in conjunction with a consortium of SDOs and professional organizations may be an important avenue 
for linking to local industry.
Address barriers to standards access – There is inadequate access among all stakeholders to infor-
mation with respect to selection, adoption, deployment, and maintenance of standards. Part of this 
issue can be solved by encouraging governments to provide actors within each of their countries with 
national requirements, norms, and guidance for design and implementation of eHealth systems. Donors 
should also provide similar guidance to their grantees. But before this guidance can be provided, certain 
information gaps need to be filled. 
A global, curated compendium of health informatics standards and implementation guides relevant 
to LMICs would streamline access to additional information about standards. Additional implemen-
tation guides tailored to LMIC use cases would provide clarity around the use of standards within 
new contexts.
Even with better information, certain standards are out of reach to certain stakeholders due to their 
cost. The global community should advocate for other SDOs to follow HL7’s lead in open sourcing 
their intellectual property and collaboratively explore the development of business models to support 
ongoing SDO activities. Donors can also fund the development of open source software components of 
specific standards and the tooling to facilitate their deployment. These components could be contrib-
uted to the mHealth commons at no expense.
2. Filling in standards gaps for adoption among LMICs
Most existing health informatics standards can be repurposed without alteration in LMIC contexts, 
although for some adaptation will be necessary. In addition, a limited number of new standards may 
be needed to support unique LMIC requirements. There are three primary drivers of adaptation and 
possible development of standards:
1)  Limited bandwidth and infrastructure leading to power fluctuations and intermittent cellular 
connectivity may require lighter-weight and more reliable transmission protocols.
2)  The use of insecure and technically limited messaging interfaces, especially SMS and USSD, to 
communicate with patients, health workers, or information systems may require new methods for 
securing, verifying, and efficiently transmitting data and protecting patient privacy.
3)  The shift to non-clinical and community-based workers has revealed gaps in standardized termi-
nology to represent community-based care, especially in rural settings, and presents unique 
challenges in terms of connecting systems to enable continuity of care.
34 The State of Standards and Interoperability for mHealth among Low- and Middle-Income Countries
As noted in the interviews, standards adaptation and development must be guided by a mHealth refer-
ence architecture developed by a consensus process among SDOs. The reference architecture will 
describe the functional components of a mHealth ecosystem that links into existing functional models, 
such as the Electronic Health Record profile, and will comprehensively represent relevant use cases and 
scenarios. This work is already underway among newly created mHealth Working Groups within several 
SDOs, but there are areas where contributions from the global community are needed. Descriptions of 
existing national eHealth architectures, compilation of existing mHealth projects and their business 
requirements and use cases, and a more comprehensive understanding of the use of existing stan-
dards and their gaps will help inform the development of an overarching mHealth functional model. The 
following snapshot represents several use cases unique to projects in LMICs that merit integration into 
such an architecture:
•  Use of short messaging service (SMS) for automated alerts, querying of patient information, 
patient registration, and other basic health services
• Use of SMS and Interactive Voice Response (IVR) to contact clients regarding appointment and 
medication reminders and lab results
• Use of SMS printers or other cellular connected devices to facilitate ancillary health system 
services
• Use of voice calls and SMS to send information for supply chain and inventory management
• Phone-based decision support protocol that guides an auxiliary nurse midwife through provision 
of antenatal care in a pregnant woman’s home
ISO TR 14639 Capacity-based eHealth Roadmap provides an important reference point for national 
health information systems by documenting the national health information system architectures 
employed in five different countries. It also contains a list of standards most relevant to such systems. 
Part 2 of this standard, expected in early 2013, will describe a maturity model for use of standards at 
low, middle, and high levels of maturity.
The standards development community is engaged in the ongoing evolution and development of stan-
dards for vocabulary, content exchange, transport, privacy, and security with respect to eHealth. It will 
also be necessary to add new terminology for requirements that are unique to the developing world, in 
particular to accommodate the significant shift towards nonclinical and community-based workers. For 
example, there is currently no standardized way to capture the number of nights that the members of 
a family slept under a treated bed net in a given period of time.
While not a technical specification, the standards community also develops implementation guides, 
which describe the application of one or more standards to a use case and set of business requirements 
that is in agreement the relevant reference architectures. An example of this is the IHE Pharmacy 
Profile. These guides are a critical part of ensuring that implementers employ the right standards and 
that governments ensure they are meeting service delivery requirements. The global health community 
should fund and coordinate with SDOs the development of implementation guides applicable to the 
implementation and integration of mHealth among LMICs.
    mHealth Alliance  March 2013 35
3. LMIC engagement and mediation
The end goal with respect to the standardization gap is for LMICs to establish national health stan-
dards bodies and to become active participants in the international standards development process. 
Their current lack of representation among SDOs means that LMICs do not have the opportunity to 
contribute their requirements to standards as they are developed and that they do not have the benefit 
of learning from people around the world struggling with similar health system challenges. A multi-
faceted approach is needed to ensure that standards are applicable to LMICs and that LMICs begin 
the long process of establishing national bodies in order to be represented in the international 
standards process:
•  The WHO and other multi-national institutions, donors, and implementers have significant expe-
rience working in LMICs and can collate and represent LMIC requirements to SDOs. The global 
community can also support the attendance of LMIC representatives to SDO meetings and tech-
nical working groups.
• Regional eHealth standardization collaboratives, established by local governments in partner-
ship with academic institutions, private sector, SDOs, and other international organizations, can 
serve as a mechanism for joint regional learning, engagement with the international standards 
community, and can act as a valuable step on the way towards forming national standards bodies.
4. Promoting coordination and alignment
Lack of alignment and the need for regularly structured opportunities to coordinate efforts were 
common themes during interviews and in the literature. Some mechanisms for coordination and align-
ment already exist, such as the Joint Initiative Council for harmonization of standards activities among 
SDOs. Additional mechanisms are needed to broker the social and institutional relationships needed for 
interoperability among and between other stakeholder types. 
In particular, there is a great need to align donor investments with eHealth standards endorsed by 
multi-national organizations and SDOs, as well as with the national eHealth strategies of the countries 
within which they are funding implementations. Donors are also in need of a mechanism to facilitate 
coordination of strategies and collaboration on interoperable health reporting systems, and to leverage 
investments into common eHealth and mHealth platforms. Empowering or establishing regional stan-
dards collaboratives, as described above, or other mechanisms are needed for LMIC stakeholders to 
engage with SDOs, to convey unique requirements, and to increase participation in standards develop-
ment activities.
Given the influential role that donors play in shaping local eHealth deployments, they represent an 
important conduit through which governments and implementers can be encouraged and incentivized 
to adopt platforms and practices that comply with a minimum set of interoperability requirements. The 
WHO is currently developing Donor Alignment Principles, which are a set of high-level principles to 
36 The State of Standards and Interoperability for mHealth among Low- and Middle-Income Countries
provide guidance for eHealth harmonization and standardization. Taking that effort one step further, 
donors could quickly endorse use of standards by adopting standards, interoperability and data access 
requirements in their grant requirements. Independent certification, e.g., mHealth Interoperability 
Certification, would provide an objective measure of standards compliance and can instill market 
confidence in a platform. Different levels of certification may be appropriate to support, for example, a 
system that exposes its data via standard APIs but does not comply with the full reference architecture. 
Donors could require or favor certification in RFPs and governments could require or favor certification 
in local implementations to incentivize adoption by vendors and implementers. Certification require-
ments would also serve as a guide for future platform development and interoperability efforts.
Certain high-profile events and awards may also encourage the technical community to adopt stan-
dards and interoperability best practices. For example, the “Best of mHealth Interop Award”65 could be 
given in conjunction with periodic “Hackers Workshops” or “Connect-athons”, such as the HIMSS IHE 
Connect-a-thon. These can be tied on to other major events, such as the mHealth Summit. Competitions 
could be held to compete for micro-grants to build interfaces for key integration points identified by a 
set of global health partners.
5. Strengthening mHealth and eHealth governance
Even though national eHealth strategies themselves are often strong, operationalization and gover-
nance of the policies have proven challenging. As mobile health systems move towards scale, existing 
guidelines and strategies will need to be revised to reflect new demands across all categories of gover-
nance. The framework in ISO TR 14639 Capacity-based eHealth Roadmap identified six categories 
of eHealth governance: (1) Executive sponsorship; (2) National leadership of eHealth program; (3) 
eHealth standards adoption and implementation; (4) Development of eHealth capability and capacity 
(5) eHealth financing and performance management; and (6) eHealth planning and architecture mainte-
nance. Regulations regarding standards adoption and interoperability of mHealth and eHealth systems 
will play a key role in shifting market dynamics to favor interoperability. Such regulations should be 
developed carefully to ensure that they do not reduce innovation, but rather shift innovation towards 
increasing continuity of care for patients. National interoperability efforts will be strengthened if 
coupled with shared facilities for compliancy testing and technical assistance to adopt and adhere to 
standards and interoperability guidelines.
An international agreement with key stakeholders could provision the development of governance 
guidelines and support operationalization of eHealth Strategies across the six categories of ISO TR 
14639, while building off the recommendations of the WHO-ITU National eHealth Strategy Toolkit. 
Workshops and networks between candidate LMIC organizations and governments to facilitate organi-
zational interoperability and experience sharing could support operationalization and capacity building. 
    mHealth Alliance  March 2013 37
Conclusion
Improving adoption of health informatics standards in support of interoperable mHealth tools at scale is 
a complex and long-term process and there is no silver bullet solution. The following three crosscutting 
recommendations are intended to frame subsequent dialogue around near-term opportunities for the 
global community to address these challenges in a more coordinated fashion:
1. Shift market dynamics to incentivize interoperability – Existing market dynamics do not 
penalize and even reward the use of proprietary and non-interoperable systems. This is caused 
by many factors, including lack of funding and limited guidance for standards compliance, and, 
in some cases, legitimate competitive interests. Governments, through leadership and regula-
tory mechanisms, play the biggest role in shifting market dynamics to encourage interoperable 
systems. Donors have the opportunity to accelerate the market shift through strategic invest-
ments that require an appropriate level of standards compliance for grantees, through a 
certification process. Technology partners will bear the lion’s share of the technical burden for 
developing standards-based software components, but the burden can be lowered through a 
transparent, participatory regulatory process and incentivized through increased market access 
and reduced market risk. Lowering the cost of standards adoption and adaptation will reduce 
market disincentives. This can be done through developing implementation guides and domain 
profiles, funding the development of reusable open-source software implementations of stan-
dards, and providing technical assistance and resources at the national and international level 
for selection, adaptation, and adoption of standards.
2. align with national eHealth strategies – National eHealth strategies provide a country-specific 
framework for the harmonization of mobile and electronic health within a country in a strategic 
and sustainable fashion. Alignment with the strategy provides a clear roadmap to scale and 
compatibility with the national information systems. Investments and implementations that do 
not align with the national strategy risk increased health system fragmentation, reduced local 
buy-in, lack of interoperability, shortened product lifespan, and, ultimately, reduced impact. 
A broad assessment of national eHealth strategies that builds off existing case studies and 
inventories performed by the WHO, ISO, and others, will be an important first step in assisting 
stakeholders in identifying steps needed to align with local requirements.
3. establish regional eHealth standardization collaboratives – Regional eHealth Standardization 
Collaboratives will allow governments and local stakeholders to pool resources and expertise, 
to make national and regional standards recommendations, to facilitate shared learning, and 
to serve as a focal point for capacity building activities and for interacting with international 
standards organizations. The collaborative would be a resource for organizations implementing 
mobile and electronic health tools within the region. When countries are prepared, the collabora-
tive would also serve as a launching pad for establishing national standards bodies.
38 The State of Standards and Interoperability for mHealth among Low- and Middle-Income Countries
mHealth is still in its early stages and very few implementations have moved past the pilot phase. As 
more and more deployments are scaled up, interoperability between these systems and the broader 
health information system will become essential in order for health data to be made available to the 
right person, at the right place and time. While health informatics standards are fundamental to enabling 
interoperability and continuity of care, both are ultimately a reflection of human institutions and their 
resulting processes. Standards are an essential building block, but it is up to governments, vendors, 
donors, and implementers to build an enabling environment that incentivizes the use of standards-based 
technologies to strengthen health systems and to improve health outcomes for those most in need. 
    mHealth Alliance  March 2013 39
Photo credit: United Nations, Albert Gonazalez Farran
40 The State of Standards and Interoperability for mHealth among Low- and Middle-Income Countries
Photo credit: United Nations, Stuart Price
aPPenDIx a – Key InFOrMan  InterVIeW LISt
 name Organization Country
1 Alex Pavluck Task Force for Global Health United States
2 Alvin Marcelo Philippine Health Insurance Corporation Philippines
3 Andrew Grant Sherbrooke University Canada
4 Bart Stidham Thoughtworks United States
5 Beatriz de Faria Leao Consultant Brazil
6 Bob Jolliffe Consultant Ireland
7 Catherine Chronaki HL7 International Greece
8 Catherine Omaswa eHealth Society of Uganda Uganda
9 Chris Bailey World Health Organization Switzerland
10 Chris Seebregts Jembi Health Systems South Africa
11 Chuck Parker Continua Health Alliance United States
12 Craig Frederichs GSMA South Africa
13 Darius Jazayeri OpenMRS United States
14 David Hutchful Grameen Ghana
15 Derek Ritz Consultant Canada
16 Erica Kochi UNICEF United States
17 Frederick Kristensen NORAD Norway
18 Fredrik Winsnes NetHope United States
19 Hamish Fraser Harvard Medical School United States
20 Hani Eskandar ITU Switzerland
21 Jeff Wishnie Thought Works United States
22 Joaquin Blaya eHealth Systems Chile
23 John Ritter HL7 International United States
24 Jonathan Jackson Dimagi United States
25 Karl Brown Rockefeller Foundation United States
26 Kelly Keisling NetHOPE United States
27 Liz Peloso Consultant Canada
28 Matt Berg Earth Institute United States
29 Michael Kleeman University of California, Davis United States
30 Najeeb Al-Shorbaji World Health Organization Switzerland
31 Neal Lesh Dimagi United States
32 Ramesh Krishnamurthy World Health Organization Switzerland
33 Richard Gakuba Government of Rwanda Rwanda
    mHealth Alliance  March 2013 41
Photo credit: United Nations, Stuart Price
    reFerenCeS
1 Mechael, P. et al. Barriers 20 Ed Larson, HIMSS Insider, May 2005. (pulled from HL7, 
and Gaps Affecting mHealth in Low and Middle Income Coming to Terms, February 2007)
Countries. 2010. 21 HIMSS. “HIMSS Dictionary of Healthcare Information 
2 Global Observatory for eHealth. “Global Observatory Technology Terms, Acronyms and Organizations.” 
for eHealth series – Volume 3: mHealth: New horizons Healthcare Informatics Information Systems Society, 2006.
for health through mobile technologies.” World Health 22 Health Level 7, EHR Interoperability Working Group. 
Organization. June 2011. Coming to Terms: Scoping Interoperability for Health 
3 ITU-T. “Bridging the standardization gap – ITU-T Care. February 7, 2007.
Research Project: Measuring and Reducing the 23 John Palfrey, Urs Gasser. Interop: The Promise and 
Standardization Gap.” ITU. 4 December 2009. Perils of Highly Interconnected Systems. Basic Books, 
4 WHO-ITU National eHealth Strategy Toolkit. June 2012. New York. 2012.
5 mHealth Alliance Business Plan 24 Wozak F, Ammenwerth E, Hörbst A, Sögner P, Mair 
6 ISO Technical Committee 215 Health informatics. R, Schabetsberger T. “IHE based interoperability - 
Accessed October 2012: http://www.iso.org/iso/iso_ benefits and challenges.” Stud Health Technol Inform. 
technical_committee?commid=54960. 2008;136:771-6.
7 Global Observatory for eHealth. “Global Observatory 25 ISO Technical Report (TR) 14639-1 – Capacity-based 
for eHealth series – Volume 1: Atlas – eHealth country eHealth Architecture roadmap – Part 1: Overview of 
profiles.” World Health Organization. Dec 2010. national eHealth initiatives.
8 Global Observatory for eHealth. “Global Observatory 26 Philbrick, William. “mHealth and MNCH: State of the 
for eHealth series – Volume 2: Telemedicine – Evidence.” mHealth Alliance. June 2012. 
Opportunities and developments in Member States.” 27 Marcelo, A., Adejumo, A., Luna, D. “Health Informatics 
World Health Organization. Jan 2011. for Development: a Three-pronged Strategy 
9 Global Observatory for eHealth. “Global Observatory for of Partnerships, Standards, and Mobile Health. 
eHealth series – Volume 4: Safety and security on the Contribution of the IMIA Working Group on Health 
Internet: challenges and advances in Member States.” Informatics for Development.” Yearb Med Inform. 
World Health Organization. Dec 2011. 2011;6(1):96-101.
10 Global Observatory for eHealth. “Global Observatory 28 Garg V, Brewer J. Telemedicine security: a systematic 
for eHealth series – Volume 5: Legal frameworks for review. J Diabetes Sci Technol. 2011 May 1;5(3):768-77. 
eHealth.” World Health Organization. Feb 2012. Review.
11 Global Observatory for eHealth. “Global Observatory 29 Ludwig W, Wolf KH, Duwenkamp C, Gusew N, Hellrung 
for eHealth series – Volume 6: Management of patient N, Marschollek M, Von Bargen T, Wagner M, Haux R. 
information: trends and challenges in Member States.” “Health information systems for home telehealth 
World Health Organization. Nov 2012. services--a nomenclature for sensor-enhanced  
12  World Health Assembly – Resolutions and Decisions. transinstitutional information system architectures.” 
“WHA58.28. – eHealth.” World Health Organization. Inform Health Soc Care. 2010 Sep-Dec;35(3-4):211-25.
May 2005. 30 Margolis A, Bessonart L, Barbiel A, Pazos P, Gil J, 
13  Regional Committee for Africa. “AFR/RC60/WP/3 Machado H, Vero A. “A countrywide clinical informatics 
– eHealth Solutions in the African Region: Current project in Uruguay.” Stud Health Technol Inform. 
Context and Perspectives.” World Health Organization 2010;160(Pt 1):391-5.
Africa. June 2010. 31  Puustjärvi J, Puustjärvi L. “Personal Health Ontology: 
14 “Opportunities for innovation in information and towards the interoperation of e-health tools.” Int J 
communications technology.” Commission on Electron Healthc. 2011;6(1):62-75.
Information and Accountability for Women’s and 32 Liu WL, Zhang K, Locatis C, Ackerman M. Internet-
Children’s Health. 2012. Access September 2012: based videoconferencing coder/decoders and tools for 
http://www.who.int/topics/millennium_devel- telemedicine. Telemed J E Health. 2011 Jun;17(5):358-
opment_goals/accountability_commission/ 62. Epub 2011 May 12.
ICT_for_Accountability.pdf. 33 Klein A, Ganslandt T, Brinkmann L, Spitzer M, Ueckert 
15 International Standards Organization. Accessed F, Prokosch HU. “Experiences with an interoperable 
January 2013: http://www.iso.org/iso/home/standards.htm. data acquisition platform for multi-centric research 
16 ISO TC 215 Health Informatics Subcommittees/Working networks based on HL7 CDA.” AMIA Annu Symp Proc. 
Groups. Accessed October 2012: http://www.iso.org/ 2006:986.
iso/iso_technical_committee?commid=54960#structure. 34 De Toledo, P., Lalinde, W., Del Pozo, F., Thurber, D., 
17 Data from ISO website. Accessed September 2011. Jimenez-Fernandez, S. “Interoperability of a mobile 
18 Data from IMIA website. Accessed September 2011. health care solution with electronic healthcare 
19 Bernie Monegain, “HL7 to make standards avail- record systems.” Conf Proc IEEE Eng Med Biol Soc. 
able for free for public good.” Healthcare IT News, 2006;1:5214-7.
September 5, 2012. Access October 2012: http://www. 35 Huang, E.W., Hung, R.S., Chiou, S.F., Liu, F.Y., Liou, D.M. 
healthcareitnews.com/news/hl7-make-standards- “Design and development of a tele-healthcare informa-
available-free-public-good?topic=08,17. tion system based on web services and HL7 standards.” 
Adv Exp Med Biol. 2011;696:599-606.
42 The State of Standards and Interoperability for mHealth among Low- and Middle-Income Countries
36 Constantinescu L, Kim J, Feng DD. SparkMed: a  51 Song B, Marschollek M, Wolf KH, Gietzelt M, Franken T, 
framework for dynamic integration of multimedia Haux R. “A home-centered ICT architecture for health-
medical data into distributed m-Health systems. IEEE enabling technologies.” Stud Health Technol Inform. 
Trans Inf Technol Biomed. 2012 Jan;16(1):40-52. Epub 2010;160(Pt 1):48-52.
2011 Oct 28. 52 Chen SK, Kao T, Chan CT, Huang CN, Chiang CY, Lai CY, 
37 Luxton, D.D., Kayl, R.A., Mishkind, M.C. “mHealth data Tung TH, Wang PC. A reliable transmission protocol for 
security: the need for HIPAA-compliant standardiza- ZigBee-based wireless patient monitoring. IEEE Trans 
tion.” Telemed J E Health. 2012 May;18(4):284-8. Epub Inf Technol Biomed. 2012 Jan;16(1):6-16. Epub 2011 Oct 13.
2012 Mar 8. 53 Jovanov, E. “Wireless Technology and System 
38 Pharow, P., Blobel, B. “Mobile health requires mobile Integration in Body Area Networks for m-Health 
security: challenges, solutions, and standardization.” Applications.” Conf Proc IEEE Eng Med Biol Soc. 
Stud Health Technol Inform. 2008;136:697-702. 2005;7:7158-60.
39 Koster P, Asim M, Petkovic M. End-to-end security  54 Mense A, Sauermann S, Gerbovic G, Frohner M, Pohn 
for personal telehealth. Stud Health Technol Inform. B, Bruckner R, Urbauer P, Eckkrammer F, Wahl H. 
2011;169:621-5. “Usage of international standards for integrating 
40 Savastano M, Hovsto A, Pharow P, Blobel B. “Identity- extramural monitoring and personal health device data 
management factors in e-health and telemdicine into medical information infrastructure.” Stud Health 
applications.” J Telemed Telecare. 2008;14(7):386-8. Technol Inform. 2010;160(Pt 1):550-3.
41 Kun L, Coatrieux G, Quantin C, Beuscart R, Mathews 55 Chen, C., Haddad, D., Selsky, J., Hoffman, J.E., Kravitz, 
R. “Improving outcomes with interoperable EHRs and R.L. Estrin, D.E., Sim, I. “Making sense of mobile health 
secure global health information infrastructure.”  data: an open architecture to improve individual- and 
Stud Health Technol Inform. 2008;137:68-79. population-level health.” J Med Internet Res. 2012  
42 Rojo MG, Daniel C, Schrader T. Standardization efforts Aug 9;14(4):e112.
of digital pathology in Europe. Anal Cell Pathol (Amst). 56 Vergari F, Salmon Cinotti T, D’Elia A, Roffia L, Zamagni 
2012;35(1):19-23. G, Lamberti C. “An integrated framework to achieve 
43 Blobel B. “Advanced and secure architectural EHR interoperability in person-centric health management.” 
approaches.” Int J Med Inform. 2006 Mar-Apr;75(3- Int J Telemed Appl. 2011;2011:549282. Epub 2011 Jul 24.
4):185-90. Epub 2005 Aug 19. 57 Kolovou L, Karavatselou E, Lymberopoulos D. 
44 Tang FH, Law MY, Lee AC, Chan LW. “A mobile phone “Reference implmentation model for Medical 
integrated health care delivery system of medical Information Systems’ interoperability.” Conf Proc  
images.” J Digit Imaging. 2004 Sep;17(3):217-25. Epub IEEE Eng Med Biol Soc. 2008;2008:1510-3.
2004 Aug 3. 58 Mechael, P., Nemser, B., Cosmaciuc, R., Cole-Lewis, 
45 Trigo JD, Chiarugi F, Alesanco A, Martínez-Espronceda H., Ohemeng-Dapaah, S., Dusabe, S., Kaonga, N.N., 
M, Serrano L, Chronaki CE, Escayola J, Martínez I, García Namakula, P., Shemsanga, M., Burbach, R., Kanter,  
J. “Interoperability in digital electrocardiography: A.S. “Capitalizing on the characteristics of mHealth  
harmonization of ISO/IEEE x73-PHD and SCP-ECG.” to evaluate its impact.” J Health Commun. 2012;17 
IEEE Trans Inf Technol Biomed. 2010 Nov;14(6):1303-17. Suppl 1:62-6.
Epub 2010 Aug 9. 59 Bescos C, Schmitt D, Kass J, García-Barbero M, 
46 Martinez I, Escayola J, Martinez-Espronceda M, Kantchev P. “Interoperability and HealthGRID.” 
Serrano L, Trigo JD, Led S, Garcia J. “Implementation Methods Inf Med. 2005;44(2):190-2.
experiences of ISO/IEEE11073 standard applied to new 60 Akter, S., Ray, P. “mHealth - an Ultimate Platform to 
use cases for e-health environments.” Conf Proc IEEE Serve the Unserved.” yearb Med Inform. 2010:94-100.
Eng Med Biol Soc. 2009;2009:1679-82. 61 Craft, R.L. “Toward technical interoperability in tele-
47 Clarke, M. “Developing a standard for personal health medicine.” Telemed J E Health. 2005 Jun;11(3):384-404.
devices based on 11,073.” Stud Health Technol Inform. 62 Gerber, T., Olazabal, V. Brown, K., Pablos-Mendez, A. 
2008;136:717-22. “An agenda for action on global e-health.” Health Aff 
48 Hu, F., Hao, Q., Lukowiak, M., Sun, Q., Wilhelm, K., (Millwood). 2010 Feb;29(2):233-6.
Radziszowski, S., Wu, Y. “Trustworthy data collection 63 Norgall, T. “Interoperability--a key infrastructure 
from implantable medical devices via high-speed  requirement for personalised health services.” Stud 
security implementation based on IEEE 1363.” IEEE Health Technol Inform. 2005;117:125-33.
Trans Inf Technol Biomed.” 201 Nov;14(6):1397-404. 64 Ackerman MJ, Filart R, Burgess LP, Lee I, Poropatich 
Epub 2010 Apr 26. RK. “Developing next-generation telehealth tools and 
49 Istepanian RS, Hu S, Philip NY, Sungoor A. The potential technologies: patients, systems, and data perspec-
of Internet of m-health Things “m-IoT” for non-invasive tives.” Telemed J E Health. 2010 Jan-Feb;16(1):93-5.
glucose level sensing. Conf Proc IEEE Eng Med Biol 65 See Best of Interop 2012 Awards: www.bestofinterop.com
Soc. 2011;2011:5264-6.
50 García-Sáez G, Hernando ME, Martínez-Sarriegui I, 
Rigla M, Torralba V, Brugués E, de Leiva A, Gómez EJ. 
“Architecture of a wireless Personal Assistant for 
telemedical diabetes care.” Int J Med Inform. 2009 
Jun;78(6):391-403. Epub 2009 Jan 21.
    mHealth Alliance  March 2013 43
Photo credit: United Nations, Stuart Price
    mHealth Alliance  March 2013 45

