In Bangladesh, the power of health in  
every mother’s hand 
Photo by Aponjon
18  n  APONJON
APONJON
Aponjon (meaning “dear one(s)” in Bangla) aims to help to 
substantially reduce maternal and newborn deaths by improving 
health-seeking behaviors and preventive care among pregnant 
women, new mothers, and their families. 
The Mobile Alliance Maternal Action (MAMA) program launched nationally in December 2012.  A Bangladeshi social 
enterprise, Dnet, implements Aponjon in partnership with the Ministry of Health and Family Welfare (MOHFW) and 
with support from the US Agency for International Development. 
Although under-five child mortality has decreased considerably in Bangladesh, neonatal mortality has decreased at a 
slower rate, with neonatal deaths a larger share of infant mortality. Greater progress was needed at that stage. Given 
that newborn survival and health are intrinsically linked with the health of women before conception, during pregnancy, 
and around the time of birth, and recognizing limitations in human resources for health, Aponjon developed as a 
mobile-based behavior change communication (BCC) program to increase health-seeking behavior at the household 
level and use of health facilities to prevent neonatal deaths.
The service is designed for women between 6 and 42 weeks of pregnancy and mothers with a child under one year of 
age. It features critical health information and reminders based on gestational stage and age of baby in the form of text 
and voice messages. The messages also address “gatekeepers” such as the women’s partners, mothers, and mothers-
in-law. In addition, Aponjon also launched a mobile application “Shogorbha” for pregnant women and redesigned its 
website as a host of web services.
About Aponjon
G lobally, Aponjon is a unique mHealth initiative be- Figure 1.  cause it functions through all of the country’s telecom Aponjon has two major components:  
operators—six. About 81% of Aponjon users are from rural content (voice/text) and call center (counseling). 
areas; 60% of women users have their own mobile phones. 
Technology stakeholders in the program include the telecom 
operators and value added services platform aggregator.
Aponjon has two major components: content (voice/
text) and call center (counselling). The primary audience 
(expecting and new mothers) are delivered two messages, 
either by SMS or interactive voice response (IVR), a week 
while the secondary audience (partners, in-laws, parents, 
etc.) receive one, with each message costing about US.03 
cents. The voice messages are a mix of direct messages and 
mini-skit messages, with local actors playing the roles of 
a doctor, pregnant woman, mother, and mother-in-law. 
Gatekeepers’ information reinforces messages provided to 
the mother and encourages family involvement in healthy 
decision-making around pregnancy, birth, and infant care. 
mHEALTH COMPENDIUM  SPECIAL EDITION 2016  n  19
All Aponjon content complies with the government’s BCC to subscribers, serving as a direct channel to communicate 
guidelines. Content is identified, designed, and adapted with a doctor about health problems. Aponjon partners 
based on ethnographic research; semi-structured content with the field forces of BRAC, Infolady (Dnet’s program), 
surveys; a review of national guidelines and international MaMoni, Social Marketing Company, Smiling Sun, and 
literature on maternal, newborn, and child health (MNCH); several local nongovernmental organizations and agencies for 
and an expert review by a panel of Bangladeshi physicians, customer acquisition. Customers can also register themselves, 
researchers, and communications professionals. Followed by and provide information to ensure that the messages are in 
feedback from BabyCenter, the messages are approved by the sync with the gestational stage or baby’s age. Users are also 
Information, Education, and Communication (IEC) Com- able to select a preferred time of day for message delivery so 
mittee of the MOHFW. The service is available in Bangla that the message is received when it is most convenient. 
and two local dialects. Aponjon also offers a counseling line 
Program Design Process 
Dnet carried out extensive formative research from Septem- Aponjon received support from the Access to Information Pro-
ber 2011 through May 2012 before launching the service gram II (A2I-II) hosted by the Prime Minister’s Office, which 
nationally. The research included 1,403 subscribers from five facilitated coordination among various government agencies 
divisions, including 349 pregnant women (25%), 575 moth- for the program. Aponjon actively participates in the district 
ers of children under age one (41%), and 479 other household health information system initiative of the Directorate General 
decision-makers (e.g. husbands, mothers-in-law) (34%). Areas of Health Services-Management Information Services office 
of interest included: gender and mobile phone ownership; and has already streamlined its system data landscape. 
effective strategies for enrollment and promoting user aware- Another important public sector contribution comes from 
ness; acceptable cost models; user satisfaction of the content the Bangladesh Telecommunications Regulatory Commis-
and tech platform; influence of content on MNCH-related sion (BTRC), which helped secure approvals for differential 
health-seeking behaviors; and the involvement of family mem- charging and approved the short code and Aponjon counsel-
bers in the service. Data collection included a pretest focus ling line. Aponjon’s partners in the private sector have also 
group, registration forms, deregistration data, payment status included Johnson & Johnson, Agora, Lal Teer, and Beximco 
data, structured interviews, field observations, and phone which contributed through corporate social responsibility 
surveys. The Johns Hopkins School of Public Health mHealth (CSR) funds and sponsorships and helped in brand propa-
Initiative jointly produced a  report with Dnet that examines gation. Telecom operators also complied with the mode of 
and analyzes Dnet’s formative research. differential charging and made it possible for Aponjon to 
Aponjon conducts widespread bi-annual phone surveys. reach people across the socioeconomic spectrum.
Apart from tracking health-seeking knowledge and practice On the technical side, SSD-Tech provides the technical 
indicators, the surveys query users if the service benefitted platform for service delivery with “MT charging,” meaning 
them and what could have been done better in terms of clients are charged when messages are received. Synesis IT 
content and design of service delivery. serves as the call center service provider that developed a 
customer relationship management system and a separate 
system for the counseling line. 
Growth in Scale
After the national launch, Aponjon acquired 100,000 gladesh. A core research team had evaluated various aspects 
subscribers by July 2013. The subscriber base hit 750,000 in of the service before national roll-out. Community health 
August 2014, 1 million in September 2014 and 1.5 million workers from BRAC and USAID’s MaMoni project assisted 
in December 2015. In addition to standard SMS and IVR, in enrolling most of the initial subscribers. Popular cam-
the service has made content available through a mobile paign strategies were executed in select urban locations and 
application, “Shogorbha”, for pregnant women. Aponjon their contribution in the overall growth of subscription was 
aims to reach 2 million subscribers by September 2016 and reviewed. Using local leaders and spokespeople to increase 
launch newer products. awareness of Aponjon while also forging greater trust in the 
During its pilot phase, Aponjon served 1,403 subscribers brand, building partnerships with more community-based 
in a few urban and rural areas across five divisions of Ban- organizations, including more detailed messages on nutri-
tion, arranging for refresher trainings for call center agents 
20  n  APONJON
and initiating a ticketing system for better management of panies interested in using the messaging for advertising make 
service issues by vendors are some major pilot phase out- up slightly less than 1% of Aponjon’s funding. 
comes that paved the way to a large-scale implementation. Aponjon has faced some vital challenges in the process of 
Dnet uses innovative financing models, leveraging CSR scaling up its operations. Lack of funding for above-the-line 
funding at local and global levels, and providing the service campaigns crippled the program’s ability to sustain its brand 
for the poorest subscribers free of charge while charging communication efforts. In spite of co-branding efforts with 
the better-off users the full price. Dnet also uses advertising products of high rural market penetration, the program never 
and sponsorship donations. Aponjon is financed primarily overcame the need for launching above-the-line campaigns as 
though support from development agencies (88%), name- the rate of self-registration was persistently low. Also, mostly 
ly USAID. The next largest portion of Aponjon’s funding due to the former, Aponjon had to heavily rely on customer 
comes from local CSR (7%), followed by the Sponsor-a-Ma acquisition led by community-based agencies that had to be 
campaign (4%). Together, user fees and fees charged to com- paid more than some leading nongovernmental organizations. 
Evaluation and Results 
Aponjon conducts periodic surveys to understand the impact interviewed. User feedback and preferences on message length, 
of the intervention and to gather feedback for further modifica- content type, message frequency, and usability were translated 
tion of the service. Annual sample surveys have been conducted into actionable recommendations. Some of the major actions 
since 2013 to understand how the service impacted users both based on findings included the introduction of content in two 
in knowledge and practice, if at all. Reasons behind non-com- major local dialects, incorporation of content specific to the 
pliance with content instructions and the process of and barriers rural version, and advanced messages on pregnancy care and 
to behavioral changes are explored. Two sample surveys have home remedies.   
been done so far, reaching 799 expecting and new mothers. Aponjon performs regular bi-annual phone surveys to track 
These surveys revealed that about half (54%) of Aponjon users the status of 11 health milestone indicators, including ante-
are first-time mothers, while 66% of them reported having been natal and postnatal care visits, exclusive breastfeeding, and 
actively using some form of family planning. About 14% of users BCG (TB) vaccination, and to gauge customer satisfaction 
reported to have spaced previous births by at least 3 years. When and loyalty through net promoter scores. The outcomes of 
users were asked about their level of satisfaction with Aponjon these health indicators are then compared to national level 
services, 91% indicated they were “satisfied” and 35% gave the values (see Figure 2 below).
services the highest possible rating.
A third-party mixed methods evaluation of the program was 
Aponjon also conducted a content survey in 2013 to better conducted by the USAID-funded TRAction project. Results 
understand user acceptability and comprehensibility of mes- indicated that respondents who had used Aponjon for a 
sages received. A total of 335 women and 88 gatekeepers were 
Figure 2.  
Evaluation results for health-seeking behavioral indicators  
(Sources: *National Data Source: BDHS 2014,  WHO 2013, and Unicef 2012); **Aponjon subscriber phone survey VII, July 2015)
4 or more ANC visits 31% 67%
Family-based delivery 37% 62%
Home-based delivery by SBA 42% 65%
Use of safe delivery kit at %
home-based delivery 88 100
%
Post natal care visit rate 32% 68%
Early initiation of breastfeeding 57% 93%
Exclusive breastfeeding to 6 mo. 55% 85%
Vaccinated BCG 98% 100%
Vaccinated Pentavalent 91% 93%
Blood group detection 70%
Improved water source 83% 87%
0 20 40 60 80 100
NATIONAL* APONJON SUBSCRIBER**
mHEALTH COMPENDIUM  SPECIAL EDITION 2016  n  21
minimum of six months, received at least three messages ing or carefully listening to all messages. (Chowdhury, 2015) 
per month and carefully listened to most of the messages Other findings indicated that some non-eligible clients were 
showed both increased knowledge and practice of maternal registered by agents, and also that users demanded another 
and newborn health care. Study recommendations included service on early childhood development. Based on this re-
that the program should emphasis continued use of services search, Aponjon formed an in-house quality control unit and 
for a longer duration, and to explore reasons for not receiv- content for early childhood development is being developed.
Lessons Learned in Program Implementation and Scaling
One of the main challenges Aponjon faced was to gather all December 2015, MAMA helped Aponjon broker instrumen-
mobile network operators under one umbrella. Given that tal partnerships with international donors and corporations 
Grameen Phone was the only operator during the pilot, areas such as Johnson & Johnson. Johnson & Johnson offered 
such as Chittagong—which had low Grameen Phone cover- sponsorships covering the entire service package for over 
age—had much fewer subscribers. After a lengthy process of 5,000 mothers in fiscal year 2015-16.
negotiation and technological integration with each operator, Although the initial program delivery commitment was for 
four operators were added before the national launch. 500,000 expecting women and pregnant mothers, Aponjon 
Receiving the right and disaggregated service delivery metrics went on to cater to over 1.6 million subscribers to date. This is 
from the technology platform vendor SSD-Tech posed an- not only due to support from USAID but also because of part-
other challenge for the program. Aponjon needed to be able nerships across the public and private sectors that Aponjon has 
to track message acceptability  by content area and monitor forged over the years. Furthermore, some major outgrowths 
fluctuations of deregistration by exposure to content. from the initial structure of project deliverables are as follows:
Over the last two years, revenue from local CSR funds has n Aponjon’s official website has been redesigned with the 
decreased alarmingly as local companies are increasingly introduction of a diverse host of web services, including 
channeling their CSR funds through in-house charity foun- articles on food and medicine in pregnancy to breast-
dations. This tendency has limited the program’s ability to feeding practices, a growth tracker, event calendar, 
extend the service to ultra-poor families for free.  estimated due date calculator, ovulation calendar, and a 
Aponjon devised a workaround, where possible, to each of social timeline called Mothers’ Forum.
the abovementioned obstacles. Soon after the pilot, the team n Aponjon launched the first mobile app in the Bangla 
built on the partnership with the BTRC and brought all language with a range of comprehensive information for 
six of the country’s telecom operators (including the state- expecting mothers. Features include week-by-week gesta-
owned Teletalk) aboard. Dnet redesigned service metrics and tional information, an expected due date calculator, event 
ensured routine tracking of service delivery based on disag- calendar, nutrition routine, weight chart, and kick-tracker.
gregated measures. Lastly, the decline in CSR funding from 
n The Aponjon counseling line features 16 doctors/general 
local companies has been tackled with increased sponsorship physicians who are available with first-line medical coun-
and fundraising efforts globally. Prior to its dissolution in seling for registered subscribers.
22  n  APONJON
Images provided by Aponjon
Future Plans
Aponjon, based on a tested sustainability model approved Activities recently launched or in development include:
by USAID, will transform into a for-profit business called 
n Aponjon Shoishob: Weekly mobile content in the form 
Lifechord. All organizational formalities and legal paperwork of IVR/SMS. It will target parents of children aged 1–5 
have been completed. Initial capital for Lifechord includes years and address issues pertaining to early childhood 
program income from non-USAID funds, CSR funds, and development. 
Dnet’s own investment. Lifechord will be able to explore 
radical cost-cutting and income-generation options begin- n Aponjon Koishor App: Mobile application targeting 
ning with the launch of Dnet’s own technology platform in adolescents aged 10–19 years and their parents. Features a 
March 2016. This marks an important transition in the pro- counseling line and live web chat. Launched April 7, 2016. 
gram; running the service from its own technology platform n Aponjon New Mother App: A mobile application which 
means greater control over service delivery metrics, stronger will target mothers of children aged under one year.  n
negotiation with mobile network operators as a content 
provider, as well as opportunities for generating revenue from Snapshot: Aponjon
diverse service innovations. This systemic changeover will Geographic Bangladesh
translate into efficiency gains, broader developmental leeway, Coverage
and fewer challenges to exploring new market segments and Implementation December 2012 to present
replicating in different contexts. Dates
However, as an initially donor-funded program, one major Implementation Dnet: a social enterprise that designs innovative 
roadblock to working out the current transition and sustain- Partners products and service solutions for women, children, and youth in rural and urban settings to create 
ability plans is the limited opportunity to attract  angel and social impact, and for institutions to enhance 
impact investors, as investments arising from such initiatives capacity and productivity. It runs Aponjon in 
cannot be declared as assets for LifeChord going forward. partnership with USAID and the Government of 
Bangladesh.
Therefore, Aponjon has been busy crafting its service portfo-
lio with new developments paving a way to diverse reve- Donor(s) USAID
nue-generating activities. Contact Tahsin Ifnoor Sayeed, M&E Specialist, Dnet,  
Information tahsin.ifnoor@dnet.org.bd
References & Additional Resources
Understanding mHealth impact among Aponjon (MAMA Bangladesh) subscribers through a phone survey in Bangladesh.  
http://dl.acm.org/citation.cfm?id=2517920
M&E of MAMA’s mHealth program to improve quality of maternal health care.   
https://apha.confex.com/apha/141am/webprogramadapt/Paper294315.html
Improving health awareness through mobile-based health messages in Bangladesh.   
http://www.journalmtm.com/2012/improving-health-awareness-through-mobile-based-health-messages-in-bangladesh/
MAMA “APONJON” Formative Research Report.   
http://www.mobilemamaalliance.org/sites/default/files/MAMA%20Bangladesh%20Formative%20Research%20Report.pdf
References:
1. GSMA Data  
https://www.gsmaintelligence.com/markets/240/dashboard/
2. Bangladesh Demographic and Health Surveys 2014 
http://www.niport.gov.bd/wp-content/uploads/publication/1432536472-BDHS%202014%20KIR.pdf
3. Health Workforce Crisis in Bangladesh 
https://everyone.savethechildren.net/articles/health-workforce-crisis-bangladesh
4. MAMA Bangladesh: Lessons Learned on the Way to 500,000 Subscribers. http://mobilemamaalliance.org/sites/default/files/
BangladeshCaseStudy2014.pdf
5. Chowdhury, Mahbub Elahi. Key Findings Presentation: Evaluating accessibility, acceptability and effectiveness of Aponjon mobile health messaging for 
improved maternal and newborn health behaviors and practices in Bangladesh. September 2015. http://www.tractionproject.org/resources/key-
findings-mama-study-traction-supprted-study-conducted-international-center-diarrheal
mHEALTH COMPENDIUM  SPECIAL EDITION 2016  n  23
