100 percent answering correctly
80
60
40
20
Before Training After Training
Figure 1. Intervention Group Pre- and Post-Training 
Assessment Correct Responses
ASHA-LINKS 
IMPLEMENTATION DATE:  May 2014 to September 2014
Using mobile phones to address postpartum needs of mothers and newborns 
The health and development indicators of mothers and children in Uttar Pradesh, India, continue to 
be among the worst in the world with significantly higher rates among rural populations. The women 
in the rural Moradabad District face overwhelming barriers to essential maternal and newborn health 
care, including limited mobility due to social restrictions, limited availability of trained health providers 
in primary health centers (PHCs), poorly equipped and supplied PHCs, and lack of timely referral and 
skilled care at the community level. Because approximately 45 percent of postpartum maternal deaths 
and 25 to 45 percent of newborn deaths occur within 24 hours of birth, the World Health Organization 
recommends that all mothers and newborns receive a postpartum visit within this critical time frame. 
Initiated in 2011 as part of a broader government-run health scheme targeting rural populations 
throughout India, accredited social health activists are being training home-based newborn care 
(HBNC) with the expectation that they will conduct six postpartum home visits but not within the 
first 24 hours for facility-based deliveries. Most ASHAs in Moradabad have yet to receive this training, 
and ASHA performance is compromised by lack of skills and motivation, minimal incentives, and few 
opportunities for career progression. ASHA-LINKS to Postpartum Maternal and Newborn Health was 
designed by Project Concern International (PCI) in response to the critical need to address maternal 
and newborn morbidity and mortality in the rural areas of Moradabad in northern India, and because 
well-trained ASHAs play an invaluable role in assuring that rural mothers and their families are educated 
on healthy postpartum practices and supported through the identification of danger signs and the swift 
referral of life-threatening complications.
About ASHA-LINKS
The objective of the ASHA pilot study was to develop technology as a means to improve maternal and newborn and potentially scale up a project utilizing mobile postpartum outcomes. PCI aimed to test the hypothesis that 
96  n  SERVICE DELIVERY 
Maternal Care
Maternal Danger Signs
Newborn Care
Newborn Danger Signs
Maternal Care
Maternal Danger Signs
Newborn Care
Newborn Danger Signs
Lauren Galvin
Table 1. Percentage of ASHAs answering questions correctly 
pre- and post-training for intervention and control groups
the introduction of the mobile postpartum health assessment 
increased the frequency, timeliness, and quality of 24-hour Assessment Questions Intervention Control
postpartum assessments; the capacity of ASHAs to provide 24- Pre- Post- Pre- Post-
hour postpartum assessments; and the ability to make referrals Newborn Care
of serious complications to appropriate health facilities. The Assessing breathing problems 80.0% 100% 66.7% 88.9%
mobile application included a decision tree to guide ASHAs Proper cleaning of cord 100% 100% 55.6% 100%
through assessments and a combination of text prompts, audio Head positioning during KMC 90.0% 100% 55.6% 100%
recordings, and images to assist in identifying, managing, Breastfeeding positioning 90.0% 100% 66.7% 77.8%
and referring complications. PCI also tested the uptake of an Newborn Danger Signs
improved referral network to link ASHAs with auxiliary nurse Fever 80.0% 100% 33.3% 77.8%
midwives and health facilities to improve the continuum of Chills 70.0% 80.0% 33.3% 55.6%
care that mothers or newborns with complications receive. Ten Eye infection 30.0% 80.0% 11.1% 44.5%
intervention and 10 control group ASHAs underwent a two- Jaundice 70.0% 100% 11.1% 66.7%
day training on home-based life-saving skills for mothers and 
newborns; the intervention group received additional training 
on use of the mobile application. Lessons Learned 
Evaluation and Results 
n Continuous, on-the-ground technical support 
ASHA knowledge, skills-based capacity, and overall should be provided to ASHAs in case the mHealth app 
performance were evaluated both qualitatively and encounters technical errors. This will ensure the data are 
quantitatively during pre- and post-training assessments, forwarded to the server correctly.
from data retrieved from the mobile phones during n Some images used to help ASHAs recognize danger 
postpartum assessments, during home visit observations signs needed clarification as ASHAs had trouble 
using a checklist, and through feedback from both ASHAs understanding them.
and the new mothers they visited. Researchers determined n ASHAs felt that they should receive additional com-
enablers and barriers for ASHAs in using the mHealth pensation from the government for the increased work-
application to determine the potential for scale-up. The load accrued through performing postpartum assessments.
assessments found the following: n ASHAs lack training in record-keeping and counseling, 
n Families were more receptive to ASHAs using the mHealth limiting the reliability of data, expecially in the control group.
application, and ASHAs felt more respected by families 
and other health workers, likely because mobile phones Conclusion 
carry symbolic authority. Quality of visits improved.              
n The intervention group had more structured and complete A decision-support phone application can be an effective job aid 
assessments but the application had little impact on if training is adequate. It does not take the place of the ASHA’s 
timeliness of assessments within and between the two assessment and decision-making capabilities but rather contrib-
groups. This finding is likely the result of deeply ingrained utes to assessment completeness and quality. Well-functioning 
structural and behavioral challenges within the health  referral and health care systems need to be in place to support the 
care system.      ASHAs and to provide proper assessment, referrals, and respon-
sive treatment. Scale-up would require extended training for the 
n The intervention group covered twice as much information ASHAs on home-based life-saving skills and mHealth technical 
during visits than the control group, but ASHAs tended skills, on-the-ground technical assistance for mHealth app trou-
to rely on the phone at the expense of interpersonal bleshooting, clearly defined and monitored government stan-
communication.      dards for ASHAs, and continuous supervision and support. n   
n Phone data entry was more reliable than paper recording, 
but troubleshooting caused some delays in data analysis. 
This miscommunication became a barrier to case follow-up. Geographic Coverage:  Moradabad District, Uttar Pradesh, India 
Implementation Partners: Project Concern International (PCI), 
n The referral network from ASHA to facility within both Dimagi, Inc. 
groups was a challenge due to poor communication, lack Donor: Dimagi, Inc., through CORE Group
of authority, absence of a formal referral system, and mis-
trust in public health care facilities. The intervention group Contact Information: Carolyn Kruger, PhD., Sr. Technical Advisor for RMNCH, Project Concern International (PCI). Email: 
recorded more referrals, but the accuracy of both groups’ ckruger@pciglobal.org 
referrals could not be verified due to lack of records.
mHEALTH COMPENDIUM  VOLUME 5  n  97
