SPOTLIGHT
SEPTEMBER 2013
CHIPATALA CHA PA FONI 
MALAWI
BACKGROUND: REPRODUCTIVE, MATERNAL, 
NEWBORN AND CHILD HEALTH IN MALAWI
Maternal, newborn, and child mortality rates in Malawi are among the highest 
in the world. The maternal mortality ratio is 675 maternal deaths per 100,000 
live births and the under-five mortality rate is 112 deaths per 1,000 births.1 
Underlying causes of poor health for women and children include limited 
availability of timely and reliable health information for decision-making and 
poor access to and use of health facilities.
Chipatala Cha Pa Foni:
Pregnant women and mothers may delay seeking care or taking appropriate 
Improving Access to preventative or curative action;2 may not be able to access appropriate health 
Reproductive, Maternal services;3 or they may access health facilities unnecessarily thereby increas-
and Newborn Health ing the load on the already overburdened health system. Knowing where 
to go for care and when are integral to maximizing health care access and 
Information and utilization and reducing maternal and child mortality.
Services in Malawi
Chipatala Cha Pa Foni (CCPF), which in English means Health Center by 
Phone, aims to increase knowledge and improve health seeking behav-
1. National Statistical Office, Malawi (2011). ior among pregnant women, guardians of young children and women of 
Malawi Demographic & Health Survey, 2010. 
Available at: http://www.measuredhs.com/ child-bearing age.
publications/publication-FR247-DHS-Fi-
nal-Reports.cfm THE INTERVENTION: CHIPATALA CHA PA FONI
2. Thorsen, V., Sundby, J. & Malata, A. 
(2012). Piecing together the maternal death 
puzzle through narratives: The three delays Chipatala Cha Pa Foni (CCPF) is a hotline and voice/text based tips and re-
model revisited. PLoS ONE 7(12), e52090. minders service providing women and guardians of young children in rural and 
doi:10.1371/journal.pone.0052090. underserved areas with access to information, medical advice and referrals on 
3. Ibid.
MAMA: MOBILE ALLIANCE FOR MATERNAL ACTION | SPOTLIGHT SEPTEMBER 2013 1
reproductive, maternal, newborn, and child health (RMNCH) issues. The two 
complementary services extend health center reach by providing community 
members with regular access to accurate health information.
THE HOTLINE
CCPF’s toll-free hotline provides clients with information and advice on 
issues across the RMNCH continuum of care, and refers callers displaying 
“danger signs” for further care at a village clinic, health center, or district 
hospital. Hotline workers are trained in maternal, newborn, and child health 
using modules from the Ministry of Health’s (MOH) Health Surveillance 
Assistants (HSAs) curriculum. A simple touch-screen device guides hotline 
workers through point-of-care protocols and records data electronically for 
monitoring and evaluation purposes. Nurse consultants provide supervision 
and quality assurance oversight to the hotline workers.
TIPS AND REMINDERS
CCPF’s tips and reminders service provides personalized messages on RM-
NCH topics, with an option for those who sign up to receive the message as 
an SMS or a voice message. The service targets women of childbearing age, 
pregnant women, and guardians of children less than one year of age in rural 
or underserved areas. Messages are personalized for clients based on their 
week of pregnancy or the child’s age.
Clients who choose to subscribe to the service have access to these mes-
sages on a weekly basis. The tips and reminders service accommodates in-
dividuals who have varying degrees of access to mobile phones. A client can 
access tips and reminders on his or her personal mobile phone, on a friend 
or family member’s personal mobile phone, or on a voice mailbox accessed 
by calling a toll-free number from any mobile phone.
DEMAND GENERATION:
Community outreach and demand generation are critical to ensure service 
uptake. Community volunteers in each village promote the service and ex-
plain and demonstrate its use. In certain areas, volunteers provide access to 
the service by maintaining a phone for community use.
PROGRAM DESIGN & IMPLEMENTATION
VillageReach developed and implemented CCPF as a mobile health project of 
Concern Worldwide’s Innovations for Maternal, Newborn, and Child Health (In-
novations) initiative. Innovations is a global initiative led by Concern Worldwide 
US to support the development and field-testing of bold and inventive ways to 
overcome barriers to delivering proven maternal, newborn, and child health 
(MNCH) solutions.
VillageReach piloted CCPF in Balaka District, Malawi with services starting in July 
2011. The pilot period concluded in May 2013, and VillageReach is expanding 
CCPF’s geographic reach with the support of Concern Worldwide Malawi and an 
Innovation Working Group Scale-Up award from the mHealth Alliance.
2. http://globalhealthmedia.org/page/2/  
MAMA: MOBILE ALLIANCE FOR MATERNAL ACTION | SPOTLIGHT SEPTEMBER 2013 2
CONTENT DEVELOPMENT: CCPF HOTLINE
VillageReach worked with the Malawi MOH to develop instructional materials 
and content for the hotline service. Child health content was based on MOH 
protocols for integrated management of childhood illnesses (IMCI). Mater-
nal health protocols were based on MOH’s Maternal and Newborn Health 
Community Case Management training. We also asked District Health Staff 
to brainstorm questions they thought a community member might ask when 
calling the hotline.
In the beginning of the project, we created in-depth manuals covering a 
wide range of potential RMNCH topics. A few months into implementation 
we observed hotline workers were not using the manuals during their calls. 
To make the information in the manuals more user-friendly, we reduced the 
25-page booklets into short, visual job-aides designed for hotline workers to 
easily refer to during their calls.
CONTENT DEVELOPMENT: CCPF TIPS 
AND REMINDERS
VillageReach used the same messaging provided by the Mobile Alliance for 
Maternal Action as a key reference when developing content for the CCPF 
tips and reminders service. We worked with district and central level MOH 
staff to adapt the content and ensure it was appropriate for rural Malawi. 
We consulted experts in Safe Motherhood, Immunization, IMCI, Prevention 
of Mother to Child Transmission of HIV, Traditional Birth Practices, Family 
Planning, and Kangaroo Mother Care, and partnered with the USAID Infant 
and Young Child Nutrition (IYCN) project in Malawi to bring in appropriate 
nutrition content. 
Messages were developed in English and then translated into the two 
common local languages in Balaka: Chichewa and Chiyao. Messages were 
written in narrative form first, and then turned into shorter SMS messages 
and recorded as electronic voice files.
The final content was reviewed by a group of women from Balaka who 
were experienced working on MNCH issues at the community level. These 
women ensured that all local myths and traditions around pregnancy were 
adequately represented and addressed in the CCPF messages. Final mes-
saging was submitted to and approved by district-level staff.
Tips and reminders content was reviewed periodically throughout imple-
mentation and updates were made to include additional content. For exam-
ple, the launch of pneumococcal vaccine in Malawi led to the incorporation 
of new messaging developed in collaboration with MOH Expanded Program 
on Immunization staff.
PARTNERSHIPS
In addition to the Innovations team, VillageReach implemented the 
CCPF pilot in partnership with stakeholders from public, private, and non- 
governmental sectors. 
MAMA: MOBILE ALLIANCE FOR MATERNAL ACTION | SPOTLIGHT SEPTEMBER 2013 3
MINISTRY OF HEALTH
Buy-in and participation from the MOH at idea generation and imple-
mentation planning stages was critical to developing, implementing and 
transitioning the pilot from demonstration project to scale-up. From the 
beginning, the implementation team developed relationships with na-
tional level MOH through Technical Working Groups and district-level 
MOH through the District Health Officer (DHO) and the District Health 
Management Team (DHMT), a committee representing district hospital heads 
of department.
There are two key ways that the district supports CCPF:
L EVERAGING HOSPITAL RESOURCES: The District Hospital provides 
space to operate the CCPF hotline. The hospital location adds to 
the service’s credibility through association with the hospital, as 
community members see the hotline and tips and reminders as 
being an extension of the district hospital.
 SHARING KNOWLEDGE AND EXPERTISE: District activities are conducted 
by coordinators who are regular district staff with additional duties 
to oversee activities, initiatives and programs across the district on 
specific topics. Coordinators in charge of MNCH activities review new 
hotline and tips and reminders content, participate in community 
outreach, and provide supervision and oversight to hotline staff. 
This ensures that content for hotline worker training and the tips 
and reminders service are consistent with district priorities and with 
national programming in relevant areas.
BAOBAB HEALTH TRUST
We partnered with a local organization, Baobab Health, on the design of 
the hotline software and hardware procurement and adaptation. Because 
Balaka is a rural area with limited technology infrastructure, Baobab Health 
designed the touch-screen devices to work in a low-resource environment. 
The devices were also designed to communicate with an electronic medical 
records (EMR) patient registration system that Baobab Health is developing 
for the MOH. This helped prevent the duplication of medical records or pa-
tient registration through the hotline.
VillageReach also received technical assistance and support from the 
Grameen Foundation’s Mobile Technology for Community Health (MoTeCH) 
program in Ghana, which had implemented a similar program in Ghana a 
year prior to the Innovations pilot test in Malawi. The MoTECH team shared 
information on technical design, technology set-up, and content creation.
CHALLENGES
Because the concept of a hotline and tips and reminders service was very 
new to the community in Malawi, the implementation team had to address 
various challenges with the design, set up and implementation of the service. 
Some of these challenges were associated with the technology, but many 
were related to implementation issues.
MAMA: MOBILE ALLIANCE FOR MATERNAL ACTION | SPOTLIGHT SEPTEMBER 2013 4
TECHNICAL CAPACITY
When VillageReach started developing CCPF, we looked for existing tech-
nology solutions that could be adapted to meet our requirements. Unfortu-
nately, a compatible platform was not available within our implementation 
timeframe. Our technology team met extensively with Grameen Founda-
tion’s MoTeCH, who had developed a similar application, to learn from their 
experience and replicate certain aspects of their application but at the time 
we could not find a platform that we could reuse instead of developing new 
functionality. Since our original technology design process early 2011, sever-
al new technologies have been developed to support mHealth applications, 
and we recommend that organizations entering this field look for existing 
solutions before building any new technologies.
BUILDING RELATIONSHIPS WITH MOBILE NETWORK OPERATORS
The technical components of CCPF require close collaboration with telecom 
providers. Although two major Mobile Network Operators offer services in 
Malawi (Airtel and Malawi-based TNM), negotiation was time consuming 
and complicated. VillageReach piloted CCPF with only one provider, Airtel. 
In many countries, aggregator services will act as a middleman, negotiating 
with multiple telecom companies so that services are available to customers 
of all mobile providers. Unfortunately, aggregator services are very limited in 
Malawi and proved cost-prohibitive for this project.
ADAPTING TO CLIENT NEEDS
Within the first six months of the CCPF pilot, the average age of pregnancy 
subscribers was 26 years old and the estimated month of pregnancy at the 
time of subscribing was between 5 and 5 ½ months. These numbers indicated 
two challenges: it was unlikely that our “average user” was in their first preg-
nancy, since first pregnancy in rural Malawi often happens before the age of 
20; and we were not reaching women early in their pregnancy, and therefore 
not influencing early initiation of antenatal care (ANC), one of our key indica-
tors. We recognized the need to adapt the service to address these challenges.
In order to encourage women to access information on ANC and healthy 
pregnancies earlier, the team developed new women of child-bearing age 
(WCBA) messages. Women could sign up for these messages to engage with 
CCPF before pregnancy or between pregnancies. The messages include in-
formation on family planning, birth spacing, early pregnancy symptoms and 
healthy eating for women of reproductive age. The hotline workers were also 
trained in family planning, and the WCBA services were officially launched 
through community events in September 2012.
ADAPTING TO THE CULTURAL CONTEXT
We found that emphasis on the concept of an estimated due date (EDD) cre-
ated fear among some members of the community. It is unusual for women 
to reveal or talk about their due date, yet the EDD was necessary to register 
the women for the tips and reminders service to ensure that the messages 
were personalized based on the women’s pregnancy status. Prior to proj-
ect launch, specific EDDs were not commonly discussed in the healthcare 
setting, and one common misconception women expressed was that the 
MAMA: MOBILE ALLIANCE FOR MATERNAL ACTION | SPOTLIGHT SEPTEMBER 2013 5
hotline was satanic because hotline workers could predict women’s due 
dates. Our community outreach efforts had to address the concept of EDD 
and how it is calculated to help address this community perception. 
MEETING CLIENT DEMAND
At the beginning of project implementation, we observed high rates of un-
answered calls. To determine the cause of the problem, VillageReach staff 
compared incoming calls to the call system with activity in the hotline room. 
By monitoring the two processes in real time we learned that the hotline 
was understaffed at key times, but also that hotline workers were turning off 
phones which was causing some missed calls. Peak call times were identified 
and staffing plans were revised to meet client demand and reduce the rate of 
unanswered calls. VillageReach also hired a nurse supervisor, which greatly 
improved hotline worker responsiveness. Appropriate changes decreased 
the proportion of unanswered calls from about 30% to less than 10%.
QUALITY ASSURANCE
Each week three to five calls answered by each hotline worker are selected at 
random for review by the nurse supervisor and nurse consultants. Currently, 
project staff download the selected recordings and distribute the files to the 
nurse consultants for review. The process is time consuming and has a sub-
stantial human resources component. VillageReach is working to revise this 
process to maintain quality as we scale to additional districts.
DEMAND GENERATION
VillageReach has used several strategies to reach clients and build demand 
for CCPF’s hotline and tips and reminders services. We trained Community 
Volunteers (CVs) to explain and demonstrate the service through one on 
one meetings and at mobilization events. Volunteers also maintained a 
community phone to provide access to the service. This strategy was suc-
cessful throughout the first year of CCPF’s implementation, however new 
registrations dropped over time.  Some CVs became less motivated to be 
involved over time as the initial excitement of the project wore off, and the 
mobile phones we distributed began to break. We also heard some reports 
of volunteers overstepping their role by acting as gatekeepers to the service, 
instead of communicating to clients that CCPF could be accessed from any 
Airtel phone. VillageReach is testing additional demand generation strate-
gies, such as registration at health centers, engagement of traditional leaders, 
and word-of-mouth marketing.
MONITORING AND EVALUATION
To understand what works and what could be improved, rigorous monitoring 
and evaluation are critical components of CCPF. Electronic data on process 
indicators is generated monthly and feedback from users is collected quar-
terly. Data is used for quality assurance as well as program evaluation and to 
guide design changes.
MAMA: MOBILE ALLIANCE FOR MATERNAL ACTION | SPOTLIGHT SEPTEMBER 2013 6
HOTLINE RECORDINGS
All calls into the CCPF hotline are recorded for quality assurance. A sample of 
recordings is reviewed every week by trained nurse supervisors. At bi-weekly 
meetings, the nurses discuss their reviews and provide feedback to hotline 
workers on their performance. 
PROCESS INDICATORS
VillageReach automatically collects data from all of the software and tech-
nology used to administer CCPF, including the touchscreen devices used 
in the hotline room, the interactive voice response (IVR) technology that 
triages and handles phone calls, and the software used to deliver tips and 
reminders messages. For the hotline, this data includes the time the call 
started and ended, demographic information about the caller, topics and 
symptoms discussed, and the final outcome of the call. The IVR also saves 
the originating phone number and the clients’ actions (connect to hotline or 
retrieve messages). We also collect information on the delivery status of tips 
and reminders messages.
COMMUNITY VOLUNTEER LOGS.
Community Volunteers record the number and type (message retrieval or 
hotline) of calls made from the community phone, the number of facilitated 
registrations, the number of people reached in one-on-one and small group 
interactions, and the number of community events attended where they dis-
cussed CCPF. We use this data to track demand generation activities for CCPF 
but the quality of data is very variable – some volunteers don’t complete logs 
at all and some don’t complete them accurately.
USER FOLLOW UP.
We follow up with a small number of registered clients, selected through 
convenience sampling, on a quarterly basis to assess the client experience 
with the service. Surveys have generally sought to evaluate client satisfaction 
and identify recommendations for improvements. Questions varied by quar-
ter and were informed by observations from monitoring call and usage data. 
In the beginning, questions asked were about satisfaction with the service, 
frequency of use, new information learned, resulting behavior changes and 
suggestions for improvements. Later surveys focused on understanding why 
users do or do not continue to use CCPF services over time and whether or 
not clients act on information provided by CCPF.
OUTCOME EVALUATION.
An independent evaluation using mixed methods was conducted by Invest 
in Knowledge Initiative (IKI). The cross-sectional population-based survey 
covered about 2840 women and 3620 children at baseline, and 3850 women 
and 3310 children at endline. Qualitative data was also collected from users, 
non-users, health center staff, district officials, and implementing partners.
Preliminary data from the outcome evaluation indicate that use of CCPF in-
creased home-based and facility-based practices among women, including 
use of a bed net during pregnancy, attending the recommended four ANC 
MAMA: MOBILE ALLIANCE FOR MATERNAL ACTION | SPOTLIGHT SEPTEMBER 2013 7
appointments, starting ANC during first trimester, giving birth in a facility, and 
receiving a post-natal checkup within 2 days of birth. Home-based practices 
for children, including exclusive breastfeeding until six months of age, use of 
bed nets, and use of oral rehydration salts to treat diarrhea also increased. 
Those that used the service expressed satisfaction with CCPF and found 
their interactions with the hotline workers to be positive, which many users 
contrasted with the sometimes negative interactions they had with busy 
and overburdened health center staff. The full pilot evaluation report will be 
available in November 2013.
SCALE-UP & NEXT STEPS
The CCPF pilot allowed Concern, VillageReach and other partners to test 
the concepts and develop the system used in the project, including testing 
multiple versions of the hotline protocol and software. The monitoring and 
evaluation process coupled with rigorous final evaluation research generat-
ed data on the outcomes and process aspects of the project. This body of 
knowledge, expertise, experience and demonstrated impact made it possible 
for other organizations to take up the lessons of the CCPF and expand and 
adapt it to help support the health needs of more women and children in 
other districts. 
Moving forward, VillageReach is studying several strategies to expand CCPF 
and develop a sustainable business plan, with a long-term goal of offering 
the service nationwide. In 2012, VillageReach received a catalytic grant from 
the WHO’s Innovation Working Group and the mHealth Alliance, providing 
financial and technical assistance to move the project beyond its pilot phase 
and support scale-up efforts. The award has enabled us to work with three 
additional partners, Concern Worldwide Malawi, Save the Children, and a 
local Traditional Leader who is part of the President’s Office Safe Mother-
hood Initiative to scale-up CCPF services in additional districts. VillageReach 
established partnership agreements with each entity to support certain 
resources associated with conducting community outreach and running the 
hotline and tips and reminders services. The scale-up in each district is struc-
tured differently depending on the partner and resources available.
In Nkhotakota, VillageReach is continuing its relationship with Concern 
Worldwide Malawi as technical advisor for the expansion of CCPF services 
into this new district. Concern Worldwide Malawi has incorporated CCPF into 
a broader project including family planning services and youth organizing, 
demonstrating the adaptability of the CCPF model and how it can be an ele-
ment of a larger approach to strengthening health systems and overcoming 
barriers to access. Concern Worldwide Malawi is managing community out-
reach and demand generation in Nkhotakota, while VillageReach continues 
to operate the hotline and tips & reminders service.
In Mulanje District, Save the Children is handling all aspects of outreach and 
demand generation, with support from VillageReach in the form of promo-
tional materials, training, and advice on best practices and lessons learned. A 
Traditional Leader, Chief Kwataine Masina, is leading the scale-up in Ntcheu 
District, building upon his existing network to inform local families about the 
service. Additional hotline workers have been employed to cope with extra 
calls to the Balaka call center from the new districts.
 
MAMA: MOBILE ALLIANCE FOR MATERNAL ACTION | SPOTLIGHT SEPTEMBER 2013 8
The MAMA Community Spotlight series 
shines a light on some of the great work 
being done by organizations using MAMA’s 
adaptable mobile messages. Each month 
we feature a new organization that has 
downloaded our messages and is using 
mobile technology to improve maternal, 
newborn and child health. 
Inspired by these innovative programs? 
Download the MAMA messages for yourself 
by visiting www.mobilemamaalliance.org 
and completing our short questionnaire.
For inquires about working with our 
partnership, contact: 
MAMA Global
 tel: 202.887.9040 
email: info@mobilemamaalliance.org
Media Inquiries, contact: 
Mabinty Koroma 
tel: 202.862.6315 
email: mkoroma@mobilemamaalliance.org
