	
mobiles	for find	tactics look	at	tools how	tos case	studies working	with links
advocacy mobiles
Welcome	to	Mobiles	in-a-box:	Tools	and	tactics	for	mobile	advocacy
Mobiles	in-a-box	from	the	Tactical	Technology	Collective	is	a	collection	of	tools,	tactics,	how-to	guides	and
case	studies	designed	to	help	advocacy	and	activist	organisations	use	mobile	technology	in	their	work.
Mobiles	in-a-box	is	designed	to	inspire	you,	to	present	possibilities	for	the	use	of	mobile	telephony	in	your
work	and	to	introduce	you	to	some	tools	which	may	help	you.	After	reading	the	material	in	this	toolkit	you
can	expect	to	be	able	to	design	and	implement	a	mobile	advocacy	strategy	for	your	organisation.
Tactical	Tech	is	no	longer	updating	this	toolkit.	Read	how	it	has	been	used	here.	We	welcome	people	to
develop,	adapt	or	translate	this	toolkit.	Please	get	in	touch	if	you'd	like	to	learn	more.
Published	October	2008.	Software	last	updated:	July	2009
How-tos Tactics
Getting	media	off	your	phone Fundraising	&	resource	mobilisation
Once	you	have	captured	your	pictures,	video	and Mobile	phones	are	increasingly	being	used	for
sound	you	need	to	get	it... facilitating	financial	transactions...
How	to	create	a	ring	tone Coordinating	&	mobilising
Ring	tones	can	be	a	great	way	for	your The	fact	that	mobile	phones	have	made	rapid
organisation	to	market	itself	or... communication	easier	and	cheaper...
Making	the	most	of	your	camera	phone Outreach	&	participation
Camera	phones	can	make	a	great	impact	to	your Finding	and	engaging	audiences	can	be	a	big
organisation's	advocacy	work... challenge	for	NGOs.	Mobile	phones...
How	to	use	and	manage	bulk	SMS	services People's	media
using	a	website
People's	media	means	ordinary	individuals	and
There	are	commercial	services	available	which groups	using	media	technology...
allow	you	to	send	and	receive...
How	to	set	up	an	SMS	hub 	
An	SMS	hub	is	a	stand-alone	system	which	allows Tools
you	to	send	and	receive...
Asterisk
How	to	create	a	mobile	web	site Set	up	an	office	phone	system,	make	free
A	'mobile	web	site'	is	a	version	of	a	website or	very...
which	is	easily	viewable	on...
Using	mobiles	to	update	blogs	and Fring
websites Use	Skype,	or	your	favourite	instant
You	can	use	your	mobile	phone	to	update	your messaging...
organisation's	blog	or	website.
There...
Clickatell
'Clickatell	is	a	commercial	SMS	service
which	allows...
ABOUT	THIS	WEBSITE CREDITS DISCLAIMER DOWNLOAD
Published	October	2008.	Software	last	updated:	July	2009
