 
FIONET: MOBILE DIAGNOSTICS 
INTEGRATED WITH CLOUD 
INFORMATION SERVICES 
and the Deki Reader, a mobile, in vitro diagnostic device 
that interprets commercially available RDTs for 
infectious diseases such as malaria, HIV, syphilis, 
hepatitis, and dengue and is CE-marked for malaria 
RDTs. airFio is a secure cloud database that stores point
-of-care data transmitted by Deki over local mobile 
phone networks. Spiri is the gateway via web browsers 
to airFio and its menu of cloud information services. 
Spiri allows health program stakeholders to remotely 
monitor diagnostic performance, adherence to case 
management protocols, health care workers activity 
levels, and other health performance indicators. 
ABOUT FIONET IN GHANA 
The Ghana Health Service (GHS) expressed a desire to 
expand the usage of RDTs throughout Ghana with the 
following objectives: 1) improved quality control of 
diagnostic procedures, 2) consistent and highly accurate 
interpretation of RDTs and 3) improved data capture 
BRIEF OVERVIEW from clinical encounters where RDTs are used.  In 
Two of the biggest problems in the management of September 2012, GHS and Fio Corporation launched an 
infectious diseases in resource-limited settings are 1) initial deployment of Fionet in three districts of the 
inadequate diagnosis and clinical management at the Accra region: Greater Accra East, Dangme East and 
point of care, and 2) inadequate capture and transfer of Dangme West.  
point-of-care data to health program stakeholders for 
monitoring and evaluation, continuous quality 
improvement, and resource allocation.  Rapid diagnostic EVALUATION AND RESULTS 
tests (RDTs), the only practical diagnostic tests Before launching Fionet, over 180 GHS and private 
compatible with point-of-care settings, are read by eye, health workers and managers were trained on Fionet. 
commonly resulting in field  accuracy far below the Participating facilities and managers were instructed to 
manufacturer’s performance rating.  Meanwhile, health utilize Fionet full time for malaria RDT processing and 
care workers are too busy delivering essential care to interpretation as well as for malaria reporting and case 
patients to focus on data capture.  As a result, data from management. Deki Readers were configured to collect 
the point of care – where planning and trends must data on malaria RDTs as well as microscopy samples for 
begin and where spending outcomes have their end – is comprehensive reporting. Since the launch, Deki 
largely inaccessible. Readers have been active in 50 clinics and over 20,000 
records have been uploaded to the airFio cloud 
Fio Corporation has developed Fionet to address these database. 500 RDT-based and 250 microscopy-based 
problems.  Fionet comprises three integrated records continue to be collected each week. 
components: Deki, Spiri, and airFio.  Deki mobile 
software applications and companion devices for health The Accra Phase demonstrated the effectiveness of Deki 
care workers integrate clinical workflow guidance and Readers to ensure RDT quality though step-by-step 
digital data capture at the point of care, then transmit guidance during RDT processing, identification of misuse 
records of patient encounters to airFio.  Deki is or poor RDT quality, and objective interpretation of 
designed for use with standard Android phones, tablets, RDT results. RDT processing quality issues including 
62 mHEALTH COMPENDIUM   │    VOLUME 2 
 
 SERVICE DELIVERY 
using expired RDTs, mismatching patients and RDTs, which the Deki Reader was not yet compatible with.  
mistakes in incubation timing, and evidence of RDT Fio has since added that and others to its list of 
misuse such as adding too much blood, were detected compatible RDTs. 
by Deki Readers in 26% of RDTs processed. 
CONCLUSION 
The Accra Phase demonstrated that Fionet works in 
Ghana and is well suited to meet the needs of the Ghana 
Health Service in a transformative manner that can be 
rapidly deployed and centrally managed using the 
existing mobile phone infrastructure. GHS has the 
systems and capability to train users and leverage Fionet 
to make measurable and sustainable gains in monitoring 
and evaluation, quality of diagnoses, improved health 
The Deki Readers also improved district and program 
care worker performance, and minimization of material 
managers’ abilities to remotely monitor quality control 
waste in primary health care services.  
at the individual-, facility-, and program-wide levels. 
Records uploaded by Deki are geo-tagged and contain As a result of the Accra Phase’s success, Fio and GHS 
complete user, facility, and patient data; RDT records are working to implement a phased deployment of 
contain an image of the RDT being processed.  Through Fionet in the country over the course of 2013/14. 
Spiri, managers remotely audited diagnostic performance 
and monitored adherence to case management 
protocols. GEOGRAPHIC COVERAGE 
Ghana. Fionet is also being utilized in Kenya, Tanzania, 
Data captured was automatically transmitted over the 
Indonesia, Democratic Republic of Congo, Sierra Leone, 
local mobile phone network; 74% of records were 
and Colombia. 
uploaded to airFio within 10 minutes, 89% within two 
hours, and 97% within one week. The data was 
automatically aggregated and securely stored on airFio, IMPLEMENTATION PARTNERS 
and Sub-district, district, regional and national reports Ghana Ministry of Health, Ghana Health Service, Fio 
were automatically updated, eliminating laborious Corporation, Fio Health Ghana Ltd.  
manual data entry and reporting. 
FUNDER 
Ghana Health Service, Fio Corporation, Fio Health Ghana 
LESSONS LEARNED Ltd.  
 During the training period, many health workers 
whom had little prior experience with RDTs made CONTACT INFORMATION 
significant processing errors. Fio enhanced the Deki Fio Corporation 
Readers via an over-the-air software update to  Dr. Stephen N. Kinoti, Vice President, 
better identify conditions of RDT misprocessing, Clinical Solutions 
invalidate RDTs of compromised quality, and Tel: +416-368-8882, Email: skinoti@fio.com  
recommend that the health worker repeat the test. Fio Health Ghana Ltd.  
 Midway through the program, the flow of data to  Dr. Elias Sory, Director  
airFio slowed due to RDT stock outs.  The program Tel: +233-302-733-011, Email: esory@fio-
switched to an RDT from a different manufacturer ghana.com  
  MHEALTH COMPENDIUM  |  VOLUME 2 63 
