Select	Language
MHEALTH	EVIDENCE	TAXONOMY
Search	over	11,000	global	digital	health	evidence	sources
Search
What	is	mHealth	Evidence?
mHealthEvidence.org	was	designed	to	bring	together	the	world’s	literature	on	mHealth	to	make	it	easier	for	program	managers,
researchers,	government	leaders,	donors,	software	developers,	and	other	key	decision-makers	to	quickly	get	up	to	speed	on	the	current
state-of-the-art	and	evidence-based	best	practices.	It	includes	peer-reviewed	and	grey	literature	from	low-,	middle-	and	high-resource
settings.
Notable	Resources:
Factors	that	influence	the	implementation	of	e-health:	a	systematic	review	of	systematic	reviews.	This	review	provides	an
update	and	re-analysis	of	a	systematic	review	of	the	e-health	implementation	literature	culminating	in	a	set	of	accessible	and
usable	recommendations	for	anyone	involved	or	interested	in	the	implementation	of	e-health.
A	2017	study	from	the	Icahn	School	of	Medicine	at	Mount	Sinai 	demonstrates	that	conducting	some	studies	entirely	via
smartphones	is	feasible,	fruitful,	and	scalable:	It	stands	up	to	scientific	rigor,	allows	for	large-scale	participant	enrollment,	and
captures	unique	environmental	data	not	available	through	traditional	methods.
Guidelines	for	reporting	of	health	interventions	using	mobile	phones:	mobile	health	(mHealth)	evidence	reporting	and	assessment
(mERA)	checklist.	This	work	marks	the	culmination	of	three	years	of	multi-institutional	collaborations	to	determine	standards	for
reporting	digital	health	evidence.	The	authors	hope	that	the	systematic	use	of	this	checklist	to	report	research	findings	will	help
improve	the	quality	of	digital	health	evidence.
Mobile	Technology	in	Support	of	Frontline	Health	Workers:	A	comprehensive	overview	of	the	landscape,	knowledge	gaps	and
future	directions.	This	report	summarizes	current	data	from	over	140	FHW-supported	mHealth	projects	from	developing	countries
to	describe	the	emergent	trends	and	best	practices	in	the	use	of	mobile	phones,	tablets,	and	technical	platforms	by	FHWs	over
the	last	decade,	understand	the	key	considerations	in	choosing	the	type	of	phone	and	platform	and	associated	programmatic
costs,	present	the	evidence	on	the	effectiveness	of	mobile	approaches,	and	establish	a	framework	for	systematically	deploying
such	tools.
VIEW	MOST	RECENT	RECORDS
Mobile	Alliance	for	Maternal	Action	(MAMA)	Lessons	Learned
Analyzing	recommender	systems	for	health	promotion	using	a	multidisciplinary	taxonomy:	A	scoping	review
Humanitarian	health	computing	using	artificial	intelligence	and	social	media:	A	narrative	literature	review
The	ALMANACH	Project:	Preliminary	Results	and	potentiality	from	Afghanistan
The	Role	of	Digital	Health	to	Support	the	Achievement	of	the	Sustainable	Development	Goals	(SDGs)
BROWSE	MHEALTH	EVIDENCE	TOPICS
Beneficiary	Age	Range
Care	Model
Health	Domain
Health	System	Constraint
Location
mHealth	Application
Special	Population
Stage	of	Development
Evaluation
Target	User
Technology
CONTRIBUTE	TO	MHEALTH	EVIDENCE!
mHealth	Evidence	is	expanding	to	include	grey	literature	in	the	growing	body	of	evidence.
Registered	users	of	mHealth	Evidence	may	now	use	this	bookmarklet	feature	to	contribute	material	for	submission.	Please	note
contributors	must	be	logged	in	to	access	this	feature.	All	submissions	will	be	reviewed.
PROVIDE	US	WITH	FEEDBACK
How	can	we	improve	the	mHealth	Evidence	website?	As	you	explore	the	new	site,	kindly	take	a	few	moments	to	answer	 a	few
brief	questions.
Your	input	helps	keep	this	site	as	useful	as	possible	for	the	thousands	of	health	professionals	and	innovators,	researchers,
scholars,	teachers,	and	students	who	access	the	mHealth	Evidence	website	each	month.
Contact 	Web	Policies
This	website	is	made	possible	by	the	support	of	the	American	People	through	the	United	States	Agency	for	International	Development	(USAID).	The
Knowledge	for	Health	(K4Health)	Project	is	supported	by	USAID's	Office	of	Population	and	Reproductive	Health,	Bureau	for	Global	Health,	under
Cooperative	Agreement	#GPO-A-00-08-00006-00.	K4Health	is	implemented	by	the	Johns	Hopkins	Center	for	Communication	Programs	(CCP).	The
contents	of	this	website	are	the	sole	responsibility	of	K4Health.	The	information	provided	on	this	website	is	not	official	U.S.	Government	information
and	does	not	necessarily	represent	the	views	or	positions	of	USAID,	the	United	States	Government,	or	The	Johns	Hopkins	University.	Read	our	full
Security,	Privacy,	and	Copyright	Policies.
