A significant unanticipated 
finding from this study was 
the high percentage of 
women who shared the PH 
messages with others.
PROJECTING HEALTH
IMPLEMENTATION DATE:  April 2012 to May 2015
Catalyzing behavior change through visual communication
India accounts for one-third of the world’s annual maternal deaths; in the country’s most populous 
state of Uttar Pradesh, the maternal mortality rate was 440 per 100,000 live births in 2011, and the 
neonatal mortality rate was 50 per 1,000 live births. India as a whole accounts for 28 percent of the 
world’s newborn deaths. In resource-poor settings, simple interventions such as birth spacing, birth 
preparedness, hygienic delivery, thermal care, and immediate breastfeeding could prevent the majority 
of these deaths. Effective, novel, and low-cost strategies for achieving improved health practices at the 
home and community levels are needed, especially in areas where staffing shortages and low literacy 
levels are common.1
About Projecting Health
P rojecting Health (PH) focuses on community-led use of (MGs) have led disseminations, which have also taken place digital media to improve health knowledge and behav- at village health and nutrition days. Accredited social health 
iors. The new method equips communities with basic skills activists (ASHAs), or frontline health care workers, facili-
and low-cost technologies for targeted message creation and tated video screenings and led group discussions around the 
delivery bolstered by scientific evidence and visual demonstra- key messages and lingering questions pertaining to the issues 
tions. PH transforms traditional social and behavior change raised in the videos. Traditionally, ASHAs relied on verbal 
communication by using customized educational videos that communication, games, and printed job aids to convey key 
are developed and produced by the communities and shared health messages. The videos offer a medium through which 
via low-cost, portable projectors and other mobile devices. ASHAs could promote healthy behaviors with increased 
PATH successfully integrated the PH model into an existing accuracy, ease, and effectiveness. By equipping community 
community program in India through local nonprofit partners members with new tools for effectively promoting health 
Gramin Vikas Sansthan and Nehru Yuva Sangathan Tisi. behaviors and mobilizing communities to improve health 
Community members were involved in all aspects of video outcomes, the approach is shifting the driving force for 
production. Community health workers and mothers groups change from health experts to the community.
24  n  BEHAVIOR CHANGE COMMUNICATION
PATH, 2014
100 percent of women *p<0.001
100 percent of women *p<0.001
98*
93*
80 90
84* 80
82*
77
71
60 60
63*
58 54
51
40 40 47 46
33
20 20 29
0
Birth Breastfeeding Family planning
preparedness Cord care Thermal care
= Projecting Health (309) = Standard MG (321) = Comparison (327) = Projecting Health (51) = Standard MG (49) = Comparison (72)
Evaluation and Results n Community-level training on basic digital media tech-
nology for video production 
The evaluation of PH as an effective model for behavior change n Production of videos featuring community members 
took place in two phases. The first phase explored whether com-
munities were equipped to produce videos and if the target com- n Facilitator-led dialogue sessions before and after  
munity would accept the approach. The second phase looked at video screenings
whether PH would be more effective for changing the behavior A significant unanticipated finding from this study was the high 
and practices of the community over traditional methods. percentage of women who shared the PH messages with others: 
During the one-year feasibility study (2012), the project pro- 75 percent of women who participated in PH groups reported 
duced 20 videos on five key maternal and neonatal health topics: sharing the messages, compared to 61 percent in the standard 
birth preparedness, thermal care, cord care, breastfeeding, and MGs and 41 percent in the nonintervention group. Addition-
family planning, and reached 10,000 women from 27 villages. ally, nearly one-third of women (28 percent) from PH groups 
Based on successful feasibility findings, a study to investigate the shared information about family planning with their husbands.
effectiveness of the PH intervention was carried out, comparing 
three arms: the PH intervention, standard MGs, and a noninter- Conclusion 
vention arm. Among the 14,000 women who participated in PH 
in this phase, a subsample of 302 mothers (with children under Findings from this evaluation suggest that women who par-
one year of age) participated in this evaluation to assess their cur- ticipated in PH groups reported higher levels of knowledge, 
rent knowledge and health practices. In addition, 321 mothers uptake of maternal and newborn health practices, and shar-
from standard MGs and 327 mothers from the nonintervention ing what they learned with others. The PH model presents an 
arm participated in the evaluation (a total of 950 women). Pre- unprecedented cutting-edge opportunity for demonstrating 
liminary analysis of end-line data suggest significant differences significant global health impact. By shifting the driving force 
in both knowledge and practices in the PH arm compared to the for change from health experts to community members, the 
other two study arms. Compared to those who participated in model has the potential to be exceptionally effective for mod-
standard MGs, PH participants showed a difference in knowl- ifying behaviors in many health areas across a range of global 
edge on temporary family planning methods, cord care, and ex- settings. PATH envisions that all future health programming 
clusive breastfeeding by 40 percent, 31 percent, and 26 percent, could easily incorporate the PH approach to achieve wide-
respectively. Among the 172 mothers who delivered at home (18 scale adoption of healthy behaviors. PATH is currently pur-
percent of the total sample), 82 percent reported practicing cord suing expansion to other geographic regions and key topic 
care followed by 47 percent in standard MGs and 46 percent in areas to validate replicability and scalability. n
the nonintervention group.
Geographic Coverage: Uttar Pradesh, India
Lessons Learned Implementation Partners: PATH; Digital Green; University of 
Washington
The PH model consists of several key elements that enhance Donora: Donations from private foundations and individuals 
video production and stimulate community engagement: to the PATH Health Innovation Portfolio, National Science 
A community advisory board to identify video topics Foundation, Department for International Developmentn 
and guide activities Contact Information: Kiersten Israel-Ballard, Technical Officer, 
PATH, kisrael-ballard@path.org
mHEALTH COMPENDIUM  VOLUME 5  n  25
