TC211:	Technology	for	Data	Collection	and
Management
Share	this:
 Tweet  Share 0  Share 0
> TC211:	Technology	for	Data	Collection	and
All	courses Management
 	$495.00
 	4	weeks
This	four	week	online	course	will	focus	on	building	skills	and	strategies	to	better	collect	and	manage	data	using	a
variety	of	technology	tools.
Course	Description
How	has	technology	changed	the	way	data	are	collected	and	the	way	surveys	are	deployed?	Organizations,
agencies	and	companies	are	just	beginning,		digital	data	collection	skills	are	in	high	demand.
Data	collection	is	the	building	block	of	M&E	work.	The	data	collected	determines	the	value	of	analysis	and	the
impact	that	can	be	measured.	Digital	survey	tools	have	added	new	elements	to	survey	design,	such	as	skip	logic,
data	validation,	and	decision	trees.	New	technologies,	such	as	biometrics,	remote	sensors,	and	satellite	imagery,
provide	additional	tools	for	data	collection	and	identifying	beneficiaries.	Understanding	these	tools,	how	to	design
and	deploy	digital	surveys,	and	how	to	combine	active	and	passive	data	collection	is	necessary	to	maximize	the
value	from	data	collection	effort.
This	four	week	online	certificate	course	will	feature	live	interactive	guest	expert	presentations	with	leading	M&E
practitioners,	software	developers,	and	data	scientists.	It	will	also	include	a	unique	hands-on	learning	environment
with	animated	videos,	technology	demos,	practical	activities,	networking	events,	immersive	simulations	and	more.
As	part	of	the	course,	participants	will	go	through	the	process	of	creating	a	data	collection	plan	and	deploying	a
mobile	survey.	Participants	will	get	feedback	from	guest	experts,	facilitators,	and	fellow	participants.
Course	Objectives
After	this	four	week	course	participants	will	be	able	to:
Articulate	the	strengths	and	weaknesses	of	different	data	collection	tools,	including	mobile	devices,
biometrics,	and	remote	sensors,	and	drones
Identify	key	concerns	for	a	data	collection	plan,	including,	but	not	limited	to:	audience,	literacy,	bias,	security
risks	
Design	and	deploy	a	digital	survey	for	a	mobile	device	using	advanced	techniques,	such	as	skip	logic	and
branching	question	trees
Compare	data	collection	software	and	select	the	best	software	for	your	data	collection	needs
Assess	technical	and	human	constraints	for	a	data	collection	plan
Manage	data	collection	enumerators	using	tools	for	remote	monitoring	the	data	collection
Develop	self-confidence	in	working	with	new	tools	to	collect	data
Course	Methodology
This	course	is	delivered	entirely	online	over	a	period	of	four	weeks.
This	course	features	several	live	interactive	expert	presentations	each	week	with	leading	practitioners,
software	developers,	academics,	and	donors.
Every	live	event	is	recorded	and	archived	for	you	to	watch	later.
This	course	also	features	a	unique	hands-on	learning	environment	with	animated	videos,	technology	demos,
practical	activities,	networking	events,	office	hours,	participant	presentations,	immersive	simulations,	and
more.
TechChange	recommends	budgeting	a	minimum	commitment	of	5-7	hours	per	week	and	scheduling	time	for
the	course	around	your	existing	obligations.
Participants	will	have	access	to	all	course	content	for	at	least	4	months	after	course	completion	so	the
material	can	be	completed	and	revisited	later.
Price
$395	if	application	and	payment	is	submitted	by	August	15th,	2018
$445	if	application	and	payment	is	submitted	by	September	15th,	2018
$495	if	application	and	payment	is	submitted	by	course	start	date
Group	discount	rates	available.	For	more	details,	please	contact	us	at	social	[at]	techchange.org.	If	you	are	not
happy	with	your	course	experience	for	any	reason,	TechChange	is	happy	to	discuss	refunds.
This	course	is	a	part	of	our	Technology	for	Monitoring	and	Evaluation	diploma	program.	Interested	in	learning
about	more	courses?	Browse	through	our	diploma	catalog	here,	or	check	out	our	main	catalog	and	FAQ	section!
Next	Session
None	upcoming...
Change
Past	Experts
Laura	O'Brien
Monitoring	and	Evaluation	Manager,	Digital	Impact	Alliance
Jaclyn	Carlsen
International	Development	+	Mobile	+	Technology	(ICT)	Specialist
Emily	Tomkys
ICT	in	Programme	Officer,	Oxfam
Read	bio	
Joel	Selanikio
CEO,	Magpi
Read	bio	
Danna	Ingleton
The	Engine	Room
Read	bio	
Kerry	Brown
D3	Systems
Read	bio	
Charles	Martin-Shields
Institute	for	Economics	and	Peace
Read	bio	
Cory	MacVie
Fulcrum
Emily	Ferguson
Product	Manager,	Swish
Natasha	Beale
ICT4D	Specialist	at	Equal	Access
Charlie	Weems
Partnership	Engineer,	Twillo	Inc.
Chris	Robert
CEO	of	SurveyCTO
Joy	Amulya
Senior	Monitoring,	Evaluation,	and	Learning	Advisor,	Center	for	Applied	Learning	and
Impact	at	IREX
John	Garrity
Senior	Connectivity	Advisor,	USAID	Global	Development	Lab
Read	bio	
Nael	Jean-Baptiste
Senior	Specialist,	EFSL	MEAL,	Save	the	Children
Daniel	Hammer
White	House	Office	of	Science	and	Technology	Policy
Amanda	Berman
Monitoring	Officer,	Johns	Hopkins	Center	for	Communication	Programs
Emily	Tavoulareas
White	House	Office	of	Science	and	Technology	Policy
Valentine	Gandhi
Head	of	Research,	Evaluation,	ICT	and	Innovation	for	Nairobi	and	Jakarta,	The	Development
Cafe
Melissa	Persaud
Voto
Read	bio	
Contact:	techsupport	[at]	techchange.org
Terms	of	Use
Privacy	Policy
Policies
©	2012-2019	TechChange
