 
MOBILE PHONE SURVEY SOFTWARE FOR 
END-USE 
quarterly surveys use DataDyne’s EpiSurveyor (now 
Magpi) platform, which facilitates the creation of data 
collection forms online, and eases the collection and 
analysis of survey data.  
ABOUT SURVEY SOFTWARE FOR 
END-USE VERIFICATION 
The PMI End-Use Verification Activity is a quarterly 
survey that captures information about the malaria 
supply chain and malaria diagnosis and treatment at 
public health facilities in focus countries in sub-Saharan 
Africa. The USAID | DELIVER PROJECT conducted a 
pilot of the End-Use Verification Activity in 2009 in 
Tanzania. The pilot used paper surveys and revealed that 
implementing the survey across all focus countries 
would be too time-intensive and prone to producing 
poor quality data.  
BRIEF OVERVIEW To address these challenges, the project conducted a 
For developing countries affected by malaria, cost- pilot in 2009 of mobile phone survey technology to 
effective, reliable, secure, and sustainable supply chains implement the End-Use survey in Ghana. Following the 
can save millions of lives. Shortages and stockouts of success of that pilot, PMI adopted the use of mobile 
health commodities can cause dangerous treatment gaps technology for regular implementation of the activity. 
for patients. Unplanned emergency orders waste money The use of mobile technology enables the rapid analysis 
on rush fees and high freight costs. Lack of inventory of data and the quick and widespread dissemination of 
control wastes valuable commodities due to expiry, findings useful for strategic and programmatic decision-
improper storage, and theft. Poor coordination leads to making. JSI used DataDyne’s EpiSurveyor (now Magpi) 
redundancies and gaps in service.  platform that enables any computer literate user to 
freely create data collection forms online, download 
The goal of a health logistics system is much larger than 
these forms to a wide variety of mobile phones, upload 
simply making sure a product gets where it needs to go; 
the captured data, and make use of general analysis 
it seeks to ensure that every person is able to obtain 
tools.  
and use quality essential health supplies whenever he or 
she needs them. To determine if malaria commodity With the mobile-phone based End-Use Verification 
needs are met, the U.S. President’s Malaria Initiative Activity, digital data collection and entry occurs in the 
(PMI) implements quarterly surveys that capture field at the point which data is gathered, removing an 
information about the malaria supply chain and malaria extra step of inputting data, which leads to less error 
diagnosis and treatment at public health facilities in focus and greater efficiency. Importantly, decision-makers have 
countries in sub-Saharan Africa. Results from these access to real-time data for decision-making, increasing 
quarterly End-Use Verification Activity surveys provide their ability to respond to critical problems in the supply 
rapid, actionable findings for decision makers. chain.  
After piloting paper-based End-Use Verification Activity  
surveys in 2009, the USAID | DELIVER PROJECT began 
conducting mobile phone-based End-Use surveys. These 
52 mHEALTH COMPENDIUM   │    VOLUME 2 
 
 LOGISTICS 
EVALUATION AND RESULTS creation, data entry, and analysis steps. In 2012, End-Use 
After the pilot in 2009, data was collected to measure Verification was initiated in two new countries, Nigeria 
the efficiency of mobile data collection, data quality, and and Zimbabwe, and continues in Ghana, Mozambique, 
ease of use. Results indicated that data collection is Malawi, Tanzania, and Zambia. It is also implemented 
quicker using digital means rather than paper. The time regularly in Angola, Burundi, DRC, Ethiopia, Kenya, 
required to conduct the End-Use survey at a health Liberia, and Mali by USAID’s Systems for Improved 
facility using EpiSurveyor was, on average, 27 minutes Access to Pharmaceuticals and Services (SIAPS) 
less than the time required to gather the data on paper. program. 
Results from a comparison of the data in the   
EpiSurveyor database with what was collected on paper 
indicate that there was very close parity between the GEOGRAPHIC COVERAGE 
EpiSurveyor database and the data gathered by paper More than 5,000 health facilities in Ghana, Malawi, 
and input by hand. From the 412 different fields Mozambique, Nigeria, Tanzania, Zambia, and Zimbabwe. 
compared, 6 discrepancies were discovered, which 
represented a 1.5% difference between the two IMPLEMENTATION PARTNERS 
methods, with the differences indicating better quality John Snow, Inc. (The USAID | DELIVER PROJECT); 
data in those collected via mobile phone. Country-specific partners: GHANA: Stores, Supplies and 
Drugs Management (SSDM), National Malaria Control 
Ease of use of the mobile phone-based survey program 
Program (NMCP), Pharmacy unit, Disease control unit, 
was researched through a short questionnaire, where 
Family Health Division (FHD), National Tuberculosis 
every respondent asked to be able to use EpiSurveyor 
Control Program (NTCP), National AIDS Control Program 
again. Despite any perceived limitations of the hardware 
(NACP) and the Centre for Health Information 
and software, the ability to automatically perform 
Management (CHIM) | MALAWI: NMCP | 
analysis and eliminate the need to manually enter data 
MOZAMBIQUE: NMCP and Central de Medicamentos e 
after the data collection period made replacing paper-
Artigos Medicos (CMAM) | NIGERIA: NMCP, Targeted 
based data collection with mobile phones desirable.  
States High Impact Project (TSHIP), Malaria Action 
Program for States (MAPS) | TANZANIA: NMCP and 
Pharmaceutical Services Section (PSS) | ZAMBIA: Ministry 
LESSONS LEARNED of Health | ZIMBABWE: Ministry of Health Child Welfare 
 To ensure that data could be secure in the field, (MOHCW), MOHCW Directorate of Pharmacy Services 
even when mobile upload to the remote server was 
not possible, data collectors needed the ability to 
FUNDER 
back-up data from the mobile phone to a laptop. JSI 
worked with DataDyne to create this feature, PMI, USAID  
allowing for data transfer via cable or Bluetooth to 
the user’s laptop as a .txt file (compatible with CONTACT INFORMATION 
Excel, Word, Notepad, etc.) USAID 
 Rene Salgado, Senior Malaria Monitoring 
and Evaluation Advisor 
CONCLUSION Email: ssalgado@usaid.gov  
Coordinating and implementing large scale surveys is a John Snow, Inc. (The USAID | DELIVER 
complicated, time consuming process. Using mobile PROJECT)  
phones for the End-Use Verification activity has reduced  Mike Frost, Technical Advisor  
the time needed to implement the activity and produce Tel: +703-528-7474, Email: mfrost@jsi.com  
actionable findings, by streamlining the database 
  MHEALTH COMPENDIUM  |  VOLUME 2 53 
