Closing the  
Access Gap:
Innovation to Accelerate Universal Internet Adoption
CLOSING THE ACCESS GAP: INNOVATION TO ACCELERATE UNIVEPhRoStoA crLe dIiNt: MTEorRgaNnaE WT inAgDardO foPr TUISOAIND  (T/anza n1ia)
Funded with Support From
2 \ CLOSING THE ACCESS GAP: INNOVATION TO ACCELERATE UNIVERSAL INTERNET ADOPTION
Acknowledgments
This paper is the result of a collaboration among Caribou Digital, the Digital Impact 
Alliance (DIAL), and the U.S. Agency for International Development (USAID). 
Caribou provided research and analysis for the paper. DIAL’s Insights and Impact team 
funded the work, which was led by Beth Gertz. DIAL team members Kate Wilson, 
Andrew Axelrod, Syed Raza, and Jeff Wishnie provided input and support for the 
project. USAID’s Digital Inclusion team, including John Garrity, Graham Gottlieb, and 
Tom Koutsky also contributed, as did DIAL advisor Michael Kleeman from University 
of California San Diego. 
We would like thank DIAL’s Access Advisory Group members, who have generously 
shared their insights and knowledge to inform this report: Miriam Altman (formerly 
Telkom), Michael Best (Georgia Institute of Technology), Jane Coffin (Internet 
Society), Jonathan Dolan (USAID), Paul Garnett (Microsoft), Sonia Jorge (Alliance 
for Affordable Internet), Lauren Kahn and Charlotte Smart (UK Department for 
International Development), Lars Reichelt (RA Advisors), and Arjuna Sathiaseelan 
(University of Cambridge). 
We also would like to thank individuals from many innovative internet access businesses 
who kindly contributed to the paper’s research: Peter Bloom (Rhizomatica), James 
Cemmell (Inmarsat), Andy Halsall (poa! Internet), Kurtis Heimerl (Endaga), Tim 
Human (Project Isizwe), Raina Kumra (Gigato), Colleen Mallahan (Google Project 
Link), Paul Talley (ViRural Africa), Steve Song (Village Telco), Pat Wu and Ryan 
Wallace (Facebook), and Elaine Weidman-Grunewald (Ericsson).
The author’s views expressed in this publication do not necessarily reflect the views 
of the United States Agency for International Development or the United States 
Government.
Suggested citation: USAID, Caribou Digital and the Digital Impact Alliance.  
Closing the Access Gap: Innovation to Accelerate Universal Internet Adoption.  
February 2017.
CLOSING THE ACCESS GAP: INNOVATION TO ACCELERATE UNIVERSAL INTERNET ADOPTION / 3
Table of 
Contents
4 \ CLOSING THE ACCESS GAP: INNOVATION TO ACCELERATE UNIVERSAL INTERNET ADOPTION
1 Preface .......................................................................................................................6
2 Executive Summary .................................................................................................. 7
3 The Current Access Landscape ................................................................................ 11
3.1 Current forms of access and adoption
3.2 Convergence of trends and technologies driving 
  the emergence of new access innovations
4 Last Mile Access Innovations ................................................................................. 16
4.1 Models to extend infrastructure
4.2 Complementary technologies
4.3 Improving value
5 Developing a Portfolio of Approaches to Advance Internet Access .................... 31
5.1 Identifying options based on market context
5.2 Country example: A portfolio of access innovations in Kenya
6 Conclusions and Implication for Action ............................................................... 35
6.1 Key themes
6.2 Implications for action
6.3 Conclusion
Appendix 1 Catalogue of access innovation ........................................................... 42
Appendix 2 Case studies of select access innovations ............................................47
Appendix 3  Backhaul innovations and case studies ................................................78
Profiles Mawingu Networks ................................................................................................... 21
ViRural Africa ........................................................................................................... 23
Rhizomatica .............................................................................................................. 25
Village Telco.............................................................................................................. 27
poa! Internet ............................................................................................................. 29
Gigato .......................................................................................................................30
Figures New access models grouped by ‘access challenge’ .................................................. 17
Factors that influence viability of different access interventions ......................... 32
llustrative map of access innovations in Kenya ....................................................... 32
Tables Technology and Business Model Characteristics of Access Innovations ................ 18 
  Key Considerations Unique To Each Community Scenario ........................................ 34
Box 1 The anatomy of a network ........................................................................................ 15
CLOSING THE ACCESS GAP: INNOVATION TO ACCELERATE UNIVERSAL INTERNET ADOPTION / 5
1 Preface 2
“Significantly increase access to information and 
communications technology and strive to provide 
universal and affordable access to the internet in  
least developed countries by 2020”
– Sustainable Development Goal 9c
Roughly four billion people globally have yet to adopt the internet. By including 
internet access in the Sustainable Development Goals (SDGs), the global community 
is committed to expanding access and promoting adoption. 
As governments, donors, think tanks, • What is required to foster a more 
and others try to understand how enabling environment for promising 
to achieve the SDGs, a significant access and adoption innovations? 
body of work on barriers and progress 
toward internet access and adoption is The analysis suggests that although  
expanding. The Digital Impact Alliance a “silver bullet” is unlikely to emerge, 
(DIAL) commissioned this paper to there is a clear role for business model 
understand potential business model and and technology innovation, and the 
technology innovations for accelerating financing mechanisms to support  
access and adoption of mobile phones such developments.
and the internet in emerging markets and The analysis also suggests that although 
inform the development community of a good deal of government, industry, 
innovations underway, as well as lessons and development community activity is 
emerging from these efforts. Questions underway, independent, uncoordinated 
examined include: actions are unlikely to succeed in solving 
• Are these innovations purely this development challenge. Instead, 
operating at the margins, or might coordinated collective action is needed. 
some have the potential to disrupt Working together, the global community 
traditional business models? can make “universal and affordable access 
• What role do such innovations play to the internet in least developed countries” 
in a strategy to achieve broader a reality.
access and adoption within an 
emerging market? 
6 \ CLOSING THE ACCESS GAP: INNOVATION TO ACCELERATE UNIVERSAL INTERNET ADOPTION
2 Executive  Summary
“…Entirely new approaches and innovative business 
models may be needed …to achieve universal coverage 
of broadband.”
The Broadband Commission. The State of Broadband. 20151
Mobile and internet services have the power to transform lives, offering life-enhancing 
financial, health, and many other services, as well as the simple ability to express oneself 
to one’s family and community. Yet millions of people in emerging markets lack access 
to these services, and even those who have access often do not adopt services, because 
of constraints arising from limited affordability, perceived value, and ability to use 
the services. The resulting access and adoption gaps threaten to exacerbate existing 
economic and social inequities facing low-income, rural communities in emerging 
markets, particularly among women and girls.
The market alone will not close the of millions of people unconnected as 
access gap. Over time, industry they reside beyond the point at which 
investment in mobile and fixed networks current service delivery, via the dominant 
in the developing world may increase model of network operators, makes 
and extend existing network coverage, economic sense. 
but will likely not expand to connect 
marginalized populations in unconnected This is where innovation has a role to 
and under-connected geographies play. A growing set of non-traditional 
because of the high capital and service providers are testing new business 
operational costs and low profit potential. models and technologies to reach 
This market frontier, or the point at consumers who otherwise might reside 
which economic incentives to expand and beyond the market frontier. Thus far, 
deliver connectivity fall to zero, will for few, if any, of these innovations have 
the foreseeable future leave hundreds yet to reach the type of scale that are 
1. Broadband Commission for Sustainable Developement. The state of broadband 2015: Broadband as a foundation for 
sustainable development. Geneva: ITU; 2015. Available at: http://www.broadbandcommission.org/publications/Pages/
SOB-2015.aspx 
CLOSING THE ACCESS GAP: INNOVATION TO ACCELERATE UNIVERSAL INTERNET ADOPTION / 7
substantially shifting the access and appropriate in specific markets,  
adoption equations. These diverse efforts, but no single innovation will apply 
however, are important as industry, in every context. Market dynamics, 
governments, and the development geographic conditions, regulatory 
community explore how to close this gap. constraints, and community 
characteristics all play a role in the 
To address the access gap, academics, potential success of different business 
technologists, and entrepreneurs, from models and the applicability of 
major Silicon Valley firms to start-ups different technologies. To enable this 
in rural Mexico, are testing new business portfolio to emerge, governments, 
models and technologies to extend donors, industry and investors all have 
the reach and affordability of mobile a role to play in supporting greater 
and internet beyond what the current innovation and experimentation to 
mobile footprints and business models identify and accelerate scale-up of 
support. Though these models all address sustainable solutions. 
the basic issue of internet access and 
adoption, they approach the challenge in 2. An active community of innovators 
quite different ways, providing a variety is implementing solutions, but many 
of potential solutions that may or may require risk capital to fully explore 
not be appropriate for a given market. alternative business models. The 
A review of some recent and ongoing business case for last-mile innovations 
efforts provides both a framework to for the most marginalized populations 
help decision makers consider where is still to be determined given the high 
innovation can best address gaps in their costs for deployment and currently 
specific contexts, as well as some lessons low profit potential. To help support 
and opportunities for action across the entrepreneurs innovating for the last 
ecosystem. The following are the three mile, risk capital is needed to help 
main conclusions: offset immediate infrastructure costs 
but must be carefully structured 
1. A portfolio of diverse, innovative to avoid dependency. Although 
access solutions is required to meet industry will remain the chief 
unique market contexts. A range of source of investment in the sector, 
innovative models are beginning to governments, bilateral donors, and 
serve communities at the base of the impact investors have key roles 
economic pyramid. It is unlikely that to play in supporting innovation. 
a single “silver bullet” will emerge Governments, donors, industry, 
to close the access gap for billions and investors can all play roles with 
of people across dozens of markets. greater support through appropriate 
Each model offers features that are financing and risk capital, which 
8 \ CLOSING THE ACCESS GAP: INNOVATION TO ACCELERATE UNIVERSAL INTERNET ADOPTION
supports testing of new business In addition to creating constructive 
models and technologies. enabling environments to expand 
traditional network connectivity in their 
3. Greater collaboration and knowledge countries, policymakers can consider how 
sharing across the community, within their policies and regulations encourage 
bounds of market competitiveness, innovation, as well as provide risk capital 
can play a role in accelerating in the form of grants or short-term 
innovation. Both innovators and subsidies to enable small companies or 
investors alike require more actionable social enterprises to test the viability 
market intelligence (for example on of potentially game-changing access 
end users, geographic characteristics, innovations. Access innovations are 
existing infrastructure, and regulatory blossoming in policy environments that 
constraints) in order to tailor foster competition, provide flexible and 
different market models. The type streamlined licensing, and are open to 
of market data commonly used to trials and experimentation. Innovators, 
base investment decisions in mature including start-ups and forward-looking 
markets is more expensive and traditional operators, can learn from 
difficult to obtain in low-resource prior telephony and internet expansion 
environments. Most innovators, efforts where history demonstrates that 
particularly smaller actors, struggle simply building infrastructure is not 
to navigate regulatory, technical, and enough; thoughtful distribution that 
financial challenges on their own, improves affordability and strengthens 
as well as to understand and foster the incentives and ability of low-income 
the demand-side drivers needed to end users to adopt service also is required 
drive low income end user adoption. to support economically sustainable 
Both innovators and investors alike models. 
are hungry for better knowledge 
and more data and what works for Bilateral and multilateral donors and 
different models. Greater government other investors have an opportunity to 
and donor investment to support accelerate adoption by providing risk 
research and knowledge sharing can capital to enable promising, early-stage 
help address these gaps and uncover innovations. Market-based finance will 
these data. be the key driver of sustainable, large-
scale connectivity, but many potentially 
IMPLICATIONS FOR ACTION interesting models are at risk of being 
To realize the potential growth and lost to the ‘valley of death’ between 
adoption of innovation in this sector, proof-of-concept and positive cash 
a range of market participants all have flow. Access advocates—comprising the 
roles to play. growing set of global alliances, advocacy 
CLOSING THE ACCESS GAP: INNOVATION TO ACCELERATE UNIVERSAL INTERNET ADOPTION / 9
groups, academics, donors, NGOs, and 
corporate policy shops—can enhance 
their voices and effectiveness through 3
stronger coordination. 
Finally, given the magnitude and 
complexity of the challenge, 
governments, innovators, donors, 
and other investors, as well as access 
advocates, may want to consider a more 
coordinated approach to testing the 
viability of these innovations, including 
greater investment in testing such 
models, and more structured approaches 
to undertaking and sharing data and 
insights. By establishing clear definitions 
of success, identifying areas of respective 
comparative advantage, harmonizing 
research agendas, and improving 
knowledge sharing, these groups can help 
accelerate sustainable access for and 
adoption by the underserved.
10 \ CLOSING THE ACCESS GAP: INNOVATION TO ACCELERATE UNIVERSAL INTERNET ADOPTION
3 The Current  Access Landscape
Access to the internet (defined as the necessary conditions of network coverage, 
affordable price levels, and user agency with skills, resources, and interest) can result 
in economic and social benefits for wealthy and low-income consumers alike.2 The full 
benefits of the mobile revolution will not be realized until all members of society have 
access to networks and services that are relevant and affordable. 
Industry will continue to play a key  Given this, policymakers and regulators 
role in extending traditional mobile play critical roles in fostering enabling 
networks to the last mile, while environments that push the market 
policymakers and regulators can focus frontier, expanding the market’s ability 
on creating optimal environments for to serve lower-income, low-density 
the market to expand as deeply across consumers who currently lack access or 
a population as possible. Network see value in adopting services where they 
coverage to some rural, or marginalized, exist. Even the most progressive policies, 
communities may never make economic however, run up against the limits of the 
sense to serve via traditional networks existing economics of traditional services. 
and business models, however, even in This is the point at which business model 
the most supportive policy environments. and technology innovation is required.
At some point in every market, 
commercial investment hits a “market Governments, industry, donors and 
frontier,” or the point at which economic others with an interest in achieving global 
incentives to expand and deliver service goals relating to phone and internet 
fall to zero, where industry’s cost-to- access might consider a variety, or 
serve each incremental new user— portfolio, of different solutions, whereby 
much less to design service to meet policy facilitates the expansion of 
low-income, underserved consumer existing network coverage, while business 
segments—intersects the willingness or model and technology innovations help 
ability of the new user to pay for service.3 to reach rural, low-income communities.
2. See for example https://www.itu.int/ITU-D/treg/broadband/ITU-BB-Reports_Impact-of-Broadband-on-the-Economy.pdf 
and http://www.worldbank.org/en/publication/wdr2016
3. World Bank. Telecommunications and Information Services for the Poor: Toward a Strategy for Universal Access. 
World Bank Discussion Paper No. 432. April 2002.
CLOSING THE ACCESS GAP: INNOVATION TO ACCELERATE UNIVERSAL INTERNET ADOPTION / 11
3.1 CURRENT FORMS OF  environments. Where service might  
ACCESS AND ADOPTION be available, prices can be unaffordable 
In developing countries, mobile networks to low income populations in emerging 
are the dominant access technology, with markets. As a result, urban 3G population 
mobile operators purchasing spectrum coverage is 89 percent but only 29 
licenses, deploying networks of cell percent for rural regions.
5 Although 2G 
towers, and selling predominantly pre- coverage is widespread, global coverage  
6
paid, airtime and data via agent networks. of higher speed 3G is lower at 70 percent,  
7
Mobile phones—basic, feature phones, and and 4G is 35 percent.  As a result, even 
smartphones—are increasingly available where low-income users are able to afford 
and affordable. The combination of the service, they often face a far inferior  
portability of a handset and broad network user experience, relying mainly on slower 
coverage provides the user with mobility. 2G service. A recent GSMA report 
estimates that compared to urban cellular 
Mobile carrier networks have been site deployments, rural and remote tower 
deployed globally over the last 25  site location can cost up to 30% more 
years and the regulatory, technical,  in CAPEX, up to 100% more in OPEX 
and commercial structures such as (driven by increased energy and backhaul 
broadband spectrum licensing are well costs), while serving 80% less users per 
established. Cell networks provide wide site, and resulting in 95% less revenue.8
areas of coverage from single cell sites 
compared with technologies such as 
Wi-Fi; access to the internet is typically 
unrestricted and open. Globally, 2G 
coverage is widespread, with 90 percent  
of the world's population covered.4 
The business case for expanding coverage 
into rural regions is challenging, however. 
The high capital expenditure (CAPEX) 
and operating expenditure (OPEX) costs 
associated with mobile carrier networks, 
including costly spectrum licensing 
fees, lead to deployments focused on 
densely populated, urban, and peri-urban 
4. GSMA, “Closing the coverage gap – a view from Asia.” June 2015. 
5. ITU. “ICT Facts and Figures - The World in 2015.” Posted at http://www.itu.int/en/ITU-D/Statistics/Documents/facts/
ICTFactsFigures2015.pdf. Accessed December 2015.
6. GSMA, “Closing the coverage gap – a view from Asia”. June 2015.
7. GSMA. “4G Networks to Cover More Than A Third of Global Population This Year.” Posted at http://www.gsma.com/
newsroom/press-release/4g-networks-to-cover-more-third-of-global-pop-this-year/. Accessed December 2015. 
8. GSMA. Unlocking Rural Coverage: Enablers for commercially sustainable mobile network expansion. http://www.gsma.
com/mobilefordevelopment/programme/connected-society/unlocking-rural-coverage-enablers-commercially-sustainable-
mobile-network-expansion. July 2016.
12 \ CLOSING THE ACCESS GAP: INNOVATION TO ACCELERATE UNIVERSAL INTERNET ADOPTION
3.2 CONVERGENCE OF TRENDS poa! Internet are blanketing Kibera 
AND TECHNOLOGIES DRIVING in Nairobi with coverage from Wi-Fi 
THE EMERGENCE OF NEW hotspots. Wi-Fi, especially free and/or 
ACCESS INNOVATIONS shared Wi-Fi, can reduce the cost of 
Fortunately, a range of business data usage, increasing the affordability 
model and technology innovations for underserved demographic 
are emerging in the marketplace that segments. 
address supply and demand barriers to 3. Thirdly, the reach and capacity of 
access and adoption along the network both international and national fiber 
map. Academics, technologists, and networks are expanding. Where 
entrepreneurs are testing new business financially possible, fiber makes last 
models and technologies to extend the mile access innovations better, more 
reach and affordability of mobile and reliable, less expensive, faster, and 
internet beyond what the current mobile ideally, more open and competitive. 
carrier footprints and business models Fiber is an enabler for new access 
support. Four trends are converging innovations. For example, Google’s 
to drive the emergence of new access Project Link provides fiber backhaul 
innovations. as a neutral wholesaler, sharing 
1. A proliferation of pilots and the infrastructure across multiple 
demonstrations are testing new internet service providers (ISP) 
business models and technologies. and mobile operators in parts of 
(See Appendix 1 for headlines Uganda and Ghana. FibreCo in South 
on a non-comprehensive set of Africa offers a similar open access 
42 examples.) The wide range of network. This changing landscape 
access innovations being tested whereby an operator does not need 
and the number of pilots and trials to own international, national, and 
increase the likelihood of uncovering local backhaul networks means new 
sustainable, low cost access solutions. entrants can address specific parts of 
the value chain. 
2. Widespread access to Wi-Fi-enabled 
devices, particularly mass adoption 4. Finally, global companies with 
of smartphones, is enabling access significant scale and resources are 
innovations that utilize Wi-Fi. testing new approaches to extend 
Companies like Project Isizwe (see access to under and unconnected 
Appendix 2 for case studies) have populations. Microsoft is leading the 
been piloting free Wi-Fi to increase charge on TV white space (TVWS), 
internet usage among first-time users particularly with its partnership with 
in South Africa, while companies like Mawingu Networks.  
CLOSING THE ACCESS GAP: INNOVATION TO ACCELERATE UNIVERSAL INTERNET ADOPTION / 13
Google is testing the provision of 
coverage from high-altitude balloons 
through Project Loon. Facebook has 
similar efforts with solar airplanes 
via Internet.org. LeoSat, OneWeb, 
and Space X are launching flotillas 
of low earth orbit (LEO) satellites to 
provide ubiquitous global coverage. 
All of these firms have economic 
incentives for their investments that 
differ from that of traditional mobile 
operators. This wave of new players 
has the potential to complement and/
or disrupt the mobile networks status 
quo.
The convergence of these trends,  
and the increasing complexity in 
the access landscape, highlight 
the importance of researching and 
understanding the portfolio of emerging, 
new access innovations. 
14 \ CLOSING THE ACCESS GAP: INNOVATION TO ACCELERATE UNIVERSAL INTERNET ADOPTION
BOX 1: THE ANATOMY OF A NETWORK
In general, mobile phone and internet networks feature core networks, backhaul, and last mile.
Core networks (including national backbone  given the costs associated with obtaining rights of 
and international connectivity) encompass  way and construction permits. Microwave often 
the high-capacity fiber optic infrastructure is used in areas where fiber is too expensive, but 
delivering traffic to/from aggregation points it requires line-of-sight between transmitters, 
(e.g., Internet Exchange Points, IXPs), peering so it too can be prohibitively expensive in very 
connection points between Tier 1 Service remote areas. Satellite backhaul overcomes the 
Providers, and submarine cable landing stations  rural challenges of distance and topography, but 
for international connectivity. has high operating costs and often lower quality 
service than traditional fiber. 
Backhaul (or middle mile) refers to the 
infrastructure carrying voice and data traffic from Last mile refers to the connection from an 
an operator’s core network to an aggregation site, aggregation site to an end user, be it an individual 
such as a base station. Backhaul often is the key in a household or a school or business. Providers 
barrier to supplying coverage particularly to areas deliver last mile service via traditional mobile 
featuring low-density or challenging topography phone radio or alternative channels such as Wi-Fi. 
such as islands or mountains. Beyond pure infrastructure, a mobile operator or 
internet service provider also must invest to ensure 
Fiber is the most common form of backhaul, a viable distribution network is in place, such as 
offering the highest capacity and best quality agents selling airtime, as well as sources to sell and 
service, but often is prohibitively expensive to service locally appropriate handsets.
deploy in rural or topographically difficult areas, 
INTERNATIONAL 
CONNECTIVITY MIDDLE MILE LAST MILE
NATIONAL
BACKBONE
Source: Internet Society, “Lifting the Barriers to Internet Development in Africa” http://www.internetsociety.org/sites/default/files/Barriers%20to%20
Internet%20in%20Africa%20Internet%20Society_0.pdf
CLOSING THE ACCESS GAP: INNOVATION TO ACCELERATE UNIVERSAL INTERNET ADOPTION / 15
4 Last Mile  Access Innovations
The entry of new players in this market shows an increasingly diverse range of business 
models and technology innovations. The term “access innovations” provides a framework 
to categorize the range of approaches and to understand and highlight the different 
methods of last mile access. Last mile access innovations typically refer to those that 
close the gap between an aggregation point, such as a cell site, and the end user. 
Innovation may or may not involve  fostering demand is integral to success 
new technology, but in either case, for any access innovation.
requires reimagining business models, 
including everything from cost and In addition to distinguishing the role of 
pricing structures to sales and marketing new business models and/or technologies, 
to handset considerations. Some access definition of the last mile delivery 
innovations rely on existing mobile and challenges each innovation can address 
internet networks and offer innovative provides a useful way to categorize 
business models that aim to address innovations. While all ultimately may 
barriers to access and adoption by the have roles to play in closing the last mile, 
underserved. Other innovations also they address challenges at different 
incorporate new or new use of existing points along the network. Figure 1 
technologies to address the economics  offers a framework for these categories, 
of extending the network to the last  followed by greater description on the 
mile, ranging from cached content next page. 
delivered via Wi-Fi to high-altitude Table 1 offers a way to categorize 
solutions such as satellites, balloons,  emerging access innovations, describing 
and solar powered airplanes. some of the common technology and 
Regardless of the approach, technology business model features commonly found 
and supply-side solutions are not among examples underway.
enough; sustainable business models— 4.1 MODELS TO EXTEND 
not to mention social impact—require INFRASTRUCTURE
affordable service, sufficient local 
content, and relevant services to attract One type of innovation seeks to extend 
and retain users, and ways to generate existing network infrastructure to 
sufficient awareness and skills among communities where backhaul is limited 
underserved users. A robust approach to as a result of traditional service providers not anticipating economically viable 
16 \ CLOSING THE ACCESS GAP: INNOVATION TO ACCELERATE UNIVERSAL INTERNET ADOPTION
FIGURE 1: NEW ACCESS MODELS GROUPED BY “ACCESS CHALLENGE”
Lack of network Lack of affordability Lack of relevance 
coverage: extending where connectivity and familiarity where 
infrastructure exists: complementary connectivity exists: 
technologies improving value
Network expansion Alternative internet service Access models leveraging 
to rural communities delivery to marginalized existing devices and access 
without existing communities already within technologies, shifting burden of 
network coverage, but coverage, but dominant willingness to pay, such as with 
with backhaul options models are not fully serving Free Basics and Gigato.
(satellite; microwave the base of the pyramid 
or TVWS to fiber). customers, such as with poa! 
Examples include Internet's and Project Isizwe.
Mawingu, Rhizomatica, 
and ViRural.
Source: Caribou Digital9
means of providing connectivity. The average revenue per user (ARPU) in the 
models employ a range of technologies US$3–US$5 range. “Anchor tenants” 
to extend the network, such as Wi-Fi or refers to organizations with sufficient 
microwave, but are most distinguished demand and resources to merit service 
by their business models’ innovations, provider investment in a given geographic 
including different ownership, area, such as local government offices, 
partnership, and management structures agricultural processing enterprises, and 
that affect the relationship with, and tourist facilities. 
value proposition for, end users.
Extending Infrastructure:  
Extending Infrastructure: Rural ISP MNO-partnership model 
In areas where mobile network operators The high CAPEX and OPEX costs 
are not present, entrepreneurs are associated with mobile carrier networks 
developing internet service delivery leads to deployments focused on 
models leveraging Wi-Fi for last mile densely populated, urban/peri-urban 
access connectivity to anchor tenants environments. However, approaches 
and direct to individuals. These models such as sharing of mobile network 
often feature low cost networking infrastructure and deployment of 
equipment, with backhaul connectivity lower cost, “white labeled,” networking 
provided either by microwave links or equipment by nontraditional service 
satellite. The lower CAPEX and OPEX providers can reduce costs and facilitate 
requirements are supported by monthly network expansion. 
9. http://cariboudigital.net/new/wp-content/uploads/2016/08/Caribou-Digital-DFID-Digital-Access-in-Africa.pdf
CLOSING THE ACCESS GAP: INNOVATION TO ACCELERATE UNIVERSAL INTERNET ADOPTION / 17
TABLE 1: TECHNOLOGY AND BUSINESS MODEL CHARACTERISTICS OF ACCESS INNOVATIONS
TECHNOLOGY CONSIDERATIONS
Access Devices Access Backhaul Spectrum Network Technology Licensing
Extending  Rural Internet Wi-Fi enabled devices Wi-Fi / TVWS Various options Licensed- 
Infrastructure:  Service Provider (feature phones, smart depending on exempt Wi-Fi
Network expansion to (ISP) phones, tablets) availability, cost 
rural communities without and regulatory 
existing network coverage, constraints (fiber, 
but with backhaul options satellite, TVWS, 
(satellite; microwave or microwave)
TVWS to fiber)
MNO- GSM-enabled phones Licensed Various options Licensed
partnership (basic, feature, smart) mobile depending on 
model (revenue networks availability, cost 
sharing or and regulatory 
wholesaler) constraints (fiber, 
satellite, TVWS, 
microwave)
Microtelco/ GSM-enabled Phones GSM Microwave or Use of GSM 
Community (basic, feature, satellite outside of 
GSM smartphone) traditional 
license (e.g., 
“social purpose 
spectrum”)
Complementary Paid Wi-Fi enabled devices Wi-Fi Predominantly Licensed- 
technologies: Commercial (feature phones, fiber exempt Wi-Fi
Alternative internet  Wi-Fi smartphones, tablets)
service delivery to 
marginalized communities Subsidized, Free Wi-Fi enabled devices Wi-Fi Predominantly Licensed- 
already within coverage, but Public Wi-Fi (feature phones, fiber exempt Wi-Fi
dominant models are not smartphones, tablets)
fully serving the base of the Shared Access Desktop computers, Ethernet/ Various options None
pyramid customers Centers laptops, tablets, Wi-Fi depending on 
internet-enabled availability, cost 
phones (feature, and regulatory 
smartphones) constraints (fiber, 
satellite, TVWS, 
microwave)
Improving value:  Zero-Rating GSM-enabled Phones Licensed Relies on mobile Licensed
Access models leveraging (basic, feature, mobile carrier network
existing devices and access smartphones) networks
technologies, shifting burden 
of willingness to pay. Sponsored/ GSM-enabled phones Licensed Relies on mobile Licensed
Earned Data (basic, feature, mobile carrier network
smartphones) networks
TABLE 1: TECHNOLOGY AND BUSINESS MODEL CHARACTERISTICS OF ACCESS INNOVATIONS
BUSINESS MODEL
User Pricing Sales & Distribution Examples
Extending  Rural Internet Varies (metered/ Community network Mawingu, AirJaldi
Infrastructure:  Service Provider sachet pricing; agent model
Network expansion to (ISP) monthly subscription; 
rural communities without anchor tenant 
existing network coverage, supported)
but with backhaul options 
(satellite; microwave or MNO- Full-fare, metered Agent network Africa Mobile Network,  
TVWS to fiber) partnership usage, predominantly Vanu, ViRural
model (revenue pre-pay for calls, 
sharing or SMS, or MB of data
wholesaler)
Microtelco/ Varies (metered/ Community network Rhizomatica, Endaga 
Community sachet pricing; agent model (formerly), Village Telco
GSM monthly subscription, 
pre-pay for each call/
SMS; anchor tenant 
supported)
Complementary Paid Full-fare, metered Staff at hotspot  poa! Internet, Roke Telecom, 
technologies: Commercial usage for MB of data and agent network Everylayer
Alternative internet  Wi-Fi 
service delivery to 
marginalized communities Subsidized, Free Free via gov’t or None Project Isizwe, Facebook 
already within coverage, but Public Wi-Fi corporate subsidy; Express Wi-Fi
dominant models are not limited usage
fully serving the base of the 
pyramid customers Shared Access Free or partially None Community knowledge centers
Centers subsidized via 
government and 
donors/ NGOs, 
limited usage
Improving value:  Zero-Rating Free for select Partner mobile Free Basics
Access models leveraging content, subsidized by operators &  
existing devices and access mobile operators or app stores
technologies, shifting burden app developers
of willingness to pay.
Sponsored/ Free for select Partner mobile  Gigato
Earned Data content, subsidized by operators & 
mobile operators or app stores
app developers
New hardware and software solutions Extending Infrastructure: Microtelco/
often enable these innovations: whereas Community GSM
base stations once cost upwards of Micro-telecommunications (or 
US$100,000, simple, lower volume microtelco) /community GSM providers 
base stations using open source offer small-scale, lower-cost network 
software now can cost as little as solutions that link to traditional backhaul 
US$10,000.10 Access to appropriately with the purpose of bringing voice 
priced spectrum, particularly digital and SMS services (and in some cases 
dividend spectrum, spectrum band internet) to remote, rural areas outside 
vacated by analogue television station of the coverage footprint of mobile 
broadcasts in the transition to digital operators, by leveraging ownership 
television broadcasting can provide and operation of the network by the 
balance between capacity and geographic community.11 Networks typically use 
coverage. Healthy market competition, spectrum without a license, or with 
with multiple competing mobile special dispensation from the regulator. 
operators and limited government 
ownership can lead to competitive Remote, rural regions where GSM 
consumer benefits in the form of pricing network build-out is unlikely are  
and service options for users. suitable locations for community- 
owned networks as well as supportive 
A number of new entrants are regulatory environments that provide 
demonstrating potential profitability allowances for use of GSM spectrum 
in low population-density deployments without a license. In some instances, 
with sufficient revenue to cover lower to varying degrees, these innovations 
cost CAPEX deployments. By financing feature local ownership and/or operation 
their own network deployment, these of the network, which provides incentive 
organizations reduce traditional to develop the network.12 As members of 
operators’ financial risk. The new a local community operate the network, 
entrants tend to partner with operators some of the revenues generated remain 
either through revenue-sharing with the community and a sufficient 
agreements (essentially acting as an software management system is critical 
extension of the main operator) or as a to allowing community members to run 
wholesale network, supporting multiple the network.  
operator access networks.
10. Heimerl, K. Hassan, S. Kashif, A. Brewer, E. Parikh, T. Local, Sustainable, Small-Scale Cellular Networks. ICTD 2013 
Proceedings of the Sixth International Conference on Information and Communication Technologies and Development:  
Full Papers – Volume 1. 2013.
11. Galperin, H. Bar, F. “The Microtelco Opportunity: Evidence from Latin America.” Information Technologies and 
International Development, 3 (2). 2006. Heimerl, K. Hassan, S. Kashif, A. Brewer, E. Parikh, T. “Local, Sustainable, 
Small-Scale Cellular Networks.” ICTD 2013 Proceedings of the Sixth International Conference on Information and 
Communication Technologies and Development: Full Papers – Volume 1. 2013. 
12. Ibid
20 \ CLOSING THE ACCESS GAP: INNOVATION TO ACCELERATE UNIVERSAL INTERNET ADOPTION
PROFILE 1: MAWINGU NETWORKS
Mawingu Networks is a rural internet service provider outside the 60,000 person market town of  
Nanyuki in Laikipia county, Central Kenya, which has approximately 300,000 to 400,000 inhabitants. 
The organization has employed a successful partnership strategy to attract start-up and growth capital to 
trial and improve its business model and use of technology, which in this case began with unlicensed TV 
white space spectrum and has evolved over time. 
Mawingu’s base stations, which are solar powered, initiative and USAID, in part to test the ability to 
are the first in Kenya to use unlicensed TV white develop a model using TV white space spectrum 
space spectrum band to offer high-speed (up to and technologies. Subsequently, Mawingu was 
20 Mbps) internet service via Wi-Fi in a rural able to attract funding from investors, including 
setting. For its pilot project, Mawingu set up eight Vulcan, Inc. and private investor, Jim Forster. 
hotspots, including in five schools, as well as the Ultimately, the approach appealed to the Overseas 
the Red Cross, public library, health clinic, and a Private Investment Corporation (OPIC), which 
Mawingu Kiosk available to the public. As Mawingu committed to providing a US$4.1 million loan in 
has expanded, it added agents who sell low-cost September 2016 to enable commercial expansion 
internet access and device charging services within of Mawingu’s model further across Kenya. 
their communities. The success of these hubs 
depends on increasing foot traffic, so agents have See Appendix 2 for more details on 
the incentive to market the value of their services Mawingu Networks.
to the wider community. The price to end users is 
low, beginning with a price of roughly US$0.50 for 
24 hours (300 MB cap), US$1 per week (500 MB 
cap), US$3 for one month (2 GB), or US$10 for a 
three-month package (8 GB), and device charging.
Mawingu has knit together a diverse set of partners 
that have enabled its initial project. Its early 
days featured grants from Microsoft’s 4Afrika 
Community-owned networks succeed in communities place. Communities must maintain and operate the 
where there is an existing, strong social structure. network on an ongoing basis, and companies that offer 
such solutions are early stage businesses that can face 
The key challenge with community-led models challenges to deploy large-scale networks.
is the level of effort required to recruit and train 
communities to invest in and operate the network. Scale-up itself could pose an additional challenge 
This high-touch approach may limit the scalability, for microtelco/community GSM networks operating 
but may be suitable if deployed in partnership with without dispensation from the regulator for spectrum, 
existing NGOs or community groups that have the in the form of regulatory uncertainty. If microtelco/
community mobilization infrastructure already in community GSM networks scale, there may be a risk 
CLOSING THE ACCESS GAP: INNOVATION TO ACCELERATE UNIVERSAL INTERNET ADOPTION / 21
of obstruction from mobile operators. within the mesh network.
A final trade-off is that such models 
typically offer voice and SMS services 4.2 COMPLEMENTARY 
but no internet access. TECHNOLOGIES
In many communities, traditional 
One variation on the microtelco/ coverage and services exist, but are cost-
community model is to extend network prohibitive for low-income end users in 
reach by creating a network of Wi-Fi the existing footprint. In these  
routers, known as a “mesh network.” contexts, innovators are testing new 
Generally, entrepreneurs or community business models, often using existing  
groups manage such networks, including or emerging technologies in novel ways, 
local marketing and distribution within to promote affordable access among  
their communities. The Village Telco low-income consumers.
mesh network allows free local calls; 
a mesh network in Johannesburg had Complementary Technologies:  
70 percent of calls being local. Wi-Fi- Paid Commercial Wi-Fi
enabled handsets usually are required, Wi-Fi hotspots are operated as 
although technology such as the Mesh commercial businesses ranging from 
Potato allows such networks to provide single cybercafés to networks of hotspots 
voice services via basic feature phones. selling pre-pay, full-fare internet access. 
Wi-Fi networks utilize unlicensed Wi-
Such networks can be useful, but have Fi spectrum and provide more localized 
limits. Given the limited reach of Wi- coverage compared to mobile carrier 
Fi routers, the approach is difficult networks, satellites or high-altitude 
to deploy in very remote or widely platforms (or HAPs, referring to the 
distributed rural communities. The range of more experimental solutions  
decentralized nature of a mesh network for providing backhaul coverage to 
means there is no single point of failure. mobile network operators (MNO) or 
More critically, routers within these ISPs in rural, hard-to-reach areas such  
networks both transmit and receive data, as balloons, low earth orbit (LEO) 
but cannot do so simultaneously; as the satellites, or solar-powered unmanned 
number of routers in a network increases, aerial vehicles).
the efficiency of the overall network 
decreases. Larger mesh networks are Commercial Wi-Fi networks 
technically challenging to implement and generally are most economical in 
require a person with sufficient technical densely populated urban/peri-urban 
skill to follow installation instructions. environments that provide a larger user 
And mobility is restricted to areas of base and higher likelihood of low cost 
coverage around the particular router fiber backhaul.  
22 \ CLOSING THE ACCESS GAP: INNOVATION TO ACCELERATE UNIVERSAL INTERNET ADOPTION
PROFILE 2: VIRURAL AFRICA
ViRural is a U.S.-based start-up company aiming to extend phone, internet, and mobile charging services 
to rural African communities that lack connectivity and reliable energy solutions. On the cusp of its 
initial commercial deployment in Nigeria, ViRural’s objective is to offer a wholesale rural network to local 
mobile operators via roaming agreements. This solution enables operators to extend services to small rural 
communities that have not yet demonstrated sufficient demand to encourage investment in traditional 
network extension. 
ViRural relies on operator partners’ existing In 2017, ViRural aims to launch its first 
spectrum licenses and offering roaming services deployment in Nigeria where regulatory 
on a revenue share basis. Customers use their constraints against active infrastructure sharing 
existing phones and SIM cards to connect to the prohibit the “Wholesale” model.  In collaboration 
ViRural network, which interconnects to their with the Nigerian Telecommunications regulator, 
operator as seamlessly as if they are roaming via a ViRural has partnered with a regional MNO for 
separate operator network. ViRural earns a share access to spectrum based on a revenue sharing 
of revenue for each connection it enables, as well scheme.  In mid-2017, the Nigerian Regulator 
as revenue from the sale of scratch cards or other (NCC) has indicated it will repeal the ban on 
fees for use of Wi-Fi, device charging services at national roaming.  ViRural’s agreement with the 
the ViRural base station container, and pay-as- MNO includes a clause which allows ViRural 
you-go home electrification. to transition to a “Wholesale” model once the 
regulatory issues have been addressed.
ViRural assembles off-the-shelf technology 
components using commercial, carrier-grade The Nigerian deployment will offer connectivity 
small-cell base station technology into a simple and electricity to more than 20,000 rural 
“Community Hub.” Each Community Hub Nigerian communities, connecting more than  
features a 15-foot mast, clustered alongside a 40 million people.  
40-foot shipping container that includes a satellite 
or microwave dish to link to backhaul, as well In addition to the Nigerian deployment, ViRural 
as solar panels with back-up batteries to enable is active in more than 10 additional African 
sufficient power to run the network, provide fee- Markets including Liberia where ViRural has 
based device charging services, and power for 100 partnered with fhi360 and Mercy Corps to  
homes at 90 watt-hours per day each. A single provide connectivity to more than 280 rural 
Community Hub can provide 7-10 kilometers of Liberian communities in 2017.
phone coverage and other services for a population See Appendix 2 for more information on ViRural.
up to 2,500 people.
CLOSING THE ACCESS GAP: INNOVATION TO ACCELERATE UNIVERSAL INTERNET ADOPTION / 23
Markets where mobile data costs are Wi-Fi is beginning to expand in emerging 
prohibitive for lower income user markets. With support from government 
segments are attracting lower cost Wi- or corporate funding, Wi-Fi access is 
Fi services, particularly where there is provided for free in public locations, 
already widespread adoption of Wi-Fi reducing the affordability barrier and 
enabled handsets, i.e., feature phones enabling users to access the internet at 
and smartphones. relatively fast speeds, such as 15 Mbps 
for Project Isizwe in South Africa.14  
Wi-Fi networks use unlicensed spectrum, This model works best in densely 
which remove the need for costly populated urban/peri-urban 
spectrum licenses, lowering the barriers environments where a large proportion 
to entry for smaller providers. As a of the target population use Wi-Fi-
result, Wi-Fi networks can be developed enabled feature phones or smartphones. 
with lower CAPEX than mobile carrier These models require governments with 
networks, which can lower the cost for a strong digital inclusion agenda and/
the user.13 The user is able to access or willing corporate sponsors, however, 
services provided by the internet at both of which often work with nonprofits 
relatively fast speeds in Wi-Fi covered with existing or prospective sustainable 
areas. Commercial Wi-Fi hotspots business models. 
generally do not require on-going public 
funding or subsidies. Wi-Fi networks use unlicensed spectrum, 
which removes the need for costly 
The business case deteriorates in spectrum licenses and lowers barriers 
rural areas, however, because of lower to entry for smaller providers. Wi-Fi 
population density, lower customer networks also have lower CAPEX and 
spending, lack of power and low- OPEX than MNOs, potentially lowering 
cost fiber backhaul. Users have to the cost for the user.15
pay; therefore, access is limited by 
affordability. Users are also limited to However, sustainability becomes a 
accessing connectivity at the hotspot challenge as the size of the network 
location, constraining mobility. grows and costs for maintenance 
increase. Access is typically limited by 
Complementary Technologies:  time or bandwidth usage; for example, 
Subsidized, Free Public Wi-Fi Project Isizwe has a daily cap of 250 
Once exclusively found in prosperous MB,16 removing the ability for the user to 
cities of the developed world, public complete tasks of long duration. 
13. EveryLayer, personal communication, November 2015.
14. Project Isizwe. “City of Tshwana Free Wi-Fi gets upgraded to 15 mbps.” Posted at http://projectisizwe.org/city-of-
tshwane-free-wifi-gets-upgraded-to-15mbps/. Accessed December 2015.
15. http://allafrica.com/stories/201609191316.html
24 \ CLOSING THE ACCESS GAP: INNOVATION TO ACCELERATE UNIVERSAL INTERNET ADOPTION
PROFILE 3: RHIZOMATICA
Rhizomatica demonstrates how policymakers and regulators can encourage innovation by enabling new 
actors to play new roles in deploying service to underserved communities.
Rhizomatica is a non-profit that since 2012 has cost way for communities to set tariffs and manage 
created a regional community telecommunications billing. 
cooperative enabling low-income communities 
in Mexico to own and operate their own small, Given the low cost structure, the community 
local mobile networks. The key to Rhizomatica’s gains access to, and operate, an otherwise 
approach was gaining the Mexican regulator’s unavailable local GSM network at an affordable 
approval to use licensed, but unused, GSM rate. The revenue model–designed in part by one 
spectrum for community-based networks where of Rhizomatica’s early communities–features 
traditional service providers choose not to operate. fixed, monthly membership fees that entitle 
As a result of Rhizomatica’s early networks and users to unlimited calls within the local or any 
ongoing advocacy, as of 2015, the Mexican other Rhizomatica network. The monthly user 
regulator officially allocated parts of the 850 fee is 40 pesos, of which 15 pesos goes towards 
MHz spectrum band to be designated for social Rhizomatica’s management fees, and 25 pesos 
use. Underserved communities that meet specific covers the community’s operating costs such as 
criteria are eligible to use this spectrum for electricity and internet connectivity. Users also 
community-based networks to close gaps in the can purchase credits to make long-distance calls 
traditional network. using voice over internet protocol (VOIP). Any 
revenue generated above operating costs stays 
In addition to leveraging unused spectrum, within the network or the community.
Rhizomatica’s model focuses on low-cost 
community design, ownership and administration Rhizomatica’s partners now include 20 active 
of the network. The community contributes networks with over 3,000 active users per 
the roughly US$10,000 in CAPEX required month. In addition to serving these communities 
for network installation. The local government and identifying others for expansion, 
administers the network, working with Rhizomatica Rhizomatica advocates with the International 
to set up the network and troubleshoot problems. Telecommunications Union (ITU) and others 
Rhizomatica’s ground operations team provides to promote regulatory reform to allow small 
the more sophisticated technical services, communities to legally utilize unused, GSM 
including ensuring satellite or Wi-Fi connectivity, spectrum in largely remote, rural locations. 
to providing backhaul and remote network Rhizomatica also continues to develop its open-
management. Individual community operate source, community network management software 
and maintain the network. A key underpinning for use with GSM implementations to enable 
of this approach is use of open source network communities to administer networks.
management software (openBSC), as well as See Appendix 2 for more information  
Rhizomatica’s own open source software for on Rhizomatica.
community network management, providing a low-
CLOSING THE ACCESS GAP: INNOVATION TO ACCELERATE UNIVERSAL INTERNET ADOPTION / 25
Users are limited to accessing centers provides a natural location where 
connectivity at the hotspot location groups already meet and the provision 
constraining mobility and raising privacy of information and communication 
issues if the hotspot is in a public location technology (ICT) skills training can 
away from their homes. In rural areas, address the poor digital literacy of users 
lower population density, lack of power, driving increased demand.
and lack of low-cost fiber amplify the 
sustainability challenge. If a community is already served by a 
backhaul connection, the addition of a 
Complementary Technologies:  shared access center can open up that 
Shared Access connection to a broader range of people 
A shared access center provides a in the community. The sharing of devices 
physical location to use communications reduces the burden of the cost of device 
and internet via shared desktop ownership and accessing a computer 
computers typically provided for free instead of a handset is more suitable to 
or subsidized by government or donors/ multitasking, content production, and 
NGOs. Shared access centers can also be e-learning activities. Furthermore, access 
commercial enterprises—“cybercafés.” centers provide ICT skills development 
Shared access centers were the earliest through formal classes or informal 
method to extend access to low- learning. 
resourced communities in cities, towns, 
and villages round the world, pooling the The scalability and economic 
costs of devices and access in public, sustainability of nonprofit shared access 
concentrated locations.17 is a challenge, since they demand 
ongoing subsidies from government or  
This access model typically requires NGOs. Fixed and operating costs in rural 
sufficient concentration of users areas can be higher if satellite is used, 
around the access center. Initial models and those costs are spread over fewer 
required government and/or donors/ users who access the network addressable 
NGOs with a digital inclusion agenda to users. The further expansion of GSM 
provide ongoing subsidy without which rollout and mobile phone adoption has 
sustainability could be a challenge. Re- reduced the demand, and need, for 
using existing community infrastructure shared access centers.  
such as libraries, schools, and community  
16. Project Isizwe. “FAQ.” Posted at http://projectisizwe.org/faq/. Accessed December 2015.
17. Sey, A. Coward, C. Bar, F. Sciadas, G. Rothschild, C. & Koepke, L. “Connecting people for development: Why public access 
ICTs matter.” Seattle: Technology & Social Change Group, University of Washington Information School. 2013. Proenza, 
F J. “Public Access ICT Across Cultures.” MIT Press. 2015. Toyama, K. Kuriyan, R. Bailur, S. Rangaswamy, N. Ratan, A. 
Veeraraghavan, R. Menon, D. Pal, J. Srinivasan, J. “Review of Research on Rural PC Kiosks.” Posted at: http://www.eolss.
net/sample-chapters/c15/e1-25-02-04.pdf. Accessed January 2016.
26 \ CLOSING THE ACCESS GAP: INNOVATION TO ACCELERATE UNIVERSAL INTERNET ADOPTION
PROFILE 4: VILLAGE TELCO
Village Telco sells a Wi-Fi-based mesh network device, Mesh Potato, to allow communities to build a mesh 
network that allows free local calls, long distance calls and internet access. Village Telco’s customers are the 
people within the communities purchasing the mesh network device.
Village Telco developed the Mesh Potato product One server is needed to provide billing and 
to allow people to make free local calls on their dashboard services for an administrator. These 
network. Village Telco does not manage any services can be run on a standard laptop computer.
deployments but rather manufacturers the 
technology for others to use. Most of the projects Scaling mesh networks can be challenging, since 
that use the Mesh Potato are small, with 10-100 the number of nodes in any given network is 
service points, with the majority at the lower end limited. Wi-Fi devices work on a “listen before 
of that spectrum, and operate on the fringe of talk” basis, e.g., given three adjacent nodes in a 
existing GSM networks. Village Telco has sold network, the middle node cannot concurrently 
about 3,000 of their first-generation device, and listen and talk to nodes either side of it. It is 
about 3,000 second-generation devices. possible to overcome this challenge with a dual 
radio, which can simultaneously listen and talk,  
The basic service will give end users local, national but it becomes challenging for local network 
and international calling and internet (with free owners to implement.
local calls). The network required to deliver this is 
“plug-and-play,” i.e., users should be able to set up See Appendix 2 for more information on 
the device easily without technical assistance, and Village Telco.
robust enough to withstand a variety of challenging 
environmental circumstances.
When making a phone call, the nearest Mesh 
Potato talks to the next closest, which talks to 
the next Mesh Potato, and eventually to the 
destination. The mesh network can be augmented 
via links to internet backhaul, which allow for other 
services, e.g., VOIP calls and internet access.  
CLOSING THE ACCESS GAP: INNOVATION TO ACCELERATE UNIVERSAL INTERNET ADOPTION / 27
Also, the fixed location of the access By partnering with mobile operators 
center limits mobility, creates a privacy with substantial existing user bases, 
challenge and can restrict usage zero-rating can address the affordability 
by certain groups, such as women, barrier for a huge potential user base. 
depending on local contextual norms Facebook estimates that more than one 
around technology use. billion people can access Free Basics 
across Asia, Africa and Latin America.20 
4.3 IMPROVING VALUE Zero-rating and sponsored data models 
A number of actors are experimenting are software based and therefore lean 
with business models that leverage to deploy in terms of infrastructure with 
existing networks to provide service minimal CAPEX cost.
in increments and at price points 
that appeal to low-income end users, Zero-rating presents challenges, 
increasing their willingness to try and however. First, negotiating deals with 
increase use of internet services. mobile operators can be time intensive, 
especially for smaller start-ups. 
Improving Value: Zero-Rating Depending on the details of the zero-
Zero-rating refers to the practice of rating agreements between content/
mobile operators and internet service service providers and operators, zero-
providers that provide a subsidy to offer rating can distort the market through 
free data for end users to access specific price discrimination for zero-rated 
apps or services through an existing services. Second, critics of zero-rating 
network.18 Although these types of contend it violates the conventions of 
innovations do not address connectivity “net neutrality,”21 where zero-rating 
gaps, they can help to address adoption services have been blocked in Chile and 
barriers to users who cannot afford in India.22 
access, or who are skeptical of access.
Users typically get access to data 
and content free of charge, through 
subsidization of data by mobile operators 
and ISPs, e.g., Facebook's Free Basics.19 
18. Zero-Rating page. Wikipedia website. Available at: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Zero-rating. Accessed December, 2015. 
19. Internet.org by facebook. “Update to Internet.org Free Basics.” Posted at https://info.internet.org/en/2015/09/24/update-
to-internet-org-free-basic-services/. Accessed December 2015.
20. Ibid
21. Layton, R. Elaluf-Calderwood, S. “Zero Rating: Do Hard Rules Protect or Harm Consumers and Competition? Evidence 
from Chile, Netherlands and Slovenia.” Social Science Research Network. August 15th, 2015.
22. Gigaom. “In Chile, mobile carriers can no longer offer free Twitter, Facebook and Whatsapp.” Posted at https://
gigaom.com/2014/05/28/in-chile-mobile-carriers-can-no-longer-offer-free-twitter-facebook-and-whatsapp/. 
Accessed December 2015. BBC News. “India blocks Zuckerberg’s free net app.” Posted at http://www.bbc.co.uk/news/
technology-35522899. Access February 2016.
28 \ CLOSING THE ACCESS GAP: INNOVATION TO ACCELERATE UNIVERSAL INTERNET ADOPTION
PROFILE 53: pRoHa!I ZInOtMernAeTtICA
Aporag!o nIn itse arn Uet.K is.- a a Knden Uy.aSn. -bbaasseedd c coomppaannyy t thhaatt l laauunncchheedd i ittss i innaauugguurraall  Wii--FFii s heorvtsicpeo tin s othluet ilonw,- binrcaonmdeed a Preoa !o f 
KInitbeerrnae itn, iNn atihroeb lio iwn- Mincaoym 2e0 1a6re. a of Kibera in Nairobi in May 2015. 
poa’s observation was that low-income, urban poa! Internet targets customers between the 
internet users struggle with the high costs of ages of 18 and 25 who live in urban areas and 
data bundles offered by mobile operators. poa! are smartphone users. These users understand 
Internet’s solution is to augment existing services the “personal business case” for being online and 
with a low-cost Wi-Fi network at a lower price typically own a smartphone but cannot afford to 
point, which customers can use at home or in the use their data because of expensive cellular data 
street, rather than having to visit a specific Wi- bundles. poa! Internet identified this demographic 
Fi hotspot. To further reduce costs and ensure as potential product evangelists who could 
good understanding of local consumer needs, poa! convince others to come online. 
Internet employs a community-based sales and 
distribution model. poa! Internet develops the access network 
technology, the proprietary local content caching 
poa! Internet also differentiates its service by system, and builds relationships with local ISPs to 
offering free access to internet content from deliver the backhaul. The team targets localities 
dedicated cached content servers on the local in which the model can be implemented, adapting 
network. poa! Internet’s technology and network is the business model to work with the communities 
enables its users to access high-speed broadband at to promote the service and protect network assets. 
a far lower price point than local mobile operators. They also form relationships with vendors to get 
The free content is blended with paid-for internet the optimum cost for each access point. 
access where usage is limited by the customer’s 
ability to pay. Internet bundles range in price from See Appendix 2 for more information on poa! 
KES 10 (US$.10 for 25 MB of downloading) up to Internet.
KES 3,000 (US$29.11 for 25GB of downloading), 
with the majority of purchases varying from KS10–
KS100 (US97 cents).23   
23. http://allafrica.com/stories/201609191316.html. 
http://www.dhahabu.co.ke/2016/11/30/poa-internet-liquid-telecom-brings-free-solar-internet-kibera/
CLOSING THE ACCESS GAP: INNOVATION TO ACCELERATE UNIVERSAL INTERNET ADOPTION / 29
Third, zero-rated content can often be misunderstood Improving Value: Sponsored/ Earned Data
by first-time internet users as the internet rather than a 
pre-determined selection of content from the internet. In the sponsored/earned data model, users are able to 
Fourth, users have reported fear and suspicion about access the open internet for free provided that they 
billing under zero-rated plans with concerns that they either view advertisements or test different mobile 
25
might incur data charges by “accidentally” downloading applications.  
content from the wider internet.24 
PROFILE 6: GIGATO
Gigato is an example of an innovative approach to encourage greater local content generation by local 
developers. Gigato created a smartphone application where users earn data by using sponsored applications, 
helping to improve affordability in markets where data costs are prohibitive or restrictive for lower income 
user segments. 
Gigato’s direct customers are the app developers, Although its technology can work on any mobile 
who typically struggle to generate new installs network, Gigato is concentrating on India, where 
and monthly active users, since they tend to pay prepaid mobile users represent around 95 percent 
prohibitively high costs to other platforms such as of the market. Gigato’s market research found 
Facebook and mobile ad networks to market their that these users tend to ration data, topping up 
app. App developers can use Gigato’s platform to miniscule amounts on their phones for fear of 
generate app installs and monthly active users, hidden data costs. Gigato’s platform allows these 
themselves bearing the cost of refunding data to users to earn data “recharges” by using sponsored 
users who install and use their sponsored apps. apps, reducing data costs and enhancing the 
smartphone experience.
See Appendix 2 for more information on Gigato
24. Kak, A. ”The Internet Un-Bundled - Locating the user’s voice in the debate on zero-rating.” MSc Thesis Oxford Internet Institute. 2015.
25. Gigato page. Gigato website. Available at: http://www.gigato.co/#Gigato. Accessed December, 2015. 
30 \ CLOSING THE ACCESS GAP: INNOVATION TO ACCELERATE UNIVERSAL INTERNET ADOPTION
5 Developing a Portfolio of Approaches to Advance Internet Access 
Though some of these innovations might prove viable for enabling access for large 
numbers of low-income users, silver-bullet solutions are highly unlikely. Rather, 
depending on market dynamics and the policy and regulatory environment governing 
a community, each market is likely to require a portfolio of access innovations that 
will meet the needs of diverse communities. In addition to investing to test and iterate 
access innovations, policymakers, innovators, donors, and access advocates need to 
learn how to apply such innovations as they expand their portfolio of solutions to 
accelerate internet access to hundreds of millions of users.
5.1 IDENTIFYING OPTIONS 5.2 Country example: A portfolio of access 
BASED ON MARKET CONTEXT innovations in Kenya
Identifying the portfolio of solutions  Kenya’s experience suggests how a 
that may best serve a particular portfolio approach can help close 
community will depend on the unique persistent access and adoption gaps 
characteristics of the market, including among underserved user segments. The 
definition of success, current gaps barriers to access and adoption vary 
in coverage and access, the market across Kenya’s landscape. The national 
and geographic characteristics, the fiber network links many of the urban 
availability of fiber backhaul, and the centers in the southwest and coastal 
state of the device market. The following southeast, but becomes sparse in the 
framework (Figure 2, and with more more rural areas of the north and east. 
detail, Table 2) highlights some of the Higher capacity 3G coverage is available 
questions and decision drivers that  in Nairobi, Mombasa, and a few other 
should be investigated to understand areas, but by and large, most potential 
market conditions. users experience more limited 2G 
coverage. Despite the relatively reliable 
The framework highlights the wide range infrastructure, however, many low-
of options that are appropriate for each income users have not yet adopted the 
market context, and is not intended for internet due to lack of affordability, lack 
selecting and prioritizing a particular of local content and services, and lower 
access innovation. Policymakers and their levels of digital literacy. 
donor partners should provide the right 
conditions under which the market can 
deploy multiple access innovations.
CLOSING THE ACCESS GAP: INNOVATION TO ACCELERATE UNIVERSAL INTERNET ADOPTION / 31
FIGURE 2: NEW ACCESS MODELS GROUPED BY “ACCESS CHALLENGE”
WHAT ARE THE MARKET
CHARACTERISTICS?
WHAT ARE GEOGRAPHIC 
CHARACTERISTICS? WHAT POLICYINTERVENTIONS AND 
ACCESS MODELS CAN
BE USED TO SUPPORT 
WHAT IS THE AVAILABILITY ACCESS?
OF ACCESSIBLE FIBER 
BACKHAUL? 
WHAT IS THE STATE OF THE 
DEVICE MARKET? 
FIGURE 3: ILLUSTRATIVE MAP OF ACCESS INNOVATIONS IN KENYA
ILLUSTRATIVE 2G 
COVERAGE
EASTERN ILLUSTRATIVE 3G MAWINGU NETWORKS COVERAGE
PERI-URBAN NORTH
TV-WHITE SPACE EASTERN ILLUSTRATIVE FIBER 
NANYUKI RIFT VALLEY NETWORK
WESTERN
AVANTI
RURAL
NYANZA CENTRAL SATELLITE WI-FI
RURAL
NAIROBI
EVERY LAYER 
URBAN, PERI-URBAN
WI-FI
NAIROBI INMARSAT/EQUITY
URBAN, PERI-URBAN, RURAL 
poa! Internet COAST SATELLITE WI-FI BACKHAUL 
URBAN THROUGHOUT KENYA
WI-FI
NAIROBI
*NOTE: LOCATIONS ARE INDICATIVE ONLY
32 \ CLOSING THE ACCESS GAP: INNOVATION TO ACCELERATE UNIVERSAL INTERNET ADOPTION
While existing mobile networks serve the In addition to the innovations identified 
bulk of Kenya’s population, a variety of above, Appendix 1 and 2 offer a non-
access innovations are being deployed comprehensive snapshot of 42 recent or 
to address access gaps, as the map ongoing efforts to pilot new approaches 
below illustrates. Several innovations are to reaching last mile users. 
testing how to make existing network 
services more attractive to low-income 
users. For example, poa! Internet has 
launched a trial offering low-cost Wi-Fi 
services with curated, cached content 
to encourage low-income users in 
Kibera to adopt the internet. Mawingu 
Networks are expanding use of TV 
white space-powered Wi-Fi kiosks 
to provide affordable service in peri-
urban towns such as Nanyuki, as well as 
surrounding rural communities. Equity 
Bank partnered with Inmarsat to test 
the viability of offering Wi-Fi hotspots 
supported by satellite backhaul at their 
rural agent locations.
It is too early to know which, if any, of 
these efforts will likely prove viable for 
long-term scale-up, but the experience 
illustrates how a portfolio of innovations 
may help ecosystem actors to discover 
how to overcome the variable challenges 
found in a given market. 
Although no single solution has yet 
proven itself to serve as a large-scale, 
economically sustainable alternative to 
traditional mobile and internet networks, 
the innovations underway are generating 
interesting lessons to inform ongoing 
efforts by industry, government, and 
other actors to consider.
CLOSING THE ACCESS GAP: INNOVATION TO ACCELERATE UNIVERSAL INTERNET ADOPTION / 33
TABLE 2: KEY CONSIDERATIONS UNIQUE TO EACH COMMUNITY SCENARIO
KEY FACTORS POTENTIAL CONSTRAINTS/ POTENTIAL ACCESS 
CONSIDERATIONS INTERVENTIONS 
(DEPLOYMENTS & POLICY)
What are the market Market lacks competition within the Though policy interventions may be 
characteristics? incumbent, traditional mobile operators needed to spur greater competition 
among MNOs, rural ISP and commercial 
Wi-Fi models may be considered (if the 
regulatory environment is conducive) 
Market lacks nontraditional service Regulatory barriers may be prevent 
providers nontraditional access providers to enter 
the market
Infrastructure sharing is limited MNO-lead networks may be able to 
operate under direct contract with an 
established MNO partner
What are the geographic The population density of unconnected Wi-Fi models leveraging high-capacity 
characteristics? populations is high, e.g., urban backhaul (e.g., fiber) may be viable
environments
The population density of unconnected Low population density increases the 
populations is low, e.g., rural cost-to-serve of network deployment 
environments and may require major anchor tenants, 
donor/corporate partners, and/or 
low bandwidth service models (e.g., 
microtelco/community GSM)
Topography is challenging, e.g., islands, Challenging topography increases the 
mountains, deserts cost-to-serve of network deployment; 
line of sight backhaul (e.g., microwave) 
may not be as suitable as TVWS or 
satellite. 
The market is landlocked or lacking Access to international connectivity 
access to core network trunkline (backhaul) may be a constraint that 
requires policy intervention 
What is the availability Backhaul market lacks competition Satellite or HAPs backhaul may be 
of backhaul? needed in lieu of policy intervention 
to spur competition in the terrestrial 
backhaul market
Fiber is not typically deployed alongside Deployment of fiber, or at least 
road and power line construction embedding fiber conduits, at same time 
as other infrastructure e.g. road building, 
lowers costs; may be an opportunity to 
encourage “dig once” legislation
What is the state of the Low availability of feature phones and A focus on basic phone access 
device market? smartphones (Wi-Fi enabled) (community GSM) and shared public 
internet access sites may be most viable
Widespread availability of feature phones Widespread availability of feature phones 
and smartphones (Wi-Fi enabled) and smartphones (Wi-Fi enabled) allows 
zero-rating and sponsored data, Wi-Fi-
based access innovations and HAPS
34 \ CLOSING THE ACCESS GAP: INNOVATION TO ACCELERATE UNIVERSAL INTERNET ADOPTION
6 Conclusions and  Implications for Action
With so few innovations at a stage of development or scale to provide true evidence 
of what works, it remains too early to point to best practice or replicable models. 
Nonetheless, a few themes emerge from a review of the innovation landscape.
6.1 KEY THEMES context. To enable and encourage 
1) A portfolio of diverse, innovative a portfolio of solutions to emerge, 
access solutions is required to meet governments, donors, industry, and 
unique market contexts. A range investors all have roles to play in 
of innovative models are beginning supporting greater innovation and 
to serve communities at the base of experimentation to identify and 
the economic pyramid, but thus far, accelerate scale-up of sustainable 
no single innovation has been proven solutions; examples of such roles are 
to be economically viable at scale. offered below. 
Although anything is possible in the Policy and regulatory frameworks can 
highly dynamic digital economy, this support or constitute a barrier to innovative 
observation suggests that traditional business models.
mobile networks, largely supported by Policy environments play a critical  
fiber backhaul and delivered by mobile role encouraging traditional phone  
operators, will remain the primary model and internet connectivity to expand  
for connectivity and service delivery  the “market frontier,” as well as to 
for the bulk of the population for the enabling new business model and 
near term. technology innovation. 
That said, the traditional approach Many forms of access innovations rely 
may never reach enough of the on regulatory environments that enable 
underserved, so innovations to extend innovation. Innovators who employ 
access are necessary. Diverse market solutions such as TV white space and 
dynamics, geographic conditions, microtelco/community GSM models 
regulatory constraints and community need to generate proof of concept 
characteristics all play roles in the evidence to encourage supportive 
potential success of different models. regulatory change. Models such as HAPS 
Each model offers features that are will need to address existing regulations 
appropriate in specific markets, but around the safety of high altitude and 
no single innovation will apply in every unmanned aircrafts, and to operate 
CLOSING THE ACCESS GAP: INNOVATION TO ACCELERATE UNIVERSAL INTERNET ADOPTION / 35
without interfering with existing satellite Several access innovations feature 
and terrestrial spectrum bands. shared assets. ViRural supports sharing 
of infrastructure by promoting the 
Flexible and conducive internet  use of a wholesale network service 
service provider (ISP) regimes can  for multiple mobile operators in rural, 
also play a role in supporting innovative underserved areas. Google’s Project 
models, as well as interconnection Link provides fiber backhaul as a neutral 
agreements that could support new  wholesaler, sharing the infrastructure 
GSM voice entrants and mitigate  across multiple mobile operators and 
against costly termination fees. ISPs. Google’s Project Loon has formed 
Policies or business models that enable a partnership with three of Indonesia’s 
lower capital expenditure (CAPEX) and mobile operators (Indosat, Telkomsel, 
operating expenditure (OPEX) through and XL Axiata) to provide high-speed 
shared infrastructure will jointly encourage 4G-LTE internet coverage, with the 
network expansion toward the last mile. mobile operators effectively sharing 
Creating favorable economics for existing Project Loon’s balloon based network 
mobile operators and new entrants infrastructure. Finally, Endaga was able 
can help address the coverage gap. to lower the cost of its microtelco/
One way to expand access in currently community GSM network in Indonesia 
underserved areas is to reduce CAPEX by utilizing existing satellite backhaul and 
and OPEX costs. Sharing of backhaul, a power source from the local school. 
ideally fiber, among multiple mobile Partnerships between mobile operators and 
operators, new entrants, and government last mile access innovators can lead to win-
infrastructure, such as military, police, win business models. 
schools, and post offices, reduces the Mobile operators have struggled to find 
cost to serve the community. An open business models that will help them 
access backhaul network available to recoup the high CAPEX needed to 
all mobile operators and new entrants connect the last mile; partnering with 
will lower costs and maximize traffic. last mile access innovators can help 
Sharing of towers, especially where address this challenge. ViRural Africa 
the tower already exists (e.g., existing have developed a low cost (US$70,000–
mobile operators, police, and electrical US$80,000) rural cell tower that it 
transmission) can materially reduce the finances and operates on behalf of the 
cost to serve an area. The cost of power mobile operator in exchange for revenue 
can be a significant portion of network share and access to mobile spectrum. 
OPEX; the sharing of power systems, Similarly, Google Project Loon is helping 
either grid power, or diesel and solar in address the geographic challenges 
off-grid regions reduces these costs. of connecting the many islands of 
36 \ CLOSING THE ACCESS GAP: INNOVATION TO ACCELERATE UNIVERSAL INTERNET ADOPTION
Indonesia by partnering with three has varied, including self-financing, 
mobile operators to provide backhaul friends and family, donor funding,  
and LTE network coverage. Microsoft and corporate partners. Regardless  
and FLOW are partnering with USAID of the starting point, these innovations 
and the Jamaican Universal Service Fund remain high-risk propositions. Most are 
to assess the viability of using TVWS either new or have yet to demonstrate 
technology to provide internet access in economically sustainable business models 
rural areas, as a complement to 3G/4G.25 at scale, and particularly due to the  
Forming mobile operator partnerships need for CAPEX, they can struggle 
allows the zero-rating service Free Basics to get to the point of demonstrating 
to provide users with free, albeit limited revenue potential. 
access, to internet services. Although the 
mobile operators subsidize the cost of Historically, mobile operators have 
data, “half the people who use Free Basics employed traditional debt financing 
to go online for the first time pay to access for their significant CAPEX costs. Risk 
the full internet within 30 days,”26 which capital from organizations such as the 
highlights the revenue benefits for the World Bank and International Finance 
mobile operator. Corporation (IFC) was critical to early 
growth of traditional mobile networks 
2) An active community of innovators in emerging markets. Larger companies 
is implementing solutions, but many active in this space, such as Facebook, 
require risk capital to fully explore Google, and Microsoft, have significant 
alternative business models. Though research and development budgets to 
industry will remain the chief source  fund exploration. 
of investment in the sector, 
governments, bilateral donors, and Early stage companies report that 
impact investors have key roles to play, financing to demonstrate revenue 
both in supporting innovation and in potential is a significant constraint, 
ensuring that insights flow both to and however, particularly as smaller 
across innovators and other actors in the companies are unable to raise enough 
access and adoption ecosystem. capital to acquire spectrum licenses  
and deploy technologies such as 3G  
Risk capital supports testing of new and 4G-LTE that become profitable  
business models and technologies. only when deployed at scale.  
The early stage capital fueling the Donor capital has begun to play a 
emergence of recent access innovations role toward encouraging risk capital, 
25. Mitchell, P. “Microsoft welcomes US State Department Global Connect initiative.” Posted at http://blogs.microsoft.com/
on-the-issues/2015/09/28/microsoft-welcomes-us-state-department-global-connect-initiative/. Accessed January 2016.
26. Zuckerberg, M. “Free Basics protects net neutrality.” Posted at http://blogs.timesofindia.indiatimes.com/toi-edit-page/
free-basics-protects-net-neutrality. Accessed December 2015. 
CLOSING THE ACCESS GAP: INNOVATION TO ACCELERATE UNIVERSAL INTERNET ADOPTION / 37
most notably with Overseas Private prove the concept. Mawingu Networks 
Investment Corporation’s (OPIC) 2016 is able to offer rural customers internet 
investment in Mawingu Networks,27 access at approximately US$1/week 
U.K. Department for International because of a large CAPEX subsidy on TV 
Development’s (DFID) investment in white space equipment, while UKSA’s 
Avanti,28 and the U.K. Space Agency’s CAPEX subsidy to Equity Bank/Inmarsat 
(UKSA) investment with Equity Bank/ enables testing the business case for 
Inmarsat.29 Often companies such as cached Wi-Fi via satellite backhaul. 
Microsoft directly fund small innovators, Project Isizwe can offer free Wi-Fi 
as is the case with Microsoft’s Affordable through a government subsidy. Without 
Access Initiative.30 Nonetheless, to these subsidies, these projects would 
accelerate progress to achieve the SDG not be able to provide affordable access 
target, governments, donors, industry, to users. These approaches all require 
and investors will need to play larger roles a sustainable business model, however, 
with greater support through appropriate if they are to survive if and when their 
financing and risk capital. subsidies end. 
Capital expenditure (CAPEX) subsidies are 3) Greater collaboration and knowledge 
critical, but need to be structured carefully. sharing across the community, within 
Though perhaps lower than the costs bounds of market competitiveness, can 
of building out fiber backhaul and play a role in accelerating innovation. 
mobile network towers, CAPEX is a The type of market data that commonly 
large component of last mile access informs investment decisions in mature 
innovators’ overall costs. For example, markets is harder to come by in low-
CAPEX per site can range anywhere resource environments. Most innovators, 
from under US$500 with poa! Internet particularly smaller actors, struggle 
to US$70,000–US$80,000 for ViRural to navigate regulatory, technical, and 
Africa, with different site economics.31 financial challenges on their own, as well 
as to understand and foster the demand-
Subsidies can help relieve CAPEX side drivers needed to drive low-income 
pressures so the company can address end user adoption. 
other aspects of the business to help 
27. Techmoran. “Kenya’s Mawingu Networks receives 4 Million from OIC to turn around solar energy and provide rural wireless 
Internet.” Posted at http://techmoran.com/kenyas-mawingu-networks-recieves-4-million-from-opic-to-turn-around-
solar-energy-provide-rural-wireless-internet/. Accessed December 2015.
28. Avanti Communications. “Avanti Communications appointed to deliver DFID schools programme.” Posted at http://www.
avantiplc.com/news-media/rns/avanti-communications-appointed-deliver-dfid-kenyan-schools-programme. Accessed 
December 2015. 
29. UK Space Agency. “First round of international space partnerships announced.” Posted at https://www.gov.uk/government/
news/first-round-of-international-space-partnerships-announced. Accessed November 2015. 
30. https://www.microsoft.com/en-us/affordable-access-initiative/home
31. The coverage footprint for ViRural will be significantly greater, and lower cost compared to a standard GSM network  
cell tower
38 \ CLOSING THE ACCESS GAP: INNOVATION TO ACCELERATE UNIVERSAL INTERNET ADOPTION
Both innovators and investors alike companies such as Microsoft share an 
are hungry for better knowledge and interest and can participate in creating 
more data about end users, geographic regulatory space and sharing lessons for 
characteristics, existing infrastructure, the community, but in the main, few 
regulatory constraints, and what objective actors currently seek to serve 
works for different models. Greater the needs across companies.
government and donor investment to 
support research and knowledge sharing Demand side barriers need to be addressed 
can help address these gaps. to drive adoption.
Regardless of its approach, all  
Market data are challenging to find in low- access innovation business models— 
resource environments. as well as social impact—depend upon 
Many innovators must make business fostering sufficient adoption among 
model, service design, and investment consumers. Even where coverage exists,  
decisions in the absence of reliable data a number of demand-side barriers 
on existing network infrastructure, tend to inhibit adoption, including 
population densities, willingness-to-pay, affordability challenges, lack of local 
credit risk, electrification, and other content and services, and poor language 
metrics. Greater public sector effort and digital literacy.32 
to generate and share such data for the 
public good could go a long way toward Many of the ongoing access innovators 
unlocking private sector appetite to test are learning by doing as they foster 
these markets. consumer adoption. For example, 
providers are playing with pricing 
Small innovators struggle to navigate models such as free local calls, free 
complex regulatory, technical and financial access to a subset of internet content, 
challenges. and sponsored data. Innovators such as 
A great deal of innovation in this sector Project Isizwe and Poa! Internet attract 
arises from entrepreneurs who lack consumers by sourcing and storing local 
the influence and resources of large content in a cache, reducing operating 
mobile operators or global technology costs, and ultimately pricing. Many 
companies, placing a limit on their models address digital literacy by relying 
ability to advocate for infrastructure on their sales and distribution networks 
sharing or more liberal spectrum policies. and/or community-based partners to 
This dynamic threatens to discourage guide first time users. 
entrepreneurship and innovation 
from non-traditional actors. In some 
instances, such as with TV white space, 
32. http://www3.weforum.org/docs/WEF_Internet_for_All_Framework_Accelerating_Internet_Access_Adoption_report_2016.pdf
CLOSING THE ACCESS GAP: INNOVATION TO ACCELERATE UNIVERSAL INTERNET ADOPTION / 39
For example, Poa! Internet looks to its service and spectrum licensing, as well 
agent networks and Mawingu Networks as consider risk capital in the form of 
uses trusted intermediaries at schools to grants or short-term subsidies to enable 
encourage adoption. small companies or social enterprises to 
test the viability of potentially game-
As is the case with most technology- changing access innovations. Adopting a 
based services, these innovators are portfolio approach of solutions that fit a 
learning the mix of approaches that most given market can help to close last mile 
effective and economical through trial gaps and help foster more competitive 
and error. Sharing these lessons more environments, with benefits for all 
broadly and visibly can accelerate the consumers in the market. 
collective learning curve, as can exposing 
innovators to NGOs and other actors Innovators—from forward-looking mobile 
who bring expertise and experience operators to start-ups to other industry 
to generating demand for innovations players looking to enter the connectivity 
among low-income rural populations. space—will benefit from considering 
the lessons learned about phone and 
6.2 IMPLICATIONS FOR ACTION internet adoption. History demonstrates 
The magnitude and complexity of the that simply building infrastructure is 
internet access gap defies the ability of not enough; thoughtful distribution that 
any single actor, or even a single segment improves affordability and strengthens 
of the ecosystem, to solve this challenge. the incentives and ability of low-income 
A constellation of actors must work more end users to adopt service also is required 
intensively, creatively, and collaboratively to support economically sustainable 
to accelerate the pace of innovation and models. 
hence the pace of access and adoption by Bilateral and multilateral donors, as well 
the underserved. In addition to working as impact or traditional investors have 
more effectively as a community, an opportunity to accelerate adoption by 
a number of opportunities exist for providing risk capital to enable promising 
segments of the digital ecosystem to innovations. Market-based finance will 
accelerate uptake. be the key driver of sustainable, large-
In addition to creating constructive scale connectivity, but many potentially 
enabling environments to extend interesting models are at risk of being 
the market frontier for traditional lost to the “valley of death” between 
network connectivity in their countries, proof-of-concept and positive cash flow. 
policymakers can consider how their Access advocates—comprising the 
policies and regulations encourage growing set of global alliances, advocacy 
innovation, particularly regarding groups, academics, donors, NGOs, 
40 \ CLOSING THE ACCESS GAP: INNOVATION TO ACCELERATE UNIVERSAL INTERNET ADOPTION
and corporate policy shops—can enhance sustainable way. A more coordinated, 
their voices and effectiveness through data-driven approach to testing, 
stronger coordination. By establishing demonstrating, and scaling economically 
clear definitions of success, identifying viable, high-impact access innovations 
areas of respective comparative is an important, concrete step on this 
advantage, harmonizing research collective journey.
agendas, and improving knowledge-
sharing, these groups can help accelerate 
sustainable access and adoption to  
the underserved.
6.3 CONCLUSION
It is too soon to know which, if any, 
access innovations underway in the 
market will emerge to become large-
scale, economically sustainable models 
to provide access and encourage 
adoption among underserved men, 
women, and children in all markets. Most 
of these models will not succeed, but 
even one or two successes can help shift 
the paradigm for serving the hardest-to-
reach end users. Even if such disruption 
never takes place, these innovations 
can enable deeper understanding of 
what works in terms of promoting 
adoption through improved affordability, 
incentives to adopt, and capabilities. 
Creation of an SDG target for 
accelerated universal access to internet 
underscores the global commitment  
to reach the underserved. The next  
step is for the dynamic constellation 
of actors with a stake in realizing the 
SDGs—from governments to industry 
to the development community— 
to learn together how best to accelerate 
universal access in the fastest, most 
CLOSING THE ACCESS GAP: INNOVATION TO ACCELERATE UNIVERSAL INTERNET ADOPTION / 41
ACRONYMS TABLE
ACRONYM DEFINITION ACRONYM DEFINITION
AMN Africa Mobile Networks MEO Medium Earth Orbit
ARPU Average revenue per user MESA Motorized earth station antennas
B2B Business to Business MNO Mobile network operator
B2C Business to Customer MVNO Mobile virtual network operator
BGAN Broadband Global Area Network OPEX Operating expense
CAPEX Capital expenditure OPIC Overseas Private Investment Corporation
CONATEL La Comisión Nacional de Telecomunicaciones OTT Over-the-top
DFID UK Department for International Development ROI Return on investment
DIAL Digital Impact Alliance SDG Sustainable Development Goal
DVNO Data virtual network operator SIM Subscriber Identity Module card is a 
portable memory chip used mostly in 
mobile phones that operate on the Global 
System for Mobile communications
FIZ Free Internet Zone SMS Short Message Service is a text messaging 
service component of phone, web, or 
mobile communication systems
GB Gigabyte TCO Total cost of ownership
Gbps Gigabits per second TV Television
GEO Geostationary Earth orbit TVWS TV white space
GSM Global System for Mobile Communications is UAV Unmanned aerial vehicle
an open, digital cellular technology used for 
transmitting mobile voice and data services
HAPs High-altitude platforms UHV Ultra-High Frequency, 300 MHz to 3 GHz
HRB Haitian Rural Broadband UKSA UK Space Agency
HTS High-throughput satellites UN United Nations
ICT Information and communications technology UNESCO The United Nations Educational, Scientific 
and Cultural Organization
ICT4D Information and communications technology for USAID U.S. Agency for International Development
development
IPSP International Partnership Space Program USB Universal Serial Bus is an industry standard 
developed for cables, connectors and 
communications protocols
ISP Internet service provider USF Universal Service Fund
ITU International Telecommunications Union VAS Value added service
LEO Low Earth orbit VHF Very-high frequency, 30 MHz to 300 
MHz
LTE Standard for wireless communication of high- VOIP Voice over internet protocol is a 
speed data for mobile phones and data terminals methodology and group of technologies for 
the delivery of voice communications and 
multimedia sessions over the internet
MB The megabyte is a multiple of the unit byte for WISP Wireless internet service providers
digital information
Mbps Megabits per second
42 \ CLOSING THE ACCESS GAP: INNOVATION TO ACCELERATE UNIVERSAL INTERNET ADOPTION
APPENDIX 1: CATALOGUE OF ACCESS INNOVATIONS 
CARIBOU DIGITAL RESEARCH IDENTIFIED 42 EXAMPLES ACCESS INNOVATIONS.
ACRONYM DEFINITION ACRONYM DEFINITION NAME DESCRIPTION FOUNDING 
AMN Africa Mobile Networks MEO Medium Earth Orbit DATE 
ARPU Average revenue per user MESA Motorized earth station antennas Africa Mobile Network Africa Mobile Network (AMN) finances, builds and operates solar-powered mobile 2013
base stations in remote and unconnected communities. The base stations are 
B2B Business to Business MNO Mobile network operator then connected to a partner mobile operator’s network to provide voice and data 
B2C Business to Customer MVNO Mobile virtual network operator services to subscribers in rural areas on a revenue-share basis with zero CAPEX 
BGAN Broadband Global Area Network OPEX Operating expense requirement for the mobile operator.
CAPEX Capital expenditure OPIC Overseas Private Investment Corporation AirJaldi AirJaldi provides high-quality broadband connectivity to rural areas at reasonable 2009rates connecting large and small clients from the corporate, civil society and 
CONATEL La Comisión Nacional de Telecomunicaciones OTT Over-the-top private sectors. AirJaldi provides broadband solutions in rural India using off-the-
DFID UK Department for International Development ROI Return on investment shelf Wi-Fi equipment. AirJaldi has 9 networks in 5 Indian states covering 24,200 
DIAL Digital Impact Alliance SDG Sustainable Development Goal km2, with over 100,000 users.
DVNO Data virtual network operator SIM Subscriber Identity Module card is a Avanti Avanti Communications Group provides satellite broadband to over 200 schools 2014
portable memory chip used mostly in in Kenya and is partly funded by U.K. Department for International Development. 
mobile phones that operate on the Global With the schools providing the anchor customers, Avanti will also sell internet 
System for Mobile communications connectivity to the local rural community.
Botswana Fibre Networks BoFiNet is a wholesale provider of national and international telecommunication 2012
FIZ Free Internet Zone SMS Short Message Service is a text messaging (BoFiNet) infrastructure that does not sell directly to users. BoFiNet will deploy fibre 
service component of phone, web, or networks and Wi-Fi hotpots in seven strategic locations across Botswana with the 
mobile communication systems Wi-Fi covering close to 600 sites, including hospitals, schools, and hotels.
GB Gigabyte TCO Total cost of ownership Citizen Connect - As a part of Microsoft’s 4Afrika Initiative, Citizen Connect is a TV white space 2013
Gbps Gigabits per second TV Television Namibia project in Namibia, and claims to be the world’s largest fully operational TV white 
GEO Geostationary Earth orbit TVWS TV white space space deployment. The ultimate plan is to provide a network of broadband internet 
connectivity across the country.
GSM Global System for Mobile Communications is UAV Unmanned aerial vehicle CONATEL/ Tigo The Paraguay regulator La Comisión Nacional de Telecomunicaciones 2014
an open, digital cellular technology used for (CONATEL) announced a public–private partnership with the leading mobile 
transmitting mobile voice and data services operator Tigo to expand mobile broadband coverage.
HAPs High-altitude platforms UHV Ultra-High Frequency, 300 MHz to 3 GHz Concero Connect Concero Connect uses a Motorized Earth Station Antennas (MESA systems). 2013
HRB Haitian Rural Broadband UKSA UK Space Agency These MESA systems are capable of tracking inclined orbit satellites. They propose 
HTS High-throughput satellites UN United Nations to offer rural access using these systems, and have developed agent distribution 
models working with the postal service system in South Africa.
ICT Information and communications technology UNESCO The United Nations Educational, Scientific 
and Cultural Organization Dabba Dabba is a South African company that is pioneering the establishment of 2006microtelco/community GSM networks. It uses wireless technology to provide voice 
ICT4D Information and communications technology for USAID U.S. Agency for International Development and data services to under-serviced areas.
development El Paquete A Cuban media platform based on a web of human data traffickers is a weekly Unknown
IPSP International Partnership Space Program USB Universal Serial Bus is an industry standard delivery of digital content—everything from American movies to PDFs of Spanish 
developed for cables, connectors and newspapers—that is gathered, organized, and transferred by a human web of 
communications protocols runners and dealers to the entire country.
ISP Internet service provider USF Universal Service Fund Endaga Endaga’s answer to bringing cellular access to rural unconnected communities is a 2014
ITU International Telecommunications Union VAS Value added service community-owned GSM model, a solution they plan to take to hundreds of rural 
communities around the world. This model focuses on empowering “local network 
LEO Low Earth orbit VHF Very-high frequency, 30 MHz to 300 operators,” lowering technical barriers to entry of operating networks and creating 
MHz new entrepreneurial opportunities for individuals in locations outside the reach of 
LTE Standard for wireless communication of high- VOIP Voice over internet protocol is a existing GSM networks.
speed data for mobile phones and data terminals methodology and group of technologies for Equity Bank/ Inmarsat Using Inmarsat’s satellite technology, Equity Bank, Kenya’s largest retail bank, is 2015
the delivery of voice communications and able to pilot cached Wi-Fi services through their agent network across Kenya. 
multimedia sessions over the internet Wi-Fi-enabled phones give users access to a bespoke platform consisting of both 
MB The megabyte is a multiple of the unit byte for WISP Wireless internet service providers cached and live websites that are text-based or video. 
digital information
Mbps Megabits per second
CLOSING THE ACCESS GAP: INNOVATION TO ACCELERATE UNIVERSAL INTERNET ADOPTION / 43
APPENDIX 1: CATALOGUE OF ACCESS INNOVATIONS 
CARIBOU DIGITAL RESEARCH IDENTIFIED 42 EXAMPLES ACCESS INNOVATIONS.
NAME DESCRIPTION FOUNDING 
DATE 
Ericsson Managed Rural Coverage will be provided via low-power Ericsson cell towers running on solar 2015
Services energy. Ericsson provides rural coverage to mobile operators under a managed 
service agreement. 
EveryLayer EveryLayer leverage growing fiber optic availability and low-cost telecom-grade 2013
Wi-Fi to connect the last mile with high-speed, fixed-line replacement networks. 
It has developed a proprietary, cloud-based platform, which makes it simple for 
ISPs to deploy new networks and services.
Facebook Express Wi-Fi Network of cheap Wi-Fi access points that would help residents in remote villages 2015
in India to access the internet. In partnership with AirJaldi, which manages the 
actual installation and operation of the Express Wi-Fi service.
Facebook/ Eutelsat A collaboration between Facebook and Eutelsat, a new satellite called AMOS-6, 2016
was attempted in 2016 but satellite was exploded at launch. 
Facebook: Connectivity Facebook’s Internet.org initiative is developing a high-altitude, long-endurance 2014
Lab (solar airplanes) solar plane. It uses laser communications, and broadcasts a powerful signal 
covering a city-sized area of territory. The project is part of Facebook’s initiative to 
make affordable internet access possible in remote communities around the world 
that have no internet infrastructure.
Fairwaves Fairwaves have built a technology that lowers the cost of deploying and operating 2014
mobile networks in rural regions. They support mobile operators to roll out micro 
cell towers, using open source software OpenBTS.
Free Basics by Facebook Free Basics provides customers with free access to content on their mobile phones 2013
in markets where lower income customers cannot afford data plans for internet 
access. The content includes news, employment, health, education, and other local 
information. The service sits under Facebook’s Internet.org initiative.
Gigato Gigato has created a smartphone application where users earn data by using pre- 2015
approved applications for a designated period of time. App makers can use the 
platform to generate app installs and monthly active users and the app makers bear 
the cost of refunding data to users who install and use their applications.
Google Free Zone An initiative in collaboration with mobile operators, whereby the providers waive 2012
data charges for access to select Google services, including Search, Gmail, and 
Google+.
Google Project Link Project Link provides fiber backhaul as a neutral wholesaler in Ghana and Uganda, 2013
sharing the infrastructure across multiple mobile operators and internet service 
providers (ISP). 
Google Project Loon Project Loon is a being developed by Google X with the mission of providing 2013
internet access to rural and remote areas. The project uses high-altitude balloons 
placed in the stratosphere to create an aerial wireless network with up to 4G-LTE 
speeds.
Google/Indian Railway Google’s Access & Energy team is bringing connectivity to Indian railway stations 2016
in partnership with Indian Railways and RailTel. The network has covered over 100 
stations in India 
Guifi.net Guifi.net is a community-owned mesh network in which volunteers can connect 2008
their computers to share an internet connection. Guifi.net is based in Spain and 
has over 40,000 access points. The network uses best available technologies, 
radio and fiber, with connections up to 1 Gbps and 10 Gbps internet connections.
44 \ CLOSING THE ACCESS GAP: INNOVATION TO ACCELERATE UNIVERSAL INTERNET ADOPTION
APPENDIX 1: CATALOGUE OF ACCESS INNOVATIONS 
CARIBOU DIGITAL RESEARCH IDENTIFIED 42 EXAMPLES ACCESS INNOVATIONS.
NAME DESCRIPTION FOUNDING NAME DESCRIPTION FOUNDING 
DATE DATE 
Ericsson Managed Rural Coverage will be provided via low-power Ericsson cell towers running on solar 2015 Inveneo Haiti Haiti Connected Cities is a collaborative program involving Haitian ISPs, Haitian 2011
Services energy. Ericsson provides rural coverage to mobile operators under a managed Connected Cities IT entrepreneurs, and the many organizations—NGOs and otherwise—that will 
service agreement. benefit from access to reliable and affordable broadband internet. As of April 
EveryLayer EveryLayer leverage growing fiber optic availability and low-cost telecom-grade 2013 2012, the broadband network covers 20% of the Haitian population.
Wi-Fi to connect the last mile with high-speed, fixed-line replacement networks. Jana Jana is a mobile platform that connects global brands with emerging market 2009
It has developed a proprietary, cloud-based platform, which makes it simple for consumers through reciprocal advertising. Jana’s platform connects brands and 
ISPs to deploy new networks and services. consumers, delivering insights to the brand through mobile-based ad campaigns 
Facebook Express Wi-Fi Network of cheap Wi-Fi access points that would help residents in remote villages 2015 and driving consumer action by incentivizing members with free airtime on their 
in India to access the internet. In partnership with AirJaldi, which manages the mobile phones. This exchange takes place on the company’s opt-in consumer 
actual installation and operation of the Express Wi-Fi service. facing platform, mCent.
Facebook/ Eutelsat A collaboration between Facebook and Eutelsat, a new satellite called AMOS-6, 2016 LeoSat High Throughput Satellites (HTS) networked together in a low-earth-orbit Planned 
was attempted in 2016 but satellite was exploded at launch. constellation. The LeoSat constellation provides worldwide coverage with a high 2018/2019
Facebook: Connectivity Facebook’s Internet.org initiative is developing a high-altitude, long-endurance 2014 speed, low latency, secured data network.
Lab (solar airplanes) solar plane. It uses laser communications, and broadcasts a powerful signal Microsoft Mawingu Microsoft announced the deployment of a pilot project to deliver low-cost, high- 2013
covering a city-sized area of territory. The project is part of Facebook’s initiative to Networks speed wireless broadband across Kenya using TV white space. The deployment 
make affordable internet access possible in remote communities around the world is called Mawingu Networks, and is the first deployment of solar-powered base 
that have no internet infrastructure. stations together with TV white space. 
Fairwaves Fairwaves have built a technology that lowers the cost of deploying and operating 2014 National Optical Fiber The Colombian government finances a national fiber backbone network to connect 2010
mobile networks in rural regions. They support mobile operators to roll out micro Backbone Project in 1,078 municipalities to broadband infrastructure. To accomplish this objective, the 
cell towers, using open source software OpenBTS. Colombia Colombian government issued a tender with US$200 million of public funding. 
Free Basics by Facebook Free Basics provides customers with free access to content on their mobile phones 2013 OneWeb OneWeb is a satellite start-up, creating a single, pan-global satellite network that Planned 
in markets where lower income customers cannot afford data plans for internet promises affordable, high-quality broadband with a global footprint. For emerging 2019/2020
access. The content includes news, employment, health, education, and other local markets in South Asia, Africa, Asia and Latin America, this constellation of 648 
information. The service sits under Facebook’s Internet.org initiative. satellites would provide interlinked, high-speed and 24/7 coverage.
Gigato Gigato has created a smartphone application where users earn data by using pre- 2015 Outernet Using a satellite receiver and a tuner, users in Africa, North America, and Europe 2014
approved applications for a designated period of time. App makers can use the can access Outernet’s content, e.g., local news. Outernet claims to cover 99% 
platform to generate app installs and monthly active users and the app makers bear of the planet’s population. A device they developed, Lighthouse, stores the 
the cost of refunding data to users who install and use their applications. information it receives from Outernet on its internal drive. Users can connect to 
Google Free Zone An initiative in collaboration with mobile operators, whereby the providers waive 2012 the Lighthouse Wi-Fi signal to browse the content.
data charges for access to select Google services, including Search, Gmail, and poa! Internet poa! Internet provides a Wi-Fi hotspot solution in Nairobi, where users can pay 2014
Google+. for access at a lower price, lower latency, and equal or higher speeds as compared 
Google Project Link Project Link provides fiber backhaul as a neutral wholesaler in Ghana and Uganda, 2013 to local mobile operators. In addition, users get access to a limited set of internet 
sharing the infrastructure across multiple mobile operators and internet service content for free, at fast speeds from a dedicated cached content server.
providers (ISP). Project Isizwe Project Isizwe operates as a nonprofit, with the local government financing the 2013
Google Project Loon Project Loon is a being developed by Google X with the mission of providing 2013 CAPEX and OPEX costs of free Wi-Fi hotspots in South Africa. Users can 
internet access to rural and remote areas. The project uses high-altitude balloons use 500 MB of wider internet access per day, or unlimited access to a cached 
placed in the stratosphere to create an aerial wireless network with up to 4G-LTE content portal. Project Isizwe has setup 711 Free Internet Zones (FIZ), and recently 
speeds. connected their one millionth unique user to the network.
Google/Indian Railway Google’s Access & Energy team is bringing connectivity to Indian railway stations 2016 RADWIN's FiberinMotion FiberinMotion provides free on-board Wi-Fi for city buses in Tshwane, South 2014
in partnership with Indian Railways and RailTel. The network has covered over 100 Africa. Since the project was launched over 200,000 unique users have used the 
stations in India service.
Guifi.net Guifi.net is a community-owned mesh network in which volunteers can connect 2008 Rhizomatica Rhizomatica is a regional telecommunications cooperative that enables 2009
their computers to share an internet connection. Guifi.net is based in Spain and communities in Mexico to own and operate GSM networks. They have also been 
has over 40,000 access points. The network uses best available technologies, lobbying for regulatory change on behalf of small-scale community networks, 
radio and fiber, with connections up to 1 Gbps and 10 Gbps internet connections. arguing for special dispensations from regulators to allow small communities to legally utilize GSM spectrum.
CLOSING THE ACCESS GAP: INNOVATION TO ACCELERATE UNIVERSAL INTERNET ADOPTION / 45
APPENDIX 1: CATALOGUE OF ACCESS INNOVATIONS 
CARIBOU DIGITAL RESEARCH IDENTIFIED 42 EXAMPLES ACCESS INNOVATIONS.
NAME DESCRIPTION FOUNDING 
DATE 
Space X In June 2015 the company asked the federal government for permission to begin Planned 2020
testing for a project that aims to build a constellation of 4,000 satellites capable 
of beaming the internet to the entire globe, including remote regions, which 
currently do not have internet access.
Titan Aerospace (Google) High altitude solar airplanes, which support the effort to blanket the globe in Unknown 
cheap, omnipresent internet connectivity to help bring remote areas online. 
Village Telco Village Telco sell a Wi-Fi-based mesh network device, Mesh Potato, to allow 2008
communities to build a mesh network that allows free local calls, long distance 
calls, and internet access. 
VillageShare VillageShare is a content-sharing Facebook application. It allows sharing of content 2011
with other uses that are in the same area, protecting the bandwidth-limited 
internet link from content shared between local users. The aim is to increase rural 
users’ use of the internet by reducing negative impacts is in the area of content 
generation and sharing.
ViRural Africa ViRural Africa is focused on extending ICT services to underserved rural 2013
communities in Africa. ViRural Africa’s strategy is to target communities with 
adult populations greater than 2,000 that have no access to power, no cellular 
coverage, and no internet access. This approach focuses on providing either a 
managed service, or a wholesale network service to mobile operators in rural, 
underserved areas.
Vodafone Instant Network Vodafone Instant Network is a micro cell tower developed jointly by Huawei and 2010
Vodafone Group. Trained personnel can deploy the system in less than 10 minutes 
for use in disaster scenarios and relief work.
Wikipedia Zero A project by the Wikimedia Foundation to provide Wikipedia free of charge on 2012
mobile phones, in partnership with mobile operators, particularly in emerging 
markets. The objective of the program is to increase access to free knowledge 
without data-usage cost.
VAST Networks VAST Networks is an open-access Wi-Fi network infrastructure provider, 2014
delivering carrier-grade Wi-Fi in Southern Africa. They manage, deploy, and 
develop a Wi-Fi network across 2,200 locations in South Africa, to ensure people 
enjoy internet connectivity at a much cheaper rate than through other forms of 
connectivity.
46 \ CLOSING THE ACCESS GAP: INNOVATION TO ACCELERATE UNIVERSAL INTERNET ADOPTION
APPENDIX 2: CASE STUDIES OF ACCESS INNOVATIONS
LAST-MILE INNOVATIONS
Endaga (formerly) Gigato Mawingu Networks Project Isizwe Village Telco
Free Basics 
(Facebook) ISAT Connection Project poa! Internet Rhizomatica ViRural Africa
Endaga (acquired by Facebook)
https://www.endaga.com/
ACCESS INNOVATION: Microtelco/community GSM 
DATE LAUNCHED: 2013 
NUMBER OF USERS: 5–10 networks, jointly served approximately 1,000 total end subscribers 
MARKETS LAUNCHED IN: Pakistan, Indonesia, Iraq, Philippines
Endaga’s answer to bringing cellular access to rural unconnected communities is a community owned GSM network, 
a solution to hundreds of rural communities around the world. This model focused on empowering “local network 
operators,” lowering technical barriers to entry of operating networks and creating new entrepreneurial opportunities 
for individuals in locations outside the reach of existing GSM networks. Endaga’s customer was the local network 
operator. In October 2015, Endaga’s leadership team announced it had joined Facebook.
CONDITIONS OF SUCCESS TAKEAWAYS
• Access to existing power and internet backhaul • Evidence of commercial viability of microtelco/
lowers costs. community GSM: Endaga’s evidence from existing 
• Partnership with mobile operators  deployments showed that this model is profitable 
for interconnection. enough to be sustainable.
• Allowances from regulators to use  • Credit transfer systems could be a key piece of 
unlicensed spectrum. the operational puzzle: Endaga’s credit transfer 
• Rural environments where mobile operators struggle system—where anyone on the network can move 
to provide affordable network coverage. credit between accounts with an SMS—created 
• Strong existing community social structures that a distribution system of credit transfer in the 
facilitate the community ownership model. community and could be replicated by any business 
• Availability of open source software/hardware to proposing a pre-paid access model.
build the community network. • Experimentation and unlicensed pilots demonstrate 
viability: Endaga’s approach was to first build the 
networks and prove the economic case of these 
models without a spectrum license. Being able to 
offer tangible results to commercial and regulatory 
actors is valuable, and poses a question of whether 
more of this experimentation should be encouraged.
CLOSING THE ACCESS GAP: INNOVATION TO ACCELERATE UNIVERSAL INTERNET ADOPTION / 47
APPENDIX 2: CASE STUDIES OF ACCESS INNOVATIONS
ORGANIZATION HISTORY might pay 9 cents per SMS to the local operator, who 
AND BACKGROUND in turn pays Endaga 3 cents, who in turn pay the mobile 
Endaga’s approach to offering cellular access emerged operator 1 cent (i.e. a 3x markup for each actor along 
from three PhD students at Berkeley. In their research, the chain). There isn’t a significant markup on the 
they noticed several technological shifts, one being hardware. Endaga achieved US$500–US$1,500 in 
software-defined radio.33 This technology, supplemented revenue per month per cell site. Costs can be split in 
with a business model where the community assumes terms of CAPEX and OPEX. For the former, Endaga’s 
complete ownership of the network and not a mobile bill of materials for a unit is US$2,500 (not at scale 
operator, was piloted in 2012–2013. Endaga was production). On the latter, key costs are fixed fees per 
founded subsequently in 2014 as a for-profit business, communication with mobile operators and the support 
receiving early funding (US$1.2 million) from local they must offer to their customers. Other key costs 
venture capitalists (VCs) and angel investors in the San include the software development, i.e., new features  
Francisco Bay Area. and maintenance. 
The team has since shipped around 5–10 OPERATING MODEL 
network boxes to a range of markets, including There are four groups of stakeholders Endaga cites for 
Brazil, Pakistan, and the Philippines serving the project: telecoms and regulators at the highest 
approximately 1,000 end subscribers. Endaga joined level, Endaga at the next level, the local network owner, 
Facebook (September 2015) and the hardware then the users. Users can pay the local network owner 
and software components of the company lead to either directly or through agents, using a pre-paid credit 
the opensource deployments of OpenCellular and system just like most telecom models in the emerging 
CommunityCallManager, respectively. markets. Operations are split across hardware and 
software, with the hardware consisting of assembling 
OFFERING the bill of materials (including software-defined 
The networks provided voice and SMS services not radio) for each cell site. Endaga’s software focused on 
internet access. The community users paid a local allowing customers to set prices, manage, and monitor 
network operator, either directly or through agents, the network. Specific features include: flexible billing 
using a pre-paid credit system just like most telecom system (i.e., set their prices), credit transfer, credit 
models in the emerging markets. The local network check, number check, number provisioning, and cloud 
operator was able to set prices and monitor the network analytics, allowing customers to track and monitor the 
through a web-interface engineered by Endaga, which usage of the network. 
reduces the barrier to network ownership at the local 
level. Endaga then paid a fee to mobile operators PARTNERSHIPS
based on the amount of usage between the community Partnerships with mobile operators are required to 
network and that of the mobile operator. allow interconnection with their networks. Negotiating 
the business model with mobile operators has proved 
ECONOMIC MODEL challenging, and described as the slowest moving part of 
The revenue model is based on a fee per communication, the model.
which flows along all actors. As an example, a user 
33. Software defined radio (SDR) is a radio communication system where components that have been typically implemented in hardware are instead implemented by means 
of software on a personal computer or embedded systems.
48 \ CLOSING THE ACCESS GAP: INNOVATION TO ACCELERATE UNIVERSAL INTERNET ADOPTION
APPENDIX 2: CASE STUDIES OF ACCESS INNOVATIONS
Regulators must also be engaged and supportive of the and operations (billing, credit transfer) and runs the 
network since they are operating without spectrum software on the Endaga Cloud. Access to open source 
licenses. technology has been critical for Endaga, helping them 
reduce CAPEX. Endaga utilized an existing satellite 
MARKETING AND DISTRIBUTION backhaul link and power source from the local school  
The amount of media interest Endaga received created in Indonesia.
a greater pipeline of customers than they could serve, 
typically coming from locals or expats who knew of REGULATORY CONTEXT
rural communities demanding connectivity. Customer At the early stages of the Indonesian project, the 
relationships with Endaga are maintained via a 24/7 Endaga team made their operation transparent to 
support system, and the cloud-based website interface regulators and mobile operators despite operating 
may also act as a future channel through which without a license to the GSM spectrum. Neither the 
customer relationships can be maintained. regulator nor the telecom provider was incentivized to 
shut down the network as it aligned with their interests 
A distinct set of marketing and distribution to expand access and usage of communications. 
considerations apply to the community’s users. One of Nevertheless, as Endaga looks to expand, the biggest 
the interesting tools Endaga built was a credit transfer barrier they see is regulatory. Current spectrum 
system where anyone on the network can move credit licensing does not support the entrance of small players 
between accounts with an SMS. This was used in and, therefore, there is an unclear regulatory path to 
Indonesia to create a distribution network of sellers, scale, which potentially deters future investors. Endaga 
where a teacher would buy US$100 of credit from currently avoids navigating the bureaucracy around 
the local operator (the owner of the school) directly USFs for financing and instead opts to pitch directly 
onto their phone, and then sell this credit at a small to commercial investors. 
markup to the kiosk owners, who would then sell at 
another small markup to the community. This method KEY LESSONS
of distribution emerged without Endaga’s influence, • A software management layer is critical for 
attributed to the fact that similar distributor/credit success: An effective management system (number 
systems exist in the countries of operation. allocation, billing, network analysis) is necessary to 
TECHNOLOGY effectively run a microtelco that is operated by a 
local community-owned network operator. 
At its core, Endaga used a CPU that is plugged • Building from established operational telecom 
into a software-defined radio that is then amplified practices: Many features of the operational model 
through radio equipment to cover a wider area; the can be effectively built on existing practices in 
total bill of materials comes to around US$2,500. All marketing and distributing mobile services, e.g. 
elements were bought “off the shelf” with little focus airtime distribution via agent networks.
on optimizing for scale. Users were able to access the • Most appropriate for rural: This solution is 
Endaga network through basic phones and can access appropriate for locations out of network reach, 
voice and SMS services. For the platform, Endaga especially where existing infrastructure assets can 
designed custom software to handle the management be leveraged, e.g., satellite backhaul or power.
CLOSING THE ACCESS GAP: INNOVATION TO ACCELERATE UNIVERSAL INTERNET ADOPTION / 49
APPENDIX 2: CASE STUDIES OF ACCESS INNOVATIONS
Free Basics (Facebook)
https://info.internet.org/en/story/free-basics-from-internet-org/
ACCESS INNOVATION: Zero-rating data 
DATE LAUNCHED: August 2013 
NUMBER OF USERS: 25 million Free Basics users34  
MARKETS LAUNCHED IN: 23 Africa; 12 Asia Pacific; 18 Latin America35 
Free Basics provides customers with free access to content on their mobile phones in markets where lower income 
customers cannot afford data plans for internet access. Free Basics forms partnerships with mobile operators who 
subsidize the cost of data on the assumption that users will migrate to paid data for wider internet usage. The content 
includes news, employment, health, education, and other local information. The service sits under Facebook’s  
Internet.org initiative.36 
CONDITIONS OF SUCCESS TAKEAWAYS
• A market where mobile data costs are prohibitive  • Substantial progress has been made: Free Basics 
for lower income populations. has been successful rolling out this model through 
• A strong existing base of smartphone/feature  a range of mobile operator partners across 35 
phone users. countries,37 and with over 250 content partners  
• Partnerships with mobile operators who will on board.38 
subsidize the cost of data to users. • Indirect benefits for Facebook are hard to quantify: 
• Partnerships with content providers to provide There are no direct financial returns to Facebook, 
content to the service. but there are indirect benefits as internet usage and 
in parallel Facebook usage increases. 
• Navigating the net neutrality debate is critical: 
Future steps for the Free Basics service are unclear, 
but adequately answering the net neutrality debate 
will be critical to further global expansion of  
the service.
34. https://info.internet.org/en/impact/. Accessed January 2017. 
35. https://info.internet.org/en/story/where-weve-launched/
36. internet.org by facebook. “Connecting the world.” Posted at https://info.internet.org/en/. Accessed January 2016.
37. Constine, J. “Facebook Confronts The Free Internet Neutrality Dilemma.” Posted at http://techcrunch.com/2015/12/27/gatekeeper-or-stepping-stone/.  
Accessed January 2016.
38. Rajan, N. “Facebook renames Internet.org as ‘Free Basics’, offers open platform for developers.” Posted at http://indianexpress.com/article/technology/tech-news-
technology/facebook-opens-up-internet-org-with-new-free-basics-apps/. Accessed January 2016.
50 \ CLOSING THE ACCESS GAP: INNOVATION TO ACCELERATE UNIVERSAL INTERNET ADOPTION
APPENDIX 2: CASE STUDIES OF ACCESS INNOVATIONS
• Onboarding users to the wider internet through operators for the data consumed. Facebook’s costs are 
zero-rating is working: In India Facebook claims to develop the platform, develop operator partnerships, 
more than 40 percent of users coming online for and to promote the service to end users. 
the first time with Free Basics pay for access to the 
full internet within 30 days of joining, generating OPERATING MODEL
revenue for partner mobile operators.39 Content providers can add their services to Free Basics, 
which is made as simple as possible. On the mobile 
ORGANIZATION HISTORY operator side, Facebook has built the infrastructure so 
AND BACKGROUND that it is simple and easy for any operator to integrate 
The definition of success for Free Basics is to introduce into it. 
people to the benefits of the internet.40 They work in 
partnership with mobile operators who aim to increase PARTNERSHIPS
their subscriber base. There is no direct revenue model Free Basics is open to any developer and any application 
for Facebook, though there are indirect benefits, that meets basic technical requirements.41 Free Basics is 
including a greater global awareness of the internet not exclusive to any operator, and Free Basics is willing 
and Facebook. to work with any operator who wants to provide free 
basic services. 
OFFERING
The Free Basics initiative allows app developers, MARKETING AND DISTRIBUTION
websites, or service providers to place their offering on Free Basics is marketed by both Facebook and by 
a platform that enables users free access to a range of ad campaigns from participating mobile operators. 
basic services in regions where internet access may be Advertising for Free Basics is across a variety of 
unaffordable. The value to those offering services on demographics, including rural areas where many people 
the platform include: growing audience by providing are not yet online.
affordable access to services, scaling social impact, and 
establishing brands early in the fastest-growing mobile TECHNOLOGY
markets. Examples of services included on Free Basics Free Basics is open to any developer and any application. 
are Babajobs (job matching service), Bikroy (local Services are compatible with Free Basics if they meet 
marketplace), and Maya (mobile health messaging). two criteria: (1) they are data-efficient (e.g., services 
that use VOIP, video, file transfer, or photos larger than 
ECONOMIC MODEL 200 KB are not compatible), and (2) they meet the 
Facebook says that Free Basics is designed to promote technical specifications outlined over areas including: 
an internet access model that is free and non-exclusive. mobile compatibility, which ensures the service is 
Facebook does not require content partners to pay to compatible with feature phones, and JavaScript 
be included in Free Basics, and does not pay the mobile dependency, meaning services must be able to function 
39. Internet.org by Facebook. “Free Basics: Myths and Facts.” Posted at https://info.internet.org/en/2015/11/19/internet-org-myths-and-facts/. Accessed January 2016.
40. Internet.org by Facebook. “Free Basics by Facebook.” Posted at https://info.internet.org/en/story/free-basics-from-internet-org/. Accessed January 2016.
41. Facebook for developers. “Free Basics Platform.” Posted at https://developers.facebook.com/docs/internet-org. Accessed January 2016.
CLOSING THE ACCESS GAP: INNOVATION TO ACCELERATE UNIVERSAL INTERNET ADOPTION / 51
APPENDIX 2: CASE STUDIES OF ACCESS INNOVATIONS
normally in the absence of JavaScript (important • Evolution to a smartphone user base: The 
for lower end mobile devices). Users can access the smartphone zero-rated experience outstrips  
platform via smartphones or feature phones. that of a feature phone, creating a stronger  
value proposition. The number of users who  
REGULATORY CONTEXT have smartphone access but limited data access 
The greatest concerns and regulatory barriers levied is also rapidly rising. For these reasons, zero-rated 
against Free Basics stem from the net neutrality debate. models will likely increasingly target a smartphone 
India has been an epicenter for this debate, with the user base.
Indian regulator blocking the service in February 2016.42 
Net neutrality activists argue Free Basics splits the Note: Case study completed from secondary sources, 
internet.43 On the one hand users get a whole internet since the Free Basics team was unable to be interviewed.
where they have to pay data charges. On the other 
they get a free, stripped-down internet that promotes 
a few websites, thereby giving them advantage over 
competition and creating monopolies. A key question 
is whether users are moving from Free Basics onto 
the wider, open internet. Facebook claims in India 40 
percent of people who use Free Basics are paying for 
data and access the internet outside of the free services 
within 30 days of coming online for the first time.44 
KEY LESSONS
• Need for a transparent process to select content 
providers: For those that adopt a ‘walled garden’ 
model, a transparent approach to selecting 
partnerships with content providers will be required 
to avoid criticisms of monopolizing the experience 
of the “open internet.”
• Net neutrality will be an ongoing policy concern for 
zero-rated/sponsored data models: These models 
have tended to provide access to a limited set of 
free content, a “walled garden.” The promotion 
of such content is a controversial issue because 
it shows favoritism and free access to a subset 
of internet content that creates advantage over 
competing services. 
42. BBC News. “India blocks Zuckerberg’s free net app.” Posted at http://www.bbc.co.uk/news/technology-35522899. Access February 2016.
43. Vij, S. “Why is Facebook so eager to woo India.” Posted at http://www.aljazeera.com/indepth/features/2015/10/151028092023463.html. Accessed January 2016.
44. Internet.org by Facebook. “Free Basics: Myths and Facts.” Posted at https://info.internet.org/en/2015/11/19/internet-org-myths-and-facts/. Accessed January 2016. 
52 \ CLOSING THE ACCESS GAP: INNOVATION TO ACCELERATE UNIVERSAL INTERNET ADOPTION
APPENDIX 2: CASE STUDIES OF ACCESS INNOVATIONS
Gigato
http://www.gigato.co/
ACCESS INNOVATION: Sponsored data 
DATE LAUNCHED: July 2015 
NUMBER OF USERS: 250,000 users 
MARKETS LAUNCHED IN: India
Gigato has created a smartphone application where users earn data by using sponsored applications. App developers 
can use the platform to generate app installs. Monthly active users and the app developers bear the cost of refunding 
data to users who use their sponsored apps. This model helps address the demand-side, affordability barriers to access, 
providing internet access to underserved segments where existing data costs are prohibitive or restrictive for lower 
income user segments. Gigato’s customers are the app developers.
CONDITIONS OF SUCCESS TAKEAWAYS
• A market where mobile data costs are prohibitive for • Gigato focuses on the Indian market: Focusing 
lower income user segments. efforts on one market allows Gigato to maximize 
• Strong existing base of smartphone users. the number of apps from Indian app developers 
• A burgeoning app ecosystem where discovery and they have on their system. In parallel, the more 
user churn are significant challenges. users they have the more attractive their platform 
• Partnerships with app developers who subsidize the becomes to app developers. 
cost of data. • Behavioral success metrics, “leave data turned on”: 
Part of Gigato’s mission is to get “Indian users to 
leave their data turned on.” Without this, Indian app 
consumers are unlikely to behave like app consumers 
in developed markets, making it harder to translate 
app business cases to the Indian market. 
• A Data Virtual Network Operator concept: Gigato 
sees itself as potentially becoming the first DVNO 
(data virtual network provider) in India buying 
wholesale data from aggregators, along the same 
lines as MVNOs (mobile virtual network providers).
CLOSING THE ACCESS GAP: INNOVATION TO ACCELERATE UNIVERSAL INTERNET ADOPTION / 53
APPENDIX 2: CASE STUDIES OF ACCESS INNOVATIONS
ORGANIZATION HISTORY AND co-branding promotions between Gigato and app 
BACKGROUND developers, and third, enterprise sales for larger apps, 
Gigato’s team came together in 2014, and became currently the largest revenue source. Gigato is seed 
interested in the problem of smartphone data during funded and currently raising their series A, targeting 
their visits to India where they encountered issues US$5–US$10 million. Gigato is mainly targeting Indian 
topping up SIM cards. To address this, they initially VCs, since this group understands the market better 
created a solution that paid users with data, for ad than VCs from other regions. 
impressions served on dormant screens on their phones, OPERATING MODEL
e.g., locked screens. The product eventually evolved 
away from general advertising, to one in which users Software development operations are split between 
earn data by using sponsored applications. Gigato ongoing platform development and white label app 
launched its app on July 30, 2015, and within 30 days, development. Sales and marketing encompasses 
had 100,000 users sign up. To date, they have received generating new sign-ups from app developers onto 
over 250,000 sign ups. Gigato’s platform, and co-branding promotions between 
Gigato and app developers. Key metrics for success 
OFFERING include driving growth and retention of both customers 
Gigato is using its technology and concentrating on (app-publishers) and users (pre-paid smartphone users). 
being able to be work on any GSM network. In India, Like many app-based models, the growth and activity of 
prepaid mobile users represent around 95 percent of the Gigato’s installed smartphone base is what attracts app 
market. Gigato conducted studies and found that these developers and investors to their model.
users were rationing data, topping up miniscule amounts PARTNERSHIPS
on their phones for fear of hidden data costs. Gigato’s 
platform allows these users to earn data “recharges” by Gigato initially explored mobile operator partnerships 
using sponsored apps, reducing data costs and enhancing but discovered that mobile operators would not be 
the smartphone experience. App developers struggle willing to work with one another. Instead, Gigato 
to generate new installs and monthly active users, partnered with companies that purchase data from all 
since they tend to pay prohibitively high costs to other the major mobile operators, which allows Gigato to bulk 
platforms such as Facebook and mobile ad networks to buy data across all networks, enabling interoperability. 
market their app. With Gigato’s model, app publishers MARKETING AND DISTRIBUTION
bear the costs of refunding data to users who install and 
use their applications. There is a major barrier around app discovery in India for both Gigato and its app developer customers. 
ECONOMIC MODEL The Google Play store only facilitates easy discovery 
Key costs for Gigato span two areas: wholesale data of a tiny fraction of apps on the market. In addition, 
costs per MB, and the team costs for app development alternative app stores and the phenomenon of user 
and sales. Gigato has three revenue streams: first, sideloading can make it hard to monitor and drive new 
charging app publishers per MB consumed by users, installs. Trying to market products is also challenging, 
along with a small license fee; second, revenue from because India is described as a “very noisy market,” and 
one that relies heavily on word of mouth. In addition, it 
54 \ CLOSING THE ACCESS GAP: INNOVATION TO ACCELERATE UNIVERSAL INTERNET ADOPTION
APPENDIX 2: CASE STUDIES OF ACCESS INNOVATIONS
is challenging to get users to keep applications on their • Sponsored data receives less net neutrality critique: 
phone as users often install and uninstall apps to make Zero-rating and sponsored data are different 
room for more current apps. business models that have different implications for 
net neutrality. Those concerned with net neutrality 
Technology: Gigato’s product is a software-based should consider business models like Gigato.
platform, delivered entirely over existing GSM 
networks. Gigato works over all Indian mobile operator 
networks. It is important to note that Gigato’s app 
does not register the data used by customers when 
accessing applications through Wi-Fi networks. Gigato’s 
application is currently delivered on Android phones 
only (Android 4.1 and above), and is a 4 MB download. 
REGULATORY CONTEXT
Gigato’s business model does not conflict with current 
regulations, but might be misunderstood as a violation of 
net neutrality like zero-rating. As opposed to zero-rated 
models, Gigato’s data recharge approach ensures that 
users first access the application as they normally would, 
and then allows users to use reimbursed data for any 
service. In addition, Gigato do not track what websites 
these users are using the reimbursed data for. As a 
result, they have been cited45 as an example of how to 
sponsor data in a way that complies with net neutrality. 
Gigato does not allow any “category exclusives” within 
the app, and so app publishers are made discoverable in 
an equitable manner (e.g., through randomizing order 
apps are shown in). 
KEY LESSONS
• Sponsored data models can thrive in burgeoning 
app eco-systems: App developers in emerging 
markets struggle with user acquisition and retention, 
making sponsored data models an effective way to 
encourage greater app usage by customers. 
45. Save the Internet. “STI Statement on Mark Zuckerberg’s townhall at IIT Delhi.” Posted at http://blog.savetheinternet.in/response-to-facebook-townhall/. Accessed 
January 2016.
CLOSING THE ACCESS GAP: INNOVATION TO ACCELERATE UNIVERSAL INTERNET ADOPTION / 55
APPENDIX 2: CASE STUDIES OF ACCESS INNOVATIONS
ISAT Connection Project (Equity Bank and Inmarsat)
ACCESS INNOVATION: GEO backhaul, commercial and cached Wi-Fi 
DATE LAUNCHED: 2015 
NUMBER OF USERS: 200 agents, estimated 5,000 households (for pilot stage) 
MARKETS LAUNCHED IN: Kenya 
Using Inmarsat’s satellite technology, Equity Bank, Kenya’s largest retail bank, is able to pilot cached Wi-Fi services 
through their agent network across Kenya. Customers use Wi-Fi-enabled phones to access a bespoke platform 
consisting of both cached and live websites that are text based or video. The cached content is provided to customers 
for free at high speeds because the content is stored in a local cache. Equity Bank/Inmarsat’s customers are the users.
CONDITIONS OF SUCCESS • Satellite best deployed in areas with lowest 
• Use of a pre-existing, sizeable agent network  likelihood of competing access innovations:  
(i.e.. bank agents) for sales and distribution. The relatively higher cost and lower speed of 
• Rural environments where mobile operators struggle satellite means it is displaceable by lower cost,  
to provide affordable network coverage. faster access innovations, but is indispensable in 
• High adoption of Wi-Fi-enabled feature phones rural areas where fiber does not exist and cell towers 
and smartphones. are too expensive. 
TAKEAWAYS ORGANIZATION HISTORY AND 
• BACKGROUNDSatellite companies are incentivized to explore 
“last mile” access: Given that satellite is the most Inmarsat is a provider of satellite connectivity, with 12 
ubiquitous form of backhaul access, major satellite satellites currently in orbit that provide connectivity 
companies have an interest in understanding the across every continent. Equity Bank is a financial 
different business models that can provide access services provider and licensed commercial bank 
while generating a profit. headquartered in Nairobi, Kenya. The organizations have 
• Cached content systems are demonstrating value: partnered to provide satellite connectivity to 200 rural 
Cached content systems provide free access to a Equity Bank agent locations across Kenya. 
limited set of digital content for free. Users are OFFERING
consuming content regularly, though some content 
refresh issues must be considered, e.g., some Equity Bank agents provide a Wi-Fi hotspot using 
younger users had already watched all videos from geostationary satellite backhaul using a Broadband 
their favorite cached shows and had since stopped Global Area Network (BGAN) terminal. Agents and 
using the hotspot. consumers use Wi-Fi-enabled phones to access a 
56 \ CLOSING THE ACCESS GAP: INNOVATION TO ACCELERATE UNIVERSAL INTERNET ADOPTION
APPENDIX 2: CASE STUDIES OF ACCESS INNOVATIONS
bespoke platform consisting of both cached and live schools. As the pilot continues, Equity Bank is exploring 
websites that are text based or video, and includes topics ways to engage other merchant agent shops, such as 
on agriculture, entrepreneurship, education, health, Agrovets, which are the local agricultural hubs, providing 
entertainment, and other Equity Bank services.  information for farmers while functioning as a dealmaker 
The cached content is provided to customers for free  between farmers and the buyers. 
at high speeds because the content is stored locally. 
Equity Bank agents use the Wi-Fi as a means to drive PARTNERSHIPS
greater footfall in their stores, while Equity Bank In addition to Equity Bank and Inmarsat, a range of 
benefits from an increase in the number of bank organizations has assisted with the pilot. These include 
transactions at these stores. Caribou Digital, an advisory services company focused 
on building emerging market digital economies, 
ECONOMIC MODEL Dalberg, a strategic advisory firm dedicated to global 
The CAPEX costs per location are US$2,000– development, and The Satellite Applications Catapult, 
US$4,000, which includes assembly and installation, a not-for-profit innovation and technology company 
training and starter phone/tablet costs. Many agents created to drive economic growth through the 
reported an increase of US$1–US$2 per month in development of satellite applications. Other supplier 
power costs to their business as a result of the hotspot partners on the project include BRCK, a company  
installation. The model is still in pilot stage, but some based in Nairobi that builds self-powered, mobile 
users have expressed willingness to pay for the right Wi-Fi devices. 
content. Other revenue sources such as cross listing 
other Equity Bank services or pursuing third party MARKETING AND DISTRIBUTION
advertising are being explored. The network of 200 Equity Bank agents drives the 
sales and distribution to users. After selection, the 
The funding for the work stems from a grant from the agents must be on-boarded and trained to use the 
U.K. Space Agency (UKSA), as part of a £32 million, Wi-Fi devices. On the customer awareness side, agents 
International Partnerships Space Program (IPSP), to indicate a desire for increased marketing support. The 
open up opportunities for the U.K. space sector to majority of customers discover the hotspot through 
work with international partners to develop satellite automatic notifications when their device detects the 
technology and applications in emerging economies. Wi-Fi signal, while the agent informs the rest. 
OPERATING MODEL TECHNOLOGY
The pilot started by selecting 200 agents from an The project utilizes Inmarsat’s BGAN Link to connect 
existing agent network of over 17,000 agents. These with their satellites at each of the access points. BGAN 
agents have reported an increase in foot traffic, Link operates over the Inmarsat-4 network, which has 
citing between 10 and 20 more customers per day, ubiquitous satellite coverage. Terminals have low power 
with some reporting an increase of nearly 50. Data consumption and can run off mains, batteries or solar 
consumption varies drastically across the pilot, with panels. In addition, the pilot uses BRCK mobile Wi-Fi 
the top 10 sites accounting for almost a quarter of devices to provide Wi-Fi coverage to users. 
total data consumption; 4 out of the top 10 sites are 
CLOSING THE ACCESS GAP: INNOVATION TO ACCELERATE UNIVERSAL INTERNET ADOPTION / 57
APPENDIX 2: CASE STUDIES OF ACCESS INNOVATIONS
The BRCK also stores the cached content portal ‘My 
Life’, in addition to providing access to 100 websites. 
A distinct content portal targets schools—“Wings to 
Fly”—which prioritizes education and learning content. 
REGULATORY CONTEXT
There are no major regulatory hurdles to the model. 
Satellite backhaul is already commercially available, and 
Wi-Fi utilizes unlicensed spectrum bands.
KEY LESSONS
• The willingness to pay for access in rural settings: 
Users in the pilot expressed willingness to pay, 
given the right content. Personal data consumption 
habits vary drastically, however, with user estimates 
ranging from US$0.15–US$1.50 per day for data. 
• Satellite in combination with cached Wi-Fi: Provides 
an attractive balance of ubiquitous coverage for 
rural regions, while the free access to cached 
content addresses affordability constraints.
58 \ CLOSING THE ACCESS GAP: INNOVATION TO ACCELERATE UNIVERSAL INTERNET ADOPTION
APPENDIX 2: CASE STUDIES OF ACCESS INNOVATIONS
Mawingu Networks
http://mawingunetworks.com/
ACCESS INNOVATION: Rural ISP (using TV white space and microwave) 
DATE LAUNCHED: 2013 
NUMBER OF USERS: Unknown 
MARKETS LAUNCHED IN: Kenya46 
Microsoft announced the deployment of a pilot project to deliver low-cost, high-speed wireless broadband across 
Kenya in the TV white space band. Developed by Microsoft Research, Mawingu Networks is the first deployment 
of solar-powered, TV white space technology to deliver high-speed (up to 20 Mbps)47 internet access to rural areas.48 
The signal from TV white space can travel four times the distance of regular Wi-Fi, and bend around walls and physical 
barriers better than Wi-Fi. Mawingu Networks’s customers are both local businesses and institutions and users in  
the community.
CONDITIONS OF SUCCESS to develop legal frameworks that support broader 
• Regulatory approval for use of TV white space commercial deployment of the technology. As yet, 
spectrum in trial and commercial deployments. the regulator has not allowed Microsoft to expand 
• Rural environments where mobile operators struggle its pilot beyond its current scope.
to provide affordable network coverage. • Strong private sector knowledge base: Commercial 
• High adoption of Wi-Fi-enabled feature phones  players, notably Microsoft, have led the funding and 
and smartphones. research into pilot TV white space deployments. 
These players will be key in providing evidence to 
TAKEAWAYS support the commercial TV white space case. 
• The promise of TV white space is far reaching: ORGANIZATION HISTORY AND 
White space spectrum can be used, Microsoft BACKGROUND
claims, to provide wireless, broadband access to the Mawingu Networks is the first of six TV white space 
80 percent of Kenyans who do not have access to pilots Microsoft has deployed in Africa in collaboration 
the internet.49 with partners. Microsoft’s goal is to demonstrate the 
• Regulatory change for TV white space has been commercial and technical viability of TV white space 
slow: Microsoft’s ambition is to convince regulators so regulators are convinced of the value in the market. 
46. This is one of a larger set of Microsoft pilots spanning Botswana (2015), Ghana (2014), Namibia (2014), Philippines (2014), South Africa (2013), Tanzania (2013), and 
Kenya (2013). 
47. Mawingu Networks. “Our Technology.” Posted at: http://www.mawingunetworks.com/our-technology.html. Accessed January 2016.
48. Juma, V. “Microsoft’s rural Kenya Internet bid gets Sh400m.” Posted at http://www.businessdailyafrica.com/Corporate-News/Microsoft-s-rural-Kenya-Internet-bid-
gets-Sh400m/-/539550/2810050/-/8f7p6jz/-/index.html. Accessed January 2016.
49. Garnett, P. “Delivering low-cost, solar-powered Internet access to rural Kenya.” Posted at http://blogs.microsoft.com/on-the-issues/2015/06/09/delivering-low-cost-
solar-powered-internet-access-to-rural-kenya/. Accessed January 2016.
CLOSING THE ACCESS GAP: INNOVATION TO ACCELERATE UNIVERSAL INTERNET ADOPTION / 59
APPENDIX 2: CASE STUDIES OF ACCESS INNOVATIONS
Microsoft’s work on this with the Kenyan government week (500 MB cap), US$3 for one month (2 GB), 
dates back to 2011, where they first showcased the or US$10 for a three-month package (8 GB), and 
use of TV white space technology. Mawingu Networks device charging.52 After the data thresholds are 
established its initial funding from Microsoft’s reached, connectivity throughput is slowed. No public 
4Afrika initiative, the U.S. Agency for International information is available on the costs of the network. 
Development (USAID), investment from angel investor 
Jim Forster, and Paul G. Allen’s Vulcan, Inc. Ultimately, OPERATING MODEL
the approach appealed to the Overseas Private The pilot has sought a diverse range of locations, 
Investment Corporation (OPIC), which committed to including schools, a health clinic, local government, and 
providing a US$4.1 million loan in September 2016 to the Red Cross in Nanyuki.53 Microsoft has provided 
enable commercial expansion of Mawingu Networks’s Windows 8 tablets, Windows 8 applications, and 
model further across Kenya.50 Microsoft Office 365. Another partner, Indigo, has 
provided computer labs and instruction to each school 
OFFERING and library, working with community leaders and local 
The Mawingu Networks pilot project began in Nanyuki, companies to identify the most beneficial services and 
around 200km north of Nairobi in Kenya. It connects applications for each location, including agriculture 
eight customer locations, five schools, the Laikipia and education services. Commercial details of the pilot 
County government office, Laikipia Public Library, Red are not publically available, though some social impact 
Cross, and the Burguret Dispensary health care clinic. results have been shared, for example school students 
The value proposition for users focuses on avoiding improving their scores in the Kenya National Exam 
time-consuming trips of many kilometers, often traveled due to accessing online content and standardized test 
on foot, to expensive internet cafes for checking preparation materials.
emails, researching job opportunities, and looking for 
other information. Device charging is also part of the PARTNERSHIPS
value proposition to these users, who would otherwise A key partnership for the project is the Kenyan Ministry 
travel large distances to recharge their mobile devices. of Information and Communications which provides 
For businesses or institutions like schools, the value is regulatory allowances for the pilot to take place.
faster and cheaper internet access than would otherwise 
be available. Currently Mawingu Networks maintains MARKETING AND DISTRIBUTION
merchants in 28 different townships.51 Mawingu Networks is working across a range of locations 
where individuals are finding out about the service in 
ECONOMIC MODEL different ways. In schools, students are introduced to 
Customers are charged for access on a weekly or the service as part of an organized curriculum. In other 
monthly basis. Mawingu Networks charges roughly instances, Mawingu Networks agents, selling low-
US$0.50 for 24 hours (300 MB cap), US$1 per cost internet access and device charging to their rural 
50. https://www.opic.gov/press-releases/2016/opic-and-microsoft-commit-support-wireless-internet-expansion-kenya
51. http://mawingunetworks.com/merchants/
52. Mawingu Networks. “Our Technology.” Posted at: http://www.mawingunetworks.com/our-technology.html. Accessed January 2016.
53. Microsoft Research. “Pilots and Demonstrations.” Posted at http://research.microsoft.com/en-us/projects/spectrum/pilots.aspx. Accessed December 2015.
60 \ CLOSING THE ACCESS GAP: INNOVATION TO ACCELERATE UNIVERSAL INTERNET ADOPTION
APPENDIX 2: CASE STUDIES OF ACCESS INNOVATIONS
communities, have launched community hubs that  KEY LESSONS
offer access. • Combination of TV white space spectrum alongside 
TECHNOLOGY Wi-Fi: Mawingu Networks claims that by using TV 
white space spectrum, they demonstrated that three 
TV white space involves TV frequencies assigned base stations cover areas of almost 235 km2.56 
to broadcasters that are not used locally. Mawingu • Capable local Kenyan systems integrators: Mawingu 
Networks uses low-cost wireless technology and solar Networks say that local integrators are very capable 
power to build internet networks in rural areas, where of deploying and maintaining the software and 
customers use Wi-Fi to connect. The service delivers hardware with minimal training. This is a promising 
bandwidth speeds of up to 15 Mbps. Microsoft claims result for other providers looking to roll out 
the latency is similar to a typical broadband deployment, hardware in rural areas.
and believes they can achieve a range of at least • Cloud based management: The TV white space trial 
10km around a transmitter site. These technologies in Kenya has successfully managed deployments 
can support both high-bandwidth and low-latency remotely via the cloud, demonstrating that remote 
applications, such as video streaming and Skype  management of all network components is possible 
video conferencing. in rural areas.
REGULATORY CONTEXT Note: Case study completed from secondary sources as 
The tests in Kenya are meant to highlight the viability Mawingu Networks team unable to be interviewed.
of TV white space to convince African countries to 
accelerate legislation that would enable TV white space 
technology to provide internet access.54 Conditions to 
the Kenyan pilot included operation in the frequency 
bands 470 MHz to 694 MHz for a limited number of 
geographically and time confined trial networks.55 As 
yet, the regulator has not allowed for the commercial 
use of the TV white space requisite for the pilot to 
exceed its current scope. 
54. Wanjiku, R. “Google, Microsoft pilot TV white space project in Kenya and South Africa.“ Posted at http://www.pcworld.com/article/2036390/google-microsoft-pilot-
tv-white-space-projects-in-kenya-and-south-africa.html. Accessed January 2016.
55. Haji, M. “Licensing of TV White Space Networks in Kenya.” Posted at http://www.itu.int/en/ITU-R/study-groups/workshops/RWP1B-SMWSCRS-14/Presentations/
KEN%20-%20Licensing%20of%20TV%20White%20Space%20Networks%20in%20Kenya.pdf. Accessed January 2016.
56. Microsoft et al. “Rural Broadband Trials – Laikipia County Kenya – For the Communications Authority of Kenya.” Posted at http://www.dynamicspectrumalliance.org/
assets/TVWS_Report_for_Kenya_final_final_24_Aug.pdf. Accessed January 2016.
CLOSING THE ACCESS GAP: INNOVATION TO ACCELERATE UNIVERSAL INTERNET ADOPTION / 61
APPENDIX 2: CASE STUDIES OF ACCESS INNOVATIONS
poa! Internet
http://poainternet.net  
ACCESS INNOVATION: Paid commercial Wi-Fi 
DATE LAUNCHED: 2015 
NUMBER OF USERS: Targeting connecting over 10m customers over the next 5 years 
MARKETS LAUNCHED IN: Kenya 
poa! Internet provides a Wi-Fi service in Nairobi, where users can get high speed Internet access at a far lower price 
than local mobile operators. In addition, users get free access to a limited set of digital content served from a dedicated 
cached content server. Poa! Internet’s customers are users in Nairobi.
CONDITIONS OF SUCCESS TAKEAWAYS
• A strong existing base and increasing uptake of Wi- • Caching is a cost-effective content delivery 
Fi enabled smartphone users model: One piece of downloaded content can be 
• Prohibitively expensive internet services from distributed from a cache to many users with virtually 
mobile operators no incremental cost on the network, making it 
• Access to distribution channels to promote and economically feasible to deliver rich media content, 
distribute the service effectively e.g. video, to a large volume of users at very low 
• Urban environments with a high population density price points.
of potential users • The low CAPEX cost for access points is striking: 
At a few hundred dollars per access point they 
are an order of magnitude lower than some of the 
microtelco/community GSM networks (though it 
should be noted that access points cover a smaller 
area).
• Regulatory challenges to Wi-Fi are minimal: Wi-
Fi uses unlicensed spectrum so avoiding the costly 
license fees associated with acquiring spectrum, 
lowering barriers to entry.
• Widespread availability of Wi-Fi devices ensures 
viability of Wi-Fi networks: Significant adoption 
of Wi-Fi-enabled devices enables poa! Internet to 
deploy a low-cost, Wi-Fi based network.
62 \ CLOSING THE ACCESS GAP: INNOVATION TO ACCELERATE UNIVERSAL INTERNET ADOPTION
APPENDIX 2: CASE STUDIES OF ACCESS INNOVATIONS
ORGANIZATION HISTORY access to cached content. Costs are split across CAPEX 
AND BACKGROUND with the Wi-Fi access points, installation, and backhaul 
With previous experience working at Fon, the world’s costing a few hundred dollars per site, and OPEX for 
largest Wi-Fi network, Andy Halsall and poa! Internet’s distribution, network maintenance, and marketing. 
founding team saw the opportunity to pioneer building Customers can pay via mobile money or a network of 
operator-grade networks using primarily Wi-Fi based local agents. The agents are compensated on a system 
technologies. The ability to build networks at a much analogous to the mobile airtime distribution system, i.e., 
lower price point, enabling delivery of internet access at vendors get a percentage of the airtime sale. Airtime 
a cost cheaper than traditional cellular networks could wholesalers are incentivized with discounts at larger 
offer, was the starting point for poa! Internet. poa! volumes. 
Internet’s team is currently 25 full-time people, many OPERATING MODEL
with emerging markets telecom backgrounds or hired 
from the communities that poa Internet serves. The poa! Internet develops the access network technology, 
business was originally founded in the United Kingdom, the proprietary local content caching system and builds 
but has since moved to Nairobi. relationships with local ISPs to manage the backhaul. 
The team targets localities in which the model can be 
OFFERING implemented, adapting the business model to work with 
The team found that users in urban environments were the communities to promote the service and protect 
significantly limited by the terms of use and high costs network assets. The team also forms relationships with 
of data bundles from mobile operators. To solve this vendors to get the optimum cost for each access point. 
problem, poa! Internet uses a low-cost Wi-Fi network PARTNERSHIPS
to bring down the price of data, and a community sales 
and distribution model to ensure effective promotion. poa! Internet’s partnerships stretch across internet 
poa! Internet also competitively differentiates its backhaul, tower space, and sales and distribution. In 
service by providing a quota of free access to content Kenya, they are partnering with an ISP that provides 
stored on a cache in the network. poa! Internet targets internet backhaul in addition to data center space. On 
customers between the ages of 18 and 25 who live in the tower space side poa! Internet is partnering with 
low-income urban areas and are smartphone users. those who own and maintain community locations (e.g., 
These users understand the “personal business case” for churches, schools), in addition to “cybers” who own local 
being online and, typically own a smartphone but cannot internet café outlets. These local community members 
afford to use data because of expensive data bundles. are engaged to deploy and maintain the network. 
poa! Internet identified this demographic as potential Finally, on the sales and distribution, agents are engaged 
product evangelists who could convince others to come to sell airtime to the network and hires from the local 
online. community are used to sell and promote the service 
to customers. poa! Internet notes the importance of 
ECONOMIC MODEL building relationships the local community, as this helps 
Revenue is driven from the user on a per-MB basis, split build the credibility of the service. 
across: (1) paid for, open internet access and (2) free MARKETING AND DISTRIBUTION
CLOSING THE ACCESS GAP: INNOVATION TO ACCELERATE UNIVERSAL INTERNET ADOPTION / 63
APPENDIX 2: CASE STUDIES OF ACCESS INNOVATIONS
poa! Internet is piloting a viral marketing effort TECHNOLOGY
where a successful recommendation will reward both Poa! Internet has built out around 75 Wi-Fi access 
“recommender” and “recommendee” with free internet points in the Kibera slum in Nairobi. Each access 
access. From here users can pay for access to poa! point covers a radius of up to 250m. These access 
Internet’s network in two ways: via mobile money or points are connected to wireless backhaul network 
using cash. The latter includes a network of around 150 operated by poa! Internet and eventually into a fiber 
agents (including the cybers, other shops, and existing connection. A data center in Nairobi then handles the 
airtime vendors). The model is a pre-paid system, with billing, Operations Support Systems (OSS), and so on. 
a central wholesaler (e.g., serving 50 stores). Signing Although the current focus is densely populated areas 
up for the service is very simple, requiring a few SMS such as Nairobi, poa! Internet intends to adapt the 
exchanges with a free number. model to peri-urban or rural communities. 
Cybers typically consist of half a dozen PCs linked to Each one of the access points is made mostly from 
a GSM modem, selling access to the internet, with readily available components with a few custom poa! 
their principal revenue coming from up selling other Internet features, costing a few hundred dollars. This bill 
services (e.g., printing and laminating, training on of materials consists of two radios and two antennas, a 
use of Facebook). In exchange for housing a Wi-Fi car battery, solar cell, and power controller. The solar 
access point and providing customer service to poa and battery combination remove the need for diesel 
Internet’s customers the cybers  receive a certain level or grid electricity. The service delivers high speed 
of free internet access, which offsets their existing internet suitable for video streaming and other hand 
internet connection cost. They have a shared interest bandwidth applications. The content caching system is 
in bringing more people online and creating a greater placed on servers in the network and provides a “walled 
footfall of customers through their outlets. In addition, garden of content”. Through the cache, poa! Internet 
poa! Internet hosts some of its Wi-Fi access points drastically reduces the incremental costs of delivering 
on schools, health centers and other community content across the Wi-Fi network, making it far more 
organizations in exchange for free internet access.  poa! economically viable to deliver rich content when 
Internet’s approach with a focus on local community compared to accessing the same over the wider internet.
involvement is believed to be key in reducing potential 
theft of Wi-Fi hotspot equipment. REGULATORY CONTEXT
poa! Internet is regulated by the Communication 
Authority of Kenya and possesses three three licenses: 
A Network Facility Provider license allowing them 
to physically build the network; a Content Service 
Provider license allowing them to provide content; and 
an Application Service Provider license allowing them to 
sell internet access. Kenya is regarded by poa! Internet 
as relatively strong from a regulatory perspective, with 
a structured and transparent process for all applications. 
Operating within the unlicensed Wi-Fi bands is seen 
64 \ CLOSING THE ACCESS GAP: INNOVATION TO ACCELERATE UNIVERSAL INTERNET ADOPTION
APPENDIX 2: CASE STUDIES OF ACCESS INNOVATIONS
as much less of a challenge as compared with GSM 
spectrum, since the associated licenses in the former 
case are in the thousands of dollars whereas the latter 
are many orders of magnitude higher in cost.
KEY LESSONS
• Wi-Fi is a credible technology for providing 
mass-market internet delivery. The low costs of 
internet technology and its wide spread adoption 
in smartphones allows for a far more cost effective 
delivery of internet services than traditional 
technologies such as cellular.
• Cached Wi-Fi is a critical gateway for users: The 
cache allows users to have access to internet 
content for free, which translates into a richer 
user experience that can drive subsequent interest 
in paying for access to the wider internet. Other 
providers should consider the value of offering 
rich content and media via a cache as a gateway to 
encourage use. 
• Walled garden objections must be considered: The 
amount of content available via the cached content 
system is substantially less than the wider internet, 
meaning the curation of content and means by 
which users are encouraged/discouraged from 
exploring the wider internet must be considered by 
anyone offering a cached content model. A walled 
garden can be used drop barriers to getting online 
adoption and does not necessarily lead to limiting 
customers access to the wider internet. 
CLOSING THE ACCESS GAP: INNOVATION TO ACCELERATE UNIVERSAL INTERNET ADOPTION / 65
APPENDIX 2: CASE STUDIES OF ACCESS INNOVATIONS
Project Isizwe
http://www.projectisizwe.org/
ACCESS INNOVATION: Free public Wi-Fi and cached Wi-Fi 
DATE LAUNCHED: 2013 
NUMBER OF USERS: 1,050 Wi-Fi hotspots, 2.7 million end users 
MARKETS LAUNCHED IN: South Africa 
Project Isizwe operates as a nonprofit, with the local government financing the CAPEX and OPEX costs of free Wi-Fi 
hotspots in South Africa. Customers can use 500 MB of wider internet access per day, or unlimited access to a cached 
content portal. Project Isizwe has set up 1,050 Free Internet Zones (FIZ), and have connected 2.7 unique users to the 
network. Project Isizwe’s customers are the users.
CONDITIONS OF SUCCESS like a public utility. Its nonprofit structure allows 
• Public funding to support citizen internet access. them to operate without the need for profit margins. 
• Access to low cost, fiber backhaul. Its team of 25 is split between offices in Pretoria and 
• Densely populated urban/peri-urban environments Stellenbosch, South Africa. Project Isizwe started in 
as well as rural deployments. 2013 when the first CEO, Alan Knott-Craig, Jr., was 
• High adoption of Wi-Fi-enabled feature phones  running Mxit, and made a deal with the Stellenbosch 
and smartphones. municipality to offer free Wi-Fi in public spaces. Mxit 
would “donate” the bandwidth and Wi-Fi equipment 
TAKEAWAYS while the municipality would provide the electricity  
• The non-profit model: Project Isizwe operates  and the community infrastructure to house the  
as a nonprofit, making it attractive to financing Wi-Fi equipment. 
by country governments and international  Today Project Isizwe has setup 1,050 FIZ sites and 
donors/foundations. has connected their 2.7 millionth unique user to the 
• Viable in urban/peri-urban environments: The free network. The city of Tshwane is their flagship project, 
access model is more cost effective to deploy in though Project Isizwe also has 10–15 pilot projects 
urban/peri-urban areas that have a higher population around South Africa.
density and also likelihood of fiber backhaul. OFFERING
ORGANIZATION HISTORY AND Project Iziswe’s customers include local governments 
BACKGROUND (i.e., Tshwane municipality), specific government 
Project Isizwe believes the best way to reduce digital departments (e.g., Department of Higher Education, 
inequality is for the government to treat the internet or Department of Agriculture), NGOs, and privately 
funded initiatives (e.g., local community centers). Also 
66 \ CLOSING THE ACCESS GAP: INNOVATION TO ACCELERATE UNIVERSAL INTERNET ADOPTION
APPENDIX 2: CASE STUDIES OF ACCESS INNOVATIONS
users can access the content portal via their Wi-Fi- PARTNERSHIPS
enabled device, gaining unlimited access to a cached Project Isizwe negotiated partnerships with commercial 
content portal, and 500MB of wider internet access  companies to provide equipment and backhaul at 
per day. nonprofit reduced rates, local ISP’s to deploy and 
ECONOMIC MODEL maintain network access points, and content providers 
to offer content to its portal. Project Isizwe works with 
The two main costs of this model are bandwidth and local governments to identify municipal buildings as 
hardware. CAPEX of access points vary by geography: future FIZ sites.
urban FIZ sites are around R90,000 (~US$6,000) 
per site, peri-urban costs R120,000 (~US$9,000) per MARKETING AND DISTRIBUTION
site, while rural FIZ sites cost around R150,000 Rand For marketing, Project Isizwe uses its free Wi-Fi 
(US$11,000). Project Isizwe estimates that for the Champions Program to promote the Wi-Fi access 
same service, CAPEX is cheaper on satellite by 50% but to young individuals, manage the free Wi-Fi in their 
OPEX cost increases by a factor of 3. Local government communities, and capture data about the site usage, 
funds the OPEX and CAPEX. To help cover OPEX e.g., sharing stories of users on whom the free Wi-Fi has 
costs, Project Isizwe is exploring selling value-added had an impact.
services such as Wi-Fi TV (external funding provided by 
Omidyar Network) to customers. TECHNOLOGY
OPERATING MODEL Project Isizwe’s FIZ sites each cover a 150m square 
area (e.g., public park, school). Eighty-five percent of 
The Project Isizwe team performs four core functions: the daily user traffic is through mobile phones. The key 
conducts proof of concept pilots, manages deployment difference between urban and rural locations is backhaul 
of new FIZ points, monitors the impact of sites to availability, with fiber access in urban locations lowering 
report to customers on engagement, and develops new costs, while more expensive satellite backhaul is used in 
content. Project Isizwe employs local ISPs to install and rural locations. Users access the service predominantly 
maintain FIZ sites, providing employment opportunities using smartphones; each user is allocated 500 MB per 
in the local economy while keeping Project Isizwe’s day (15 GB per month) free, at download speeds of 15 
core team to a minimum. On the content side, Project Mbps. The FIZ service blocks a few sites, e.g., gambling 
Isizwe has developed Wi-Fi TV on their content and pornography, but otherwise offers open internet 
portal, a video on-demand service that includes short access. Project Isizwe’s content portal allows for 
snippets developed by young citizen journalists in their unlimited free access, while allowing content partners to 
communities. Project Isizwe is exploring other value- offer digital content. 
added services, such as a Wi-Fi voice calling service, a 
basic chat service, and a “Wi-Fi drive-in” service, where REGULATORY CONTEXT
users can stream movies with unlimited access in certain Project Isizwe has encountered little regulatory 
areas at certain times. resistance given that it uses Wi-Fi that operates in 
unlicensed bands. There are general challenges around 
Wi-Fi security that may become more significant issues 
CLOSING THE ACCESS GAP: INNOVATION TO ACCELERATE UNIVERSAL INTERNET ADOPTION / 67
APPENDIX 2: CASE STUDIES OF ACCESS INNOVATIONS
in future, such as if online payment or similar services 
are launched over the portal.
KEY LESSONS
• Requires progressive local government with a digital 
inclusion agenda: Free Wi-Fi is generally offered 
with the support of government subsidy. It will 
likely come from local governments with existing, or 
strong intentions to form digital inclusion agendas 
with a goal to improve access for the underserved.
• Strong hybrid model potential: Free access  
could easily be blended with other business models 
that help subsidize CAPEX/OPEX, e.g., blended 
paid Wi-Fi model (B2C) or sponsored content 
model (B2B). 
• Security of equipment is a concern: Agents in 
urban areas cited security concerns with customers 
loitering in small store spaces while agents in peri-
urban and rural areas did not cite security risks. 
Providers must be mindful of security concerns for 
network equipment.
• Integration with existing agent networks  
is a promising approach: Utilizing existing  
agent networks in rural areas, in this case  
bank agents, provides a pre-existing sales 
and distribution network.
Note: As of December 2016, the funds used by the city 
of Tshwane for Project Isizwe’s expansion is under the 
process of review because the Auditor General disagrees 
with the procurement mechanism historically selected 
by the city. The city and Project Isizwe are now looking 
for new ways to provide funding, including running 
digital ads over the service.57  
57. http://www.news24.com/SouthAfrica/News/ag-declared-tshwane-free-wi-fi-project-unlawful-irregular-mayor-20161215
68 \ CLOSING THE ACCESS GAP: INNOVATION TO ACCELERATE UNIVERSAL INTERNET ADOPTION
APPENDIX 2: CASE STUDIES OF ACCESS INNOVATIONS
Rhizomatica
https://www.rhizomatica.org/
ACCESS INNOVATION: Microtelco/community GSM 
DATE LAUNCHED: 2009 
NUMBER OF USERS: 3,000 active users per month, 16 active networks 
MARKETS LAUNCHED IN: Mexico 
Rhizomatica is a regional telecommunications cooperative that enables communities in Mexico to own and operate 
GSM networks. They have also been lobbying for regulatory change on behalf of small-scale community networks, 
arguing for special dispensations from regulators to allow small communities to legally utilize GSM spectrum. 
Rhizomatica’s customer is the community that collectively operates the network.
CONDITIONS OF SUCCESS minimum amount of CAPEX and OPEX to run 
• Rural environments where mobile operators struggle microtelco/community GSM networks, and then 
to provide affordable network coverage. allow local communities to run networks at this cost 
• Allowances from regulators in order to use level without margin. 
unlicensed spectrum. • Microtelco/community GSM can be mobile 
• Strong existing community social structures that operator agnostic: By using VOIP there is no need 
facilitate the community ownership model. for a relationship with any of the mobile operators 
• Availability of open source software/hardware to in the market, and there is no perceived friction 
build the community network. with these players since Rhizomatica operates in 
TAKEAWAYS communities where mobile operators choose not 
• to operate. Regulators allow for use of unlicensed spectrum in 
Mexico: The Mexican regulator has allowed specific ORGANIZATION HISTORY AND 
bands of GSM spectrum for use by microtelco/ BACKGROUND
community GSM networks. Rhizomatica was started by Peter Bloom in 2009 
• Innovative business model elements are being as a nonprofit to create a regional community 
tested: Rhizomatica have tested interesting telecommunications cooperative. There are now 16 
adaptations of business models including active networks in Mexico with around 3,000 active 
subscription pricing and capped call time limits. users per month. The Rhizomatica team consists of eight 
people, split into three groups: the first group focuses 
• Communities can operate their own networks on technology and building out software tools, the 
at cost: Rhizomatica’s larger goal is to find the 
CLOSING THE ACCESS GAP: INNOVATION TO ACCELERATE UNIVERSAL INTERNET ADOPTION / 69
APPENDIX 2: CASE STUDIES OF ACCESS INNOVATIONS
second group focuses on legal issues such as lobbying connectivity is in place for backhaul and remote 
the Mexican government for legal access to spectrum, management. They train local communities on how to 
and the third focuses on working with communities to operate, shoot, and manage the network. Rhizomatica’s 
enable them to set up and independently run their  operations also include lobbying for spectrum 
own networks. and continuing to develop open-source network 
management software. Rhizomatica’s free open source 
OFFERING set of materials is available at GitHub.58 
Rhizomatica’s model focuses community ownership with 
the responsibility to run and maintain it. This model PARTNERSHIPS
allows the community to have access to an otherwise Rhizomatica partnered with the Shuttleworth 
unavailable local GSM network at an affordable rate. For Foundation for core financing, with the remainder 
a fixed monthly fee, local users can make as many calls coming from the Secretariat of Communications and 
within the local network as they want, as well as to any Transportation of Mexico. In addition, Rhizomatica 
other Rhizomatica network. If users want to make long partnered with local communities to help roll out 
distance calls they can purchase credits, to make VOIP networks. Rhizomatica did not interact or partner with 
calls (e.g., to the United States). any mobile operator in the market. 
ECONOMIC MODEL MARKETING AND DISTRIBUTION
The community finances the CAPEX and installation Rhizomatica does not actively market and instead  
costs, around US$10,000. They also cover the relies on word of mouth to distribute their networks. 
OPEX costs, which include power and backhaul. Once the relationship with a community has been 
In terms of revenue, each user pays 40 pesos per established, Rhizomatica helps network administrators 
month (~US$2.40) as a flat “membership fee.” Of run and manage their network but does not interfere 
these 40 pesos (less than US$2), 15 pesos go to with daily operations. Thus it is up to local communities 
Rhizomatica to cover its operating costs, and 25 to make new users aware of the service, but this 
pesos stay in the community to pay for various costs, is generally straightforward given the small size of 
including electricity, backhaul, and occasionally a communities in question.
fee to the network administrator. The revenue model 
was co-designed with communities that determined TECHNOLOGY
that the most equitable revenue model was through Rhizomatica views licensed technologies as hindering 
subscriptions. Given the limited number of channels innovation, which is why operating with open 
available on the network, the community decided that source software has been critical for Rhizomatica. 
local calls could be no longer than 5 minutes, though Rhizomatica’s own open source software is developed 
long distance calls have no time limit. for the management layer of their solution, which others 
have taken on and adapted for use elsewhere (e.g., 
OPERATING MODEL Nicaragua). Another reason Rhizomatica stresses the 
Rhizomatica’s ground operations ensure that importance of open source hardware is a need to fix 
58. GitHub. “Rhizomatica.” Posted at http://github.com/rhizomatica. Accessed January 2016.
70 \ CLOSING THE ACCESS GAP: INNOVATION TO ACCELERATE UNIVERSAL INTERNET ADOPTION
APPENDIX 2: CASE STUDIES OF ACCESS INNOVATIONS
locally; so if a network goes down, it is cheaper to fix open source software/hardware.
locally than working with international manufacturers.  
A detailed documentation of Rhizomatica’s hardware • Most appropriate for rural: This solution is 
and software can be found on their wiki.59 appropriate for locations out of traditional network 
coverage, especially where other infrastructure 
REGULATORY CONTEXT assets can be leveraged, e.g., satellite backhaul 
When Rhizomatica started working in Mexico,  or power.
the regulatory environment did not allow microtelco/
community GSM networks like theirs to operate. 
Rhizomatica began to operate its network under a 
special dispensation from the Mexican communications 
regulator, IFETEL. As a result of its lobbying work  
with IFETEL, Rhizomatica was awarded with regulatory 
change that set aside 2 x 5MHz of spectrum in the 
800MHz band, for “social” use. The criteria are that 
the communities being served must be under 2,500 
people or be designated as an “indigenous region” 
or designated as a “priority zone.” In addition to this 
work, Rhizomatica helped get the ITU to approve 
“recommendation 19”—a resolution that recommends 
governments ensure access to local participation  
in networks. 
KEY LESSONS
• Lobbying for regulatory change can work: Through 
Rhizomatica’s efforts, the Mexican government 
set aside two bands of spectrum for “social” use for 
microtelco/community GSM. Providers in other 
regions can learn from this success. 
• Open source has been pivotal: Rhizomatica can work 
with open source free software; this is critical to 
their ability to operate. The reduction in cost lowers 
barriers to entry on the network infrastructure 
side and has been a critical enabler to microtelco/
community GSM solutions. Those working in similar 
areas should review the opportunities afforded by 
59. Rhizomatica Wiki. “System Architecture.” Posted at http://wiki.rhizomatica.org/index.php/System_Architecture. Accessed January 2016.
CLOSING THE ACCESS GAP: INNOVATION TO ACCELERATE UNIVERSAL INTERNET ADOPTION / 71
APPENDIX 2: CASE STUDIES OF ACCESS INNOVATIONS
Village Telco
https://villagetelco.org/ 
ACCESS INNOVATION: Community Wireless/ WiFi 
DATE LAUNCHED: August 2008  
NUMBER OF USERS: 6,000 devices sold 
MARKETS LAUNCHED IN: South Africa, Columbia, Brazil, Puerto Rico, Nigeria, and East Timor 
Village Telco sells a Wi-Fi-based mesh network device, Mesh Potato, to allow communities to build a mesh network 
that allows free local calls, long distance calls, and internet access. Village Telco’s customers are the people within the 
communities purchasing the mesh network device.
CONDITIONS OF SUCCESS • Investor challenges with open source projects: 
• Local technical knowledge in communities to enable Village Telco is predominantly an open source 
implementation, especially of more complex mesh project without any proprietary intellectual 
systems (e.g., dual radio). property (IP), which made it challenging to attract 
• High adoption of Wi-Fi-enabled feature phones and commercial capital. 
smartphones. ORGANIZATION HISTORY AND 
• Peri-urban environments with high enough BACKGROUND
population density to ensure short distances  
within the mesh network but lack existing  Village Telco is an initiative to build low-cost  
network coverage. community mesh network hardware and software.  
It uses open source software and low-cost, Wi-Fi- 
TAKEAWAYS based mesh networking technology to deliver affordable 
• Mesh networks are typically community communications. Steve Song conceived the project 
owned rather than commercial operations: during a fellowship and subsequent grant funding from 
Most known mesh network examples in emerging Shuttleworth Foundation in 2008. At the time in  
markets are community based, with few that  South Africa, the ability to use traditional GSM 
operate commercially. networks was limited by access to mobile spectrum,  
but Wi-Fi could operate in unlicensed spectrum bands. 
• Population density a constraining factor: The This formed the basis for the Mesh Potato, a device that 
need for short distances between nodes in mesh uses the Wi-Fi network for basic telephony services  
networks make this technology ill-equipped to serve and internet access.
highly distributed rural communities, but can be 
appropriate for areas with greater population density 
(i.e., peri-urban).
72 \ CLOSING THE ACCESS GAP: INNOVATION TO ACCELERATE UNIVERSAL INTERNET ADOPTION
APPENDIX 2: CASE STUDIES OF ACCESS INNOVATIONS
OFFERING work. Partners include NetworkTheWorld.org, Dabba 
Village Telco developed the Mesh Potato to allow people Networks, David Rowe–Free Telephony Project, Atcom, 
to make free local calls on its network. Village Telco does Freifunk, Meraka Institute, IT46.se, and International 
not manage any deployments but rather manufacturers Development Research Centre.
the technology for others to use. Most of the projects MARKETING AND DISTRIBUTION
that use the Mesh Potato are small, with 10-100 
service points, with the majority at the lower end of In terms of customer channels, the marketing plan was 
that spectrum, and operate on the fringe of existing to work through word of mouth and through value-
GSM networks. Village Telco has sold about 3,000 added resellers, e.g., VOIP providers in countries like 
of its first-generation device, and about 3,000 of its South Africa and Argentina. Once adopted, customer 
second-generation device. For the end user, the basic relationships can be managed online using the Village 
60
service will give them local, national, and international Telco wiki.   
calling and internet (with local calls being free). The TECHNOLOGY
network required to deliver this is “plug-and-play,” i.e., 
users should be able to setup the device easily without The current Mesh Potato is a mesh Wi-Fi router with 
technical assistance, and robust enough to withstand a a single FXS port (FXS is a telephone interface that 
variety of challenging environmental circumstances. supplies power, dial tone, and generates ringing voltage) and one 10/100Mbit Ethernet port. An analogue phone 
ECONOMIC MODEL connects to the Mesh Potato via the FXS port. Nearby 
The original model was to generate revenue via hardware Mesh Potatoes automatically form a peer-to-peer 
sales and, with a substantial enough user base of Mesh network, relaying telephone calls without landlines or 
Potatoes, transition to selling cloud-based services (e.g., cell towers. The Mesh Potato hardware and software 
cloud-based network management and voice services). are open source. When making a phone call, the nearest 
From a user perspective, the Mesh Potato costs about Mesh Potato talks to the next closest, which talks to the 
same as any other Wi-Fi router, US$39. next Mesh Potato, and eventually to the destination. 
The mesh network can be augmented via links to 
OPERATING MODEL internet backhaul, which allows for other services, 
The Village Telco operation largely spanned software e.g., VOIP calls and internet access. One server is 
and hardware development. The team designed and needed to provide billing and dashboard services for an 
manufactured the Mesh Potato product, open source administrator. These services can be run on a standard 
software, and documentation available to end users. laptop computer. Scaling mesh networks is challenging, 
They then distributed these devices at a retail price to since the number of nodes in any given network is 
users in markets where there was interest. limited. Wi-Fi devices work on a “listen before talk” 
basis, e.g., given three adjacent nodes in a network; 
PARTNERSHIPS the middle node cannot concurrently listen and talk to 
Partners have generally helped Village Telco find nodes either side of it. It is possible to overcome this 
communities to use their product or to promote their challenge with a dual radio, which can simultaneously 
60. Village Telco. “Village Telco.” Posted at http://wiki.villagetelco.org. Accessed January 2016.
CLOSING THE ACCESS GAP: INNOVATION TO ACCELERATE UNIVERSAL INTERNET ADOPTION / 73
APPENDIX 2: CASE STUDIES OF ACCESS INNOVATIONS
listen and talk, but it becomes challenging for local 
network owners to implement. Village Telco has 
developed a simple management dashboard that 
manages and monitors billing, reporting, and usage 
statistics that can help network operators manage and 
operate their networks. 
REGULATORY CONTEXT
There are no major regulatory hurdles to the model 
since Wi-Fi utilizes unlicensed spectrum bands.
KEY LESSONS
• Device sales business model: Village Telco struggled 
to succeed with a purely device-sales-based business 
model, largely due to the challenges of training local 
implementers to setup, maintain, and commercialize 
their own networks. Aligning business models to 
more clearly drive usage, e.g., a revenue share, may 
be more appropriate.
• Anticipate the need to address technical challenges 
as networks scale: Support in first generation mesh 
networks was poor for video and voice applications 
because of varying delay across the network. As a 
result, most mesh network providers have upgraded 
to dual radio. However, this is harder for local 
network owners to implement. Considering factors 
like these, providers must anticipate the need for 
skilled technical implementers when designing mesh 
business models.
74 \ CLOSING THE ACCESS GAP: INNOVATION TO ACCELERATE UNIVERSAL INTERNET ADOPTION
APPENDIX 2: CASE STUDIES OF ACCESS INNOVATIONS
ViRural Africa
http://www.virural.com/ 
ACCESS INNOVATION: Mobile network operator-partnered GSM 
DATE LAUNCHED: Status – Pending  
NUMBER OF USERS: 20,000 communities, 40 million end users (planned) 
MARKETS LAUNCHED IN: Nigeria, Liberia, other undisclosed markets (planned)
ViRural Africa is focused on extending ICT services to underserved rural communities in Africa. ViRural Africa’s 
strategy is to target communities with adult populations greater than 2,500 that have no access to power, no cellular 
coverage and no internet access. This approach focuses on providing either a managed service for one mobile operator, 
or wholesale network service for multiple mobile operators in rural, underserved areas. ViRural Africa’s customers are 
the mobile operators.
CONDITIONS OF SUCCESS ORGANIZATION HISTORY AND 
• Markets with healthy mobile operator competition. BACKGROUND
• Mobile operator partners who allow access  ViRural Africa is a for-profit venture, aiming to rapidly 
to spectrum. scale rural network infrastructure in partnership with 
• Wholesale and infrastructure sharing models must mobile operators across rural communities in African 
be allowed by the country regulator. markets. The background of the founding team spans 
• Rural environments where mobile operators struggle the technology, telecommunications, and finance 
to provide affordable network coverage. sectors. The original founder Paul Talley became 
interested in Africa five years ago when taking a role 
TAKEAWAYS with a capital mobilization platform for infrastructure 
• Managed services as a means to extend last-mile investment opportunities, Zanbato. Through these 
mobile operator networks: Managed services, experiences, Paul saw an opportunity to address 
where a network vendor builds and operates the disparity between rural and urban connectivity in 
network, are an attractive business model for mobile Africa through low power, OPEX and CAPEX GSM 
operators who are not willing to spend the CAPEX cell towers. Paul formed ViRural Africa, a company 
to build last-mile networks. with operating subsidiaries in the United Kingdom, 
• Managed services versus wholesale models: Nigeria, and other target markets. The C-level team is 
Policymakers need to better understand the distributed globally, with technical consultants in the 
commercial dynamics behind advocating for United States and local target markets.
wholesale networks where multiple operators use 
the network, versus managed services where only 
one operator uses the network. 
CLOSING THE ACCESS GAP: INNOVATION TO ACCELERATE UNIVERSAL INTERNET ADOPTION / 75
APPENDIX 2: CASE STUDIES OF ACCESS INNOVATIONS
OFFERING where the Nigerian Communications Commission 
ViRural Africa’s primary customer is the mobile currently prohibits the sharing of active infrastructure.
operator, where it allows the mobile operators to  PARTNERSHIPS
extend their network into small rural communities. 
ViRural Africa finances, builds, and operates the For their business to work, ViRural Africa must find 
network on behalf of either one (managed services)  a mobile operator to partner with. Once the rural 
or many (wholesale) mobile operators. Rural communities have been selected for deployment, 
communities benefit from having mobile phone ViRural will design and construct the local towers and 
coverage, electricity to charge their devices, and access infrastructure. 
to a Wi-Fi hotspot near the ViRural Africa towers. MARKETING AND DISTRIBUTION
ViRural Africa is active in several African markets, with 
a focus on Nigeria with a goal to connect approximately After constructing their cell tower, ViRural Africa 
20,000 rural communities and provide connectivity to installs a 40-foot shipping container that serves as a 
40 million people. community hub. The shipping container houses the equipment and solar panels. ViRural Africa provides 
ECONOMIC MODEL power, communications, and a structure to a tenant 
Through a revenue sharing agreement with ViRural seeking to occupy the container. There are a great many 
Africa, mobile operators are able to gather new ways in which these containers may be used to benefit 
subscribers, and receive more revenue from existing the small rural communities. They might become local 
subscribers. ViRural Africa generates revenue in four markets, schools, internet cafes, eHealth clinics, training 
ways: one, a revenue share when a participating mobile centers for young entrepreneurs, vocational training for 
operator subscriber uses a ViRural Africa tower to make women, or hubs for NGOs. 
calls, send messages, and use mobile data; two, Wi-Fi TECHNOLOGY
services for the community; three, device charging at 
the ViRural Community Hub; four, pay-as-you-go solar Each site serves a distance of up to 10km and 2,500 
power for the home. subscribers, or larger populations by clustering sites. Power is from solar with lithium iron phosphate 
OPERATING MODEL batteries, eliminating the need for diesel fuel. The 
ViRural Africa provides both passive (towers) and  technology is proven, certified by some of the world’s 
active (radio equipment) infrastructure for wholesale largest cellular operators, and is successfully operating 
access by multiple partner mobile operators. This is in rural communities. ViRural Africa does not use 
often described as an “upside down MVNO” (mobile open source technology since they have seen major 
virtual network operator) because the MVNO has challenges in getting mobile operators to accept 
subscribers but no infrastructure, while the wholesale networks that are running on open source due to 
network has infrastructure and no subscribers. The main security, certification, and Quality of Service. Backhaul 
challenge here is that mobile operators prefer not to is provided using fiber, microwave, or satellite depending 
share the active radio network. An alternative to the on availability in the geographic region.
wholesale model is managed services, where a network 
vendor deploys sites for a single mobile operator. 
ViRural Africa will likely take this approach in Nigeria, 
76 \ CLOSING THE ACCESS GAP: INNOVATION TO ACCELERATE UNIVERSAL INTERNET ADOPTION
APPENDIX 2: CASE STUDIES OF ACCESS INNOVATIONS
REGULATORY CONTEXT
Since ViRural Africa’s technology works within the 
standard 2G and 3G spectrum, they must gain access 
to the licensed spectrum via partnership with license 
owners (mobile operators).
KEY LESSONS
• C-level MNO buy-in is key: ViRural’s summary  
of the challenges with MNOs to date is not 
“hitting the right level in the organization.”  
The sensitivity to competition, perceived risk around 
new technologies, and aversion to revenue share 
models made pitching the solution to anyone under 
C-level a challenge.
• Open source presents certification challenges: 
ViRural does not see open source working in 
this industry because of the of the “certified 
box mindset,” i.e., the use of proved and tested 
technologies within their networks. 
• Wholesale network challenges: ViRural’s aspires  
to roll out a wholesale network but is currently 
unable to because MNOs are resistant to 
infrastructure sharing; some regulators still  
prohibit infrastructure sharing.
CLOSING THE ACCESS GAP: INNOVATION TO ACCELERATE UNIVERSAL INTERNET ADOPTION / 77
APPENDIX 3: INNOVATIONS IN BACKHAUL
A key supply-side barrier to last-mile access is the challenge of extending the network to low-density, remote and/
or low-income areas where traditional network operator costs outweigh potential revenues, particularly relative to 
higher density, higher income urban settings. A number of innovations are underway that have the potential to shift 
the economics of backhaul expansion, including both traditional fiber or microwave backhaul, as well as substitutes in 
settings where traditional deployments are not possible. In most instances, backhaul innovations are wholesale solutions 
that require partnerships with mobile operators, ISPs, or other service providers to reach end users.61 
NEW MODELS FOR DEPLOYING OPTICAL installing fiber along poles and towers, governments 
FIBER NETWORKS can encourage more cost-effective fiber deployment 
Given the high CAPEX costs of deploying fiber, it by requiring that conduit to be included in all new road 
may be easy to overlook the potential of fiber-related construction and ensuring communications firms access 
solutions. Wherever possible, however, fiber is the to power and other towers and poles. 
preferred option for backhaul to support high-speed LICENSE-EXEMPT SPECTRUM SUCH AS TV 
access networks. Although initial deployment costs are WHITE SPACE 
high, once installed, fiber offers high capacity that can 
be more reliable and faster than satellite or microwave One solution being tested for use across urban, peri-
options (assuming no service interrupts because of urban, and rural regions that lack affordable access is 
damaged cables). The high capacity possible with fiber use of TV white space, which refers to the spectrum 
supports the sharing of the backhaul infrastructure released when governments shift TV broadcasting 
62
across multiple mobile operators and Wi-Fi operators. from analogue to digital bandwidths.  TV white space 
Fiber has low OPEX due to minimal power and networks utilize spectrum that is unused in a particular 
maintenance requirements. Under the right conditions, location and at a particular time. TV white spaces exist 
it tends to offer a lower cost-to-serve for individual end between airwaves primarily used for digital terrestrial TV 
users than alternative solutions. broadcasting in VHF (30 MHz to 300 MHz) and UHF 
spectrum bands (470 MHz to 790 MHz). Although, TV 
Traditionally, mobile operators have tended to own white space has applicability in rural environments, the 
their own fiber networks. As the digital value chain principles of dynamic spectrum can be applied to other 
shifts, however, more examples of wholesale or shared frequency ranges, suggesting the potential for greater 
fiber networks are emerging. By reducing the CAPEX innovation in its use in both developed and developing 
required by individual operators, as well as allowing new markets.
entrants to gain access to fiber backhaul, innovation 
in the use of fiber networks has the potential to help TV white space signals can travel as much as four 
governments and industry expand existing coverage and times the distance of regular Wi-Fi, without additional 
the market frontier as far as possible to the last mile. power requirements, and can penetrate walls or other 
For example, since the majority of deployment costs physical barriers more effectively than Wi-Fi. With 
arise from putting conduit and fiber in the ground or additional power, it can achieve coverage akin to 
mobile networks,63 making it particularly useful in rural 
61. Satellite and other backhaul solutions can work directly with corporate clients, but are out of scope for the purposes of this paper.
62. TV white space includes VHF (30 MHz to 300 MHz) and UHF spectrum bands (470 MHz to 790 MHz).
63. Spectrum Technology page. Microsoft Research website. Available at: http://research.microsoft.com/en-us/projects/spectrum/technology.aspx. Accessed November 
2015
78 \ CLOSING THE ACCESS GAP: INNOVATION TO ACCELERATE UNIVERSAL INTERNET ADOPTION
APPENDIX 3: INNOVATIONS IN BACKHAUL
environments. In addition, TV white space base station are proven approaches to providing backhaul for service 
radios are only 10 percent of the cost of LTE base providers in rural areas, particularly where topological 
station radios.64 constraints such as islands or mountains make fiber 
deployment unrealistic. 
TV white space deployments require a supportive 
regulatory environment that allows for use of this Satellites remain expensive to deploy and operate,  
spectrum. Generally, only large, established technology and offer reduced service quality relative to fiber;  
players such as Microsoft and Google have access to  given the distances signals must travel, data  
the resources required to lobby for such regulatory transmission experiences delays and relatively low 
support. Markets with widespread adoption of Wi-Fi- bandwidth, limiting satellite solutions’ utility for voice 
enabled handsets, i.e., feature phones and smartphones, or high-bandwidth applications. Another limiting factor 
are required. lies on the ground, because satellite-enabled receiver 
terminals may be prohibitively expensive for use by  
Although TV white space base station radios are only low-income populations. 
one-tenth the cost of LTE base station radios,65 user 
receiver equipment is still expensive and perhaps at As a result of the significant cost structures and 
this point more suitable for shared access, owing to low regulatory issues associated with use of satellites, only 
production numbers and few manufacturers. Recently large corporations have experimented with MEO and 
announced projects will further drive down the cost GEO solutions. Examples of companies and partnerships 
of receiver equipment, resulting in the production of are emerging to explore the utility of satellites to 
access points and USB dongles.66 Currently, TV white improve access and adoption in emerging markets, 
space handsets do not exist. Projects testing use of TV however. That said, the private sector satellite industry is 
white space today tend to deliver services to end users experiencing a new wave of innovation among companies 
either through Wi-Fi-enabled handsets or via shared such as Blue Origin and Space X, both in terms of 
access centers. With the launch of additional pilots, declining costs of deployment as well as increasing 
it is possible that receiver equipment production of bandwidth throughput. 
access points and USB dongles will increase, enabling 
economies of scale for receivers.67  HIGH-ALTITUDE PLATFORMS (HAPS)
HAPs refers to a range of more experimental solutions 
SATELLITES for providing backhaul coverage to mobile operator or 
While terrestrial fiber is the most efficient, large-scale internet service providers in rural, hard-to-reach areas. 
backhaul solution in most settings, the economics of HAPs solutions under discussion or being piloted include 
extending fiber to the low-density, low-income rural balloons, low earth orbit (LEO) satellites, solar-powered 
settings are challenging. In addition to terrestrial unmanned aerial vehicles (UAVs), or drones. 
microwave, an alternative is space technology. Medium 
earth orbit (MEO) and geostationary satellites (GEO) 
64. In a conversation with Garnett, P, DIAL Advisory Group (January 2016).
65. Garnett, P (DIAL Advisory Group), personal communication, January 2016.
66. Garnett, P. “Microsoft’s affordable access initiatives – partnering for impact.” Posted at http://blogs.microsoft.com/blog/2015/12/17/microsofts-affordable-access-
initiatives-partnering-for-impact/. Accessed January 2016.
67. Garnett, P. Microsoft’s affordable access initiatives – partnering for impact [blog post]. Microsoft Research. January, 2016.
CLOSING THE ACCESS GAP: INNOVATION TO ACCELERATE UNIVERSAL INTERNET ADOPTION / 79
APPENDIX 3: INNOVATIONS IN BACKHAUL
Like MEO or GEO satellite solutions, HAPs could, if Users can connect to the signal directly from an LTE-
proven viable, extend networks to areas where fiber enabled handset enabling mobility of use. 
and microwave backhaul makes little economic sense. 
Service likely would be delivered to end users through Balloons are best suited for rural regions with low 
service providers using receiver terminals serving as population density, or island-based geographies with a 
Wi-Fi hotspots. Relative to MEO and GEO satellites, dispersed population. Regulatory support is required to 
however, HAPs operate at lower altitudes, potentially operate the high-altitude, unmanned balloons, and to 
resulting in lower deployment and operational costs, as utilize spectrum bands without interfering with existing 
well as faster data links, lower power consumption, and satellite and terrestrial companies. Partnering with 
easier access for maintenance.68 existing mobile operators provides access to cellular 
spectrum and avoids the need to build a separate sales 
HAPs solutions present somewhat new regulatory and distribution network where users can connect to the 
challenges, in both developed and developing markets, signal directly from an LTE-enabled handset enabling 
since models for licensing and using spectrum in ways mobility of use. 
that complement and do not interfere with existing 
satellite and terrestrial licenses have not yet emerged. HAPs networks are still in an experimental, 
Given the level of effort and resources required to demonstration phase of development, however, and 
navigate the regulatory issues, thus far only large the regulatory, technical, and commercial factors are 
companies with substantial resources have begun testing still undefined. The balloons currently stay afloat for 
such solutions.69 up to 100 days so a continual recovery and re-launch 
operation will be required.72 Each balloon delivers 
HAPS: BALLOONS a coverage area of 1,250 square kilometres73 so a 
High-altitude flotillas of balloons, pioneered by  large number of balloons will be required for blanket 
the Google Project Loon, have the potential to bring coverage of a country, estimated as “many hundreds 
74
ubiquitous coverage to wide areas, if perhaps only  of balloons to cover Indonesia.”  If a ground receiver 
for large corporations with the substantial resources terminal is required, there will be a cost to acquire the 
needed to navigate the considerable technical and terminal, and users will be limited to the range of the 
regulatory challenges.70  receiver terminal. To connect directly to the signal a 
sophisticated 4G-LTE enabled handset is required, 
Google, for example, has been forming mobile operator limiting utility among potential low-income users. 
partnerships providing backhaul and widespread 4G-LTE 
coverage in markets such as Indonesia. The company has 
indicated that it can deliver high-speed data at 5 Mbps 
to mobile phones, and 22 Mbps to a receiver terminal.71 
68. For example, LEO satellites are available at 500 miles altitude and solar aircraft can fly at 12 miles altitude.
69. Simonite, Tom. Alphabet and Facebook’s Stratospheric Internet Plans Get Tangled in High-Altitude Red Tape. Cambridge: MIT Technology Review; March 26, 2016. 
Available at: https://www.technologyreview.com/s/601106/alphabet-and-facebooks-stratospheric-internet-plans-get-tangled-in-high-altitude-red-tape/
70. Google. “Loon for all.” Posted at https://www.google.com/loon/. Accessed November 2015.
71. Oremus, W. “Not As Loony As It Sounds.” Posted at http://www.slate.com/articles/technology/future_tense/2014/12/project_loon_how_google_s_internet_balloons_are_
actually_working.html. Accessed November 2015. 
72. Google. “How Loon Flies.” Posted at https://www.google.com/loon/how/. Accessed November 2015.
73. Hudson, H. “Google’s Project Loon to float the internet on balloons.” Posted at https://www.newscientist.com/article/dn23721-googles-project-loon-to-float-the-
internet-on-balloons/. Accessed November 2015. 
74. Solon, O. “Google installing hundreds of internet-enabled balloons.” Posted at http://www.theguardian.com/technology/2015/oct/28/google-installing-20000-
internet-enabled-balloons-in-indonesia. Accessed November 2015. 
80 \ CLOSING THE ACCESS GAP: INNOVATION TO ACCELERATE UNIVERSAL INTERNET ADOPTION
APPENDIX 3: INNOVATIONS IN BACKHAUL
HAPS: LEO SATELLITES AND SOLAR 
AIRPLANES 
Another set of HAPs includes flotillas of LEO satellites 
(500 miles altitude) or solar airplanes (12 miles altitude) 
that promise to bring ubiquitous coverage to wide areas, 
particularly rural regions with low population density. 
They could either provide backhaul for existing GSM 
and Wi-Fi networks or be used in conjunction with a 
receiver terminal. 
If successful, HAPs LEO solutions could provide blanket 
coverage including remote, rural areas, therefore, users 
gain access to communications in regions that lack 
network coverage. Facebook claims data transfer speeds 
using infrared laser beams of 10 Gbps,75 but it is unclear 
how this would translate speed for users.
HAPs LEO networks are still in an experimental, 
demonstration phase of development and the 
regulatory, technical, and commercial factors are  
still undefined. Regulatory support will be required for 
both the operation of high altitude, unmanned aircrafts, 
and to utilize spectrum bands without interfering with 
existing satellite and terrestrial companies. As with 
other HAPs solutions, only large corporations have  
the resources to move such efforts forward. If a  
ground receiver terminal is required, there will be a  
cost to acquire the terminal, and users will be limited  
to its range.
75. Maguire, Y. “Building communications networks in the stratosphere.” Posted at https://code.facebook.com/posts/993520160679028/building-communications-
networks-in-the-stratosphere/. Accessed January 2016.
CLOSING THE ACCESS GAP: INNOVATION TO ACCELERATE UNIVERSAL INTERNET ADOPTION / 81
BIBLIOGRAPHY
1. Alliance for Affordable Internet. Affordability Report 14. Heimerl, K. Hassan, S. Kashif, A. Brewer, E. Parikh, 
2015. 2015. T. Local, Sustainable, Small-Scale Cellular Networks. 
ICTD 2013 Proceedings of the Sixth International 
2. Alliance for Affordable Internet. Universal Access Conference on Information and Communication 
and Service Funds in the Broadband Era: The Technologies and Development: Full Papers – 
Collective Investment Era. May, 2015. Volume 1. 2013.
3. Blantz, E. Baikie, B. Case Study: The Haiti Rural 15. ICASA. Discussion paper on the draft framework for 
Broadband Initiative. San Francisco: Inveneo; 2012. dynamic and opportunities spectrum management 
Available at: https://www.usenix.org/system/files/ 2015. October, 2015.
conference/nsdr12/nsdr12-final1.pdf.
16. ICT Facts and Figures: The World in 2015 page. ITU 
4. Connect 2020 Agenda page. International website. Available at: http://www.itu.int/en/ITU-D/
Telecommunications Union website. Available at: Statistics/Pages/facts/default.aspx.
http://www.itu.int/en/connect2020/Pages/default.
aspx. Accessed February, 2016. 17. iDA Singapore. Regulatory Framework for TV 
White Space Operations in the VHF/UHF Bands. 
5. Dynamic Spectrum Alliance Limited. Model White Available at: https://www.ida.gov.sg/~/media/Files/
Space Rules: Background and Context. Date missing. PCDG/Consultations/20130617_whitespace/
6. Galperin, H. Bar, F. The Microtelco Opportunity: ExplanatoryMemo.pdf. Accessed January, 2016.
Evidence from Latin America. Information 18. IEEE Spectrum. Facebook's Aqulia Drone Creates 
Technologies and International Development. a Laser-net in the Sky.2016. Available at: http://
2006; 3(2). spectrum.ieee.org/view-from-the-valley/robotics/
7. GSMA. Closing the coverage gap – a view from Asia. drones/facebooks-aquila-drone-creates-a-lasernet-
June 2015. in-the-sky.
8. GSMA. Connected Women 2015 Bridging the Gender 19. Internet and Mobile Association of India. Internet in 
Gap: Mobile Access and Usage in Low and Middle India 2013. 2013.
Income Countries. 2015. 20. ITU UNESCO, United Nations Educational, 
9. GSMA. Digital Inclusion 2014. November, 2014. Scientific and Cultural Organization. The State 
of Broadband 2015: Broadband as a foundation 
10. GSMA. Green Power for Mobile Charging Choices for sustainable development. Geneva: ITU; 2015. 
2011. 2011. Available at: http://www.broadbandcommission.org/
11. GSMA. The Mobile Economy: 2016. March, 2016. publications/Pages/SOB-2015.aspx.
12. GSMA. The Mobile Economy: North America 2015. 21. ITU. ICT Facts and Figures - The World in 2015. 
2015. Geneva: ITU; 2015. Available at: http://www.
itu.int/en/ITU-D/Statistics/Documents/facts/
13. GSMA. Universal Service Fund Study. April, 2013. ICTFactsFigures2015.pdf.
82 \ CLOSING THE ACCESS GAP: INNOVATION TO ACCELERATE UNIVERSAL INTERNET ADOPTION
BIBLIOGRAPHY
22. Joshi, P. World Bank: Poverty levels in the Developing 31. Parikh, Jay. New Milestones in Connectivity Lab’s 
World. Journalist’s Resource; 2012. Aircraft and Laser Programs. Menlo Park: Facebook 
Newsroom; 2015. Available at: http://newsroom.
23. Juma, V. Microsoft’s Rural Kenya Internet Bid gets fb.com/news/2015/07/new-milestones-in-
SH400M. Kenya: Business Daily Africa; 2015. connectivity-labs-aircraft-and-laser-programs/
Available at: http://www.businessdailyafrica.
com/Corporate-News/Microsoft-s-rural-Kenya- 32. Philippines Adopts NICT’s TV White Space 
internet-bid-gets-Sh400m/-/539550/2810050/- Database for Free Wi-Fi Project [press 
/8f7p6jz/-/index.html. release]. National Institute of Information and 
Communication Technology, Japan: May 7, 
24. Kak, A. The internet Un-Bundled - Locating the user’s 2015. Available at: http://www.nict.go.jp/en/
voice in the debate on zero-rating. Oxford, UK: press/2015/05/07-1.html.
Oxford Internet Institute; 2015.
33. Policy & Research page. Alliance for Affordable 
25. Layton, R. Elaluf-Calderwood, S. Zero Rating: Internet website. Available at: http://a4ai.org/
Do Hard Rules Protect or Harm Consumers and policy-research/. Accessed December, 2015.
Competition? Evidence from Chile, Netherlands and 
Slovenia. Social Science Research Network; 2015. 34. Simonite, Tom. Alphabet and Facebook’s 
Stratospheric Internet Plans Get Tangled in High-
26. Loon for All webpage. Google website. Available Altitude Red Tape. Cambridge: MIT Technology 
at: https://www.google.com/loon/. Accessed Review; 2016. Available at: https://www.
November, 2015. technologyreview.com/s/601106/alphabet-and-
27. Maguire, Yael. Building communications networks facebooks-stratospheric-internet-plans-get-
in the stratosphere. Menlo Park: Facebook tangled-in-high-altitude-red-tape/.
Newsroom; 2016. Available at: https://code. 35. Techmoran. Kenya’s Mawingu Networks receives 4 
facebook.com/posts/993520160679028/building- Million from OIC to turn around solar energy and 
communications-networks-in-the-stratosphere/. provide rural wireless internet. Available at: http://
28. McKinsey & Company. Offline and falling behind: techmoran.com/kenyas-mawingu-networks-
Barriers to internet adoption. September 2014. recieves-4-million-from-opic-to-turn-around-
solar-energy-provide-rural-wireless-internet/. 
29. MTN page. World Bank Information Accessed December, 2015. 
Communications Technologies website. Available 
at: http://web.worldbank.org/WBSITE/EXTERNAL/ 36. The World Economic Forum. Internet for All: A 
TOPICS/ Framework for Accelerating Internet Access and 
Adoption. April, 2016.
30. Our Technology page. Mawingu Networks website. 
Available at: http://www.mawingunetworks.com/
our-technology.html. Accessed January, 2016.
CLOSING THE ACCESS GAP: INNOVATION TO ACCELERATE UNIVERSAL INTERNET ADOPTION / 83
BIBLIOGRAPHY
37. UN Broadband Commission to government 
leaders: Broadband can be your most powerful 
development catalyst [press release]. Dubai, UAE: 
ITU; March 14, 2016. Available at: http://www.itu.
int/net/pressoffice/press_releases/2016/11.aspx#.
VwAirP3rvDe.
38. Wong, A. China’s Telecommunications Boom 
in Africa: Causes and Consequences. Available 
at: http://www.e-ir.info/2015/09/21/chinas-
telecommunications-boom-in-africa-causes-and-
consequences. Accessed January 2016.
39. World Bank. Telecommunications and Information 
Services for the Poor: Toward a Strategy for Universal 
Access. World Bank Discussion Paper No. 432. April 
2002.
40. World Bank. World Development Report 2016: 
Digital Dividends. Washington, DC: World Bank; 
2016. Available at: http://www.worldbank.org/en/
publication/wdr2016.
41. Zuckerberg, M. Free Basics protects net neutrality. 
Times of India; 2015.
84 \ CLOSING THE ACCESS GAP: INNOVATION TO ACCELERATE UNIVERSAL INTERNET ADOPTION
CLOSING THE ACCESS GAP: INNOVATION TO ACCELERATE UNIVERSAL INTERNET ADOPTION / 85
