Chipatala cha pa foni 
Health center by phone
Zachariah Jezman, 
ICT in MNH Program Manager
Malawi
Elevator Pitch
Chipatala cha pa Foni 
(Health center by phone)
• Provides timely, reliable and 
relevant health information 
to pregnant women, women 
of child bearing age and 
caregivers of under five 
children
• Improves health seeking 
behaviors  and appropriate 
use of health services
2
The problem
• 2 doctors & 28 nurses/100,000 
HUMAN RESOURCE population.
• Midwives to pregnant women is 1:245
CONSTRAINTS    ( compared to WHO recommended 1:7) 
LACK OF • Almost half of Malawians live over 5 km 
INFRASTRUCTURE from the nearest health facility. 
INFORMATION • Lack of timely, relevant, reliable and 
AVAILABILITY personalized reproductive health 
information for decision making.
HEALTHCARE • Delays in seeking care.
• Unnecessary visits to the health facilities.
ACCESSIBILITY • Lack of proper client follow up.
• Very poor MNCH indicators:
• MMR of 570/100,000 deliveries
3 • 5% of neonate die in the 1st month
Solution: Chipatala cha pa Foni 
TOLL FREE HOTLINE MOBILE MESSAGING
Providing direct communication with health Providing users personalized, timely, and 
workers free of charge to receive MoH age appropriate health messages- text or 
approved health advice for decision making at voice.
home.
 • Accessible on any phone; personal, partner, relative, anyone.
• Providing clients information on home and facility based health services 
- proper use services.
5
Market size
− Currently in 4 of 28 districts in Malawi
▪ Service reaches 185,000 WCBA/135,000 
under 5 children
▪ 30,000 calls per year
▪ 20,000 unique users
▪ 18,000 clients subscribed to mobile 
messaging “Tips and Reminders”
− At national scale, CCPF market would reach
▪  >3million women of reproductive age
▪  >2million children under five
6
Value Proposition 
− Malawian innovation: “Share an Idea, Save a Life” 
− Results show that CCPF:
▪ Increases positive health behaviors for women and caregivers of young 
children
▪ Increases health knowledge
▪ Decreased burden on rural health centers and health workers
• Over 75% of calls to CCPF’s hotline are resolved without a referral to a health 
facility. 
− MOH has endorsed CCPF/ supports scaling nationally by 2016
▪ RHU consolidating body to prevent duplicative efforts
− National-level integration of services to consolidate efforts
• Partnership with Airtel Dial-a-Doc
• National electronic medical records system with Baobab Health Trust
• 3-2-1 service collaboration with CCPF tips and reminders service
− Approved, validated content - MoH protocol-based health advice
7
▪ Quality assurance
▪ Follow up calls as needed
Value Proposition : How a phone call saved a life
Mercy, a 24 year old pregnant woman from 
Dailesi village delivered on the way to the 
hospital and was bleeding and needed an 
emergency transport. 
CCPF hotline worker, who answered 
answered Mercy’s call connected with  
Transport Officer, who dispatched the 
District ambulance to pick up Mercy and 
bring her to the nearest health facility. 
Excerpt from http://www.
impatientoptimists.org/Posts/2013/12/How-
a-Phone-Call-Saved-a-Life
Mercy with her baby
 Sustainable business model
Our vision: A national health system that 
leverages the power of mobile technology to 
improve access to reliable, relevant and timely 
health information for Malawians.
Integration into MOH 
plans Offer more generalized 
health advice
))))
)
Leverage public-private 
partnerships to address ))))) Plan for MoH to 
costs of telecom manage operations
)))))
Engage partners to Testing new 
expand district reach functionalities
)))))
)))))
)))))
Growth plan: CCPF expansion
− District level expansion
▪ 2015: Discussions with partners to expand into 5 additional districts
▪ 2016: National scale = 19 
− Continued collaboration with Ministry of Health
▪ Relocation of hotline to Lilongwe (2015/2016)
▪ Increasing hotline worker staff and work stations (from 4 to 24)
▪ Expanding beyond maternal, neonatal, and child 
health to cover all health issues
▪ Training and technical upgrades
▪ Merge with Airtel/Dial-a-Doc
10
Opportunity for Investment and Partnership
▪ District-level collaborations with health programs to expand 
reach
▪ Integration into strategic plan/health policy
▪ Staff
▪ Infrastructure and tech upgrades to move hotline and scale 
nationally
11
Contacts:
Barbara Jones Singer
barbara.jones.singer@villagereach.org 
Jessica Crawford
jessica.Crawford@villagereach.org 
Zachariah Jezman
zachariah.jezman@villagereach.org 
Visit us at www.villagereach.org 
