INTERNEWS CENTER FOR INNOVATION & LEARNING  
innovation.internews.org
ImprovIng HealtH  
CommunICatIons 
In Kenya
A Feasibility Study on Engaging  
Frontline Healthcare Workers in  
Using Mobile Technology
By Aggrey Willis Otieno for Internews
February 2012
about tHe autHor
mr. aggrey Willis otieno has an MA in communication and development from Ohio University with 
immense experience in international development, community media development, health com-
munication, democratic governance and research with significant exposure in resource mobilization, 
project design, management, monitoring and evaluation with great experience in the use of new 
ICT for social change. Aggrey’s devotion is to provoke the poor and marginalized into conceptual-
izing ideas, developing and implementing strategies that strengthen their participation in fighting 
injustices and inequalities that cause poverty. He believes in the goodness of people and has been 
part of numerous initiatives in search of a better world that is free of injustices, inequalities and all 
forms of human rights violation.
CredIts 
Design: Kirsten Ankers, Citrine Sky Design
Contents
List of Abbreviations ........................................................................ 3 Section 4: Use of Texting for Healthcare ..................................... 29
Executive Summary ......................................................................... 4 Ownership and Usage of Mobile Phones by CHWs and TBAs ........... 29
Key Findings ..................................................................................................4 Who Gets Called: Use of Mobile Phones for  
Key Recommendations ..............................................................................5 Work Communications.................................................................... 30
How CHWs Use Mobile Phone Texting .................................................. 31
Section 1: Background ..................................................................... 6 How TBAs Use Mobile Phone Texting ................................................... 33
The Role of Community Health Workers (CHWs) in Kenya .................6 Benefits of Using Texting for Health Care ........................................... 33
The Role of Traditional Birth Attendants (TBAs) in Kenya ..................7 Challenges of Using Texting for Healthcare ........................................ 34
Mobile Phones and Healthcare in Developing Countries ....................8 Possible Solutions for Using Texting for Healthcare ......................... 36
Section 2: Design and Methodology ............................................. 10 Potential E-Health Project ...................................................................... 39
Study Design .............................................................................................. 10 Health Organizations Working with CHWs and TBAs ................. 39
Data Collection Process ........................................................................... 10 Potential Partnerships with Local Stakeholders ........................ 40
Section 3: Findings on CHWs and TBAs in  Section 5: Conclusion and Recommendations ............................. 42
Korogocho and Matungu ............................................................... 14 Choice of Pilot Site ................................................................................... 42
Research Findings on Community Health Workers ........................... 14 Working with Local Partners .................................................................. 42
Education and Ages .......................................................................... 14 Establishing a Working Group ................................................................ 43
Typical Profiles ................................................................................... 14 Selecting Community Health Workers ................................................. 43
Training ................................................................................................ 16 Addressing Priority Needs ....................................................................... 43
Recruitment and Selection ............................................................. 17 Implementing E-Health Technology..................................................... 44
Duties ................................................................................................... 19 Appendices ..................................................................................... 45
Challenges .......................................................................................... 22 Appendix 1: Profiles of Four Typical Community Health Workers .. 45
Research Findings on Traditional Birth Attendants ........................... 23 Appendix 2: Sample Community Register ........................................... 47
Education and Ages .......................................................................... 23
Skill Level ............................................................................................ 24
Typical Profiles ................................................................................... 25
Government Approaches ................................................................. 26
Recruitment and Selection ............................................................. 27
Challenges .......................................................................................... 27
ImprovIng HealtH CommunICatIons In Kenya  1   
lIst oF abbrevIatIons
CBO Community-based organization
CHEW Community Health Extension Worker
CHW Community Health Worker
CU Community Unit
FBO Faith-based organization
MCH Maternal & Child Health
MOH Ministry of Health
NGO Non-governmental organization
SMS Short Message Service (text messaging)
TBA Traditional Birth Attendant
ExECuTIVE SummARy
Kenya faces severe shortages of skilled health workers, particularly in remote and poor communities. As a 
consequence, one strategy that is gaining currency is to delegate tasks to the least-educated level of workers 
able to complete them effectively. Over the years, community health workers (CHWs) who receive some basic 
training from the Kenyan government and/or healthcare organizations have helped to fill the gaps in medical 
coverage. 
CHWs provide health services as diverse as making home visits structured role of CHWs who are elected to their position by 
to the ill, screening for tuberculosis, counseling on HIV/AIDS, their communities; these CHWs work within Community Units 
and teaching families safe sanitation practices. Traditional birth that fall under the Kenyan Ministry of Health, and are trained by 
attendants (TBAs), women who may have no formal training and the government. At the other end, there are self-selected CHWs 
who often learn their trade from their own mothers or grand- who work on a single health project at a time for a non-gov-
mothers, also play a key role in Kenya’s healthcare ecosystem, ernmental or community-based organization, and who receive 
especially among low-income families. While currently under minimal training. 
government pressure to stop delivering babies in their homes Traditional birth attendants also fall into a range of profiles. In 
due to the medical risks, TBAs typically provide prenatal care to Korogocho, for instance, these women continue in the historic 
pregnant women, assist with labor and delivery, and follow up role of midwives who oversee labor and delivery in their own 
with mothers and their babies after childbirth. homes, despite government policy to discourage this practice. 
In light of the vital services these frontline health workers pro- Besides the fact that Kenyan women have traditionally given 
vide in Kenya, the Internews Center for Innovation & Learning birth at home, hospital births remain out of reach for many 
commissioned this study to explore the potential for CHWs and poor women given the obstacles of cost, transportation, and 
TBAs to use an interactive mobile platform to improve the dis- limited hours. In Matungu, under a Ministry of Health initiative, 
semination of health information in their communities. As envi- TBAs are making the transition to a new role as “Safe Delivery 
sioned, such an “e-health” project would rely on mobile phone Advocates” (SDAs) who encourage pregnant women to get care 
texting and would be implemented in partnership with one or at health facilities that are better equipped to deal with medi-
more community radio stations and other local organizations. cal complications.
Internews’ Kenya office and the research team jointly deter- Study researchers learned that community health workers in 
mined two initial research sites to capture data from two kinds of Korogocho and Matungu already use mobile phones for their 
marginalized communities: the Nairobi slum of Korogocho, and work fairly extensively, although most use them primarily for 
the small town of Matungu in Mumias District in rural western simple voice calls, not for texting or other features. Traditional 
Kenya. Researchers gathered quantitative and qualitative data birth attendants, who tend to be older and less literate, use 
on the roles of CHWs and TBAs through focus group discussions, mobile phones to a somewhat lesser extent, and very few use 
questionnaires and one-on-one interviews. their phones for texting. At least one community-based orga-
nization, Pambazuko Mashinani in Korogocho, was found to be 
using mobile technology in its health programs, including bulk 
Key Findings mobile phone texting. 
The study found that community health workers fall into four 
typical profiles. At one end of the continuum, there is the highly 
ImprovIng HealtH CommunICatIons In Kenya  3   
Key Recommendations
The study resulted in the following recommendations for a pilot n Internews should collaborate with those CHWs already 
e-health project. working with local organizations in Korogocho and Matungu 
n The Nairobi slum of Korogocho would make an appropriate or with the respective district health offices to ensure that 
site for launching a health text project. It is representative of these health workers are currently active in the field. 
Kenyan slum realities and there is real potential for achiev- n The proposed health text project should be designed to 
ing concrete improvement in the health of its residents. address the priority needs for CHWs, TBAs and local health 
n Local partner organizations for such a project should be able organizations. Project activities could include training CHWs 
not only to help implement the project but also to sustain and SDAs in mobile phone technology, training community 
project activities once outside funding ends. Respected radio reporters in health coverage, and helping Ministry of 
local partners could also be key to mobilizing community Health officials to get CHWs and SDAs to refer patients to 
support. Several potential partners expressed their interest health facilities. The project could also design and imple-
in collaborating on such a project. ment mobile phone applications for CHWs and TBAs to use 
in recording, managing and disseminating data collected for 
n In addition to relying on the region-specific knowledge and 
community registers.
connections of local partner organizations, Internews could 
initiate a working group of such entities to help coordinate n The project should build on the practices and technology 
project activities and solicit the support of the local admin- already in use, developing additional skills and tools as 
istration, particularly village chiefs, assistant chiefs and vil- needed. This could include developing and disseminating 
lage elders. a standardized list of codes for health providers to text 
information. 
 4 ImprovIng HealtH CommunICatIons In Kenya
BACKGROuND 1
This section provides an overview of the roles of CHWs and TBAs in Kenya, and analyzes their use of mobile 
phones in the course of their work.  
The Role of Community Health sometimes poor (Khan et al, 1998, and Gilson et al, 1989). 
Workers (CHWs) in Kenya Second, CHWs must be carefully selected, appropriately 
trained, and adequately and sustainably supported (SOCHARA, 
Shortages of skilled health workers in Kenya, particularly in 
2005; Kelly et al, 2001; Fagbule & Kalu, 1995). 
remote and resource-constrained communities, are a key ele-
ment of the growing human resources crisis within the health Third, CHW programs are neither a magic wand for weak health 
sector (Otieno, 2012). While this multi-faceted crisis must be systems nor a cheap option for providing access to healthcare 
addressed through multiple measures, one strategy identified for poor communities. Several interventions implemented by 
by the World Health Organization is “task shifting” – the del- CHWs have been unsuccessful in the past due to unrealistic 
egation of tasks to the least-educated level of workers that expectations, poor planning and underestimating the effort 
can perform them successfully. In this context, the concept and input required for success (Chevalier et al, 1993). This has 
of empowering community members to render certain basic gravely undermined the credibility of the CHW concept. 
health services to their communities has regained currency in Fourth, by their very nature, CHW programs are vulnerable 
Kenya. unless they are driven, owned by and firmly embedded in com-
Community members, popularly known as community health munities themselves (Kaseje, 1986). Where this is not the 
workers (CHWs), have therefore been used over the years to case, they exist on the geographical and organizational periph-
render basic health services to their communities (SOCHARA, ery of the formal health system, exposed to the vagaries of 
2005). Even though the roles and activities of CHWs are enor- policy swings without the wherewithal to lobby and advocate 
for their cause. The concept of community ownership and par-
mously diverse, in most cases they perform tasks that can be 
ticipation is often mistakenly assumed to be an outcome that 
preventive, curative and or developmental. In some instances, 
can be initiated from the center. Interventions that involve the 
they have been selected to carry out very specific interventions 
work of CHWs thrive in communities that are already mobilized, 
(Karithathara, 1990). 
but struggle where they themselves are expected to galvanize 
Due to the breadth of the topic and the diversity of the litera- communities (Bose, 1993). 
ture on the subject, it is difficult to generalize about experiences 
Fifth, it is still controversial as to whether CHWs should work 
with CHWs or what makes a good CHW program. However, there 
on a volunteer basis or be paid (Chevalier et al, 1993; Khan 
is agreement on the following issues: 
et al, 1998; Bhattacharyya et al, 2001). There is no evidence 
First, CHWs make a vital contribution to community development, that volunteerism can be sustained for long periods: as a rule, 
enhancing coverage for communities that have only basic health CHWs are poor and they require some sort of income. However, 
services. CHWs can undertake actions that improve health out- in most programs, they are only expected to spend a small 
comes (Kaseje et al,1987a) and conduct innovative and effec- amount of their time on health-related functions (Chevalier et 
tive interventions. Nevertheless, they have also been accused al, 1993). Since CHWs provide services in environments where 
of being unable to consistently provide services that have sub- formal health services are inaccessible and residents are poor, 
stantial health impact, and the quality of services they provide is it is difficult for their communities to provide core financing 
ImprovIng HealtH CommunICatIons In Kenya  5   
for their work. Most of the evidence on community financing poor women prefer TBAs to nurses when seeking services. As 
schemes shows high levels of failure, leading to high dropout a result, home deliveries are considered a major contributor to 
rates among participants and the ultimate collapse of projects this high rate of mortality. 
(Chevalier et al, 1993). The matter is considered so serious that the government has 
However, due to the current pressure on Kenya’s health systems proposed to ban traditional midwives altogether. According to 
and their proven inability to respond promptly and adequately, the National Reproductive Health Policy, TBAs “are not recog-
existing evidence overwhelmingly suggests that programs that nized as providers of skilled care,” and should only be used as 
engage CHWs, while neither cheap nor easy, remain a good advocates of safe childbirth through encouraging pregnant 
investment. In reality, the alternative is no care at all for the women who seek their services to get care at health facilities 
poor (Kaseje et al, 1987a). While there is more to learn about (MOH, 2009). 
how to maximize the effectiveness of CHWs, programs can be 
However, the reality is that for the majority of women living 
strengthened by adopting best practices. Non-negotiable ele-
in remote rural areas or the slum areas of Nairobi such as 
ments of successful programs include appropriate selection of 
Korogocho, hospital delivery is not an option (Otieno, 2012). 
CHWs, continuing education, involvement and reorientation of 
Hospitals are choking under increased demand for their limited 
health service staff and curricula, and supervision and support.
services, and in many instances, poorer women simply cannot 
CHWs therefore represent an important health resource whose afford the relatively high cost of going to hospitals. 
potential in providing and extending a reasonable level of 
health care to under-served populations must be fully tapped” In an Inter Press Service story on this issue, Elizabeth Sibuor, 
(Gilson et al, 1989). However, community health programs a traditional birth attendant in Nairobi, is quoted as saying, 
immediately need to address weaknesses in training, task allo- “When a woman goes into labor in the middle of the night in 
cation and supervision. Mathare slums, the option of getting a taxi is out of question 
due to the cost and insecurity. Such women end up delivering 
with the help of TBAs. Pregnancy and labor is a matter of life 
The Role of Traditional Birth  and death, I will not sit back and let a woman and her baby die 
Attendants (TBAs) in Kenya if I can offer assistance.”
2 
In Kenya, Maternal and Child Health (MCH) is another critical Even though the proposed ban on TBAs is well-intentioned, it 
health area where there is close collaboration between com- could have dangerous results. Rather than demonizing TBAs, 
munity members and the medical fraternity. According to the the government is urged to consider reviving previous efforts to 
2009 Kenya Demographic Health Survey, 57% of births in train TBAs as a bridge between the community and the public 
Kenya take place at home, and of those, 28% are assisted by health system (Otieno, 2012). Scholars such as Knippenberg 
a traditional birth attendant (TBA). The Kenyan government (2005) argue that at the current rate, unless extra resources 
has increasingly encouraged women to deliver in hospitals, are provided, less than half the population will have access to 
as home deliveries by unskilled traditional birth attendants skilled birth attendants by 2015. It should be recognized that 
are considered to be a major contributor to maternal deaths.1 TBAs are highly regarded, especially in remote communities, 
The last demographic survey released by the government in where many already act as informal links to health clinics, 
2009 puts maternal death rates at 448 per 100,000 live births. encouraging women to be seen there, take their children for 
But according to Ziraba, Madise and Kyobutungi (2009), the vaccinations, and get tested for HIV.
maternal mortality ratio for Korogocho slum is 706 deaths per 
100,000 live births. Mobile Phones and Healthcare in 
In a study specific to Korogocho and another Nairobi slum, 
Viwandani, the African Population and Health Research Center, Developing Countries
found that less than 15% of health facilities were equipped to The technological leap offered by mobile phones in Kenya is an 
manage birth complications. The research also showed that opportunity to enable frontline health workers such as CHWs 
about 10% of births in the slums are handled by TBAs, and that and TBAs to fill healthcare delivery gaps in their communities 
1 International Press Service (IPS): Jury still out on Traditional Birth At-
tendants. Retrieved from http://ipsnews.net/news.asp?idnews=52274 2 Ibid
 6 ImprovIng HealtH CommunICatIons In Kenya
(Otieno, 2012). Mobile phone text messaging has been widely For example, in an effort to curb child mortality in the Millennium 
used in developing countries as a health communication tool Villages Project site at Sauri, Kenya, health workers were equipped 
(see Fjeldosoe, 2009; Lewis-Cole and Kershaw, 2010; Yen et with mobile phones to use text messages to register patients 
al, 2009; Mahmud, Rodriguez, and Nesbit, 2010; Kunutsor et and send in their data. The ultimate goals were to improve child 
al, 2010; and Patrick et al, 2009). Such “e-health” technology health and empower CHWs (Berg, Wariero and Modi, 2009). This 
has proven especially useful in the arenas of sexual health, dis- Child Count Project proved that an approach based on using Short 
ease prevention and management, patient compliance, patient Message Service (SMS) technology can lead to improved mainte-
adherence reporting by CHWs, appointment reminders, queries nance of children’s anthropometric records, which in effect helps 
to physicians and prevention of communicable diseases. to monitor a community’s overall health. 
ImprovIng HealtH CommunICatIons In Kenya  7   
2DESIGN AND mETHODOLOGy 
This report presents findings of a baseline survey commissioned by the Internews Center for Innovation & 
Learning on the roles of frontline health workers in Kenya and their potential to improve the dissemination 
of health information through mobile phone texting. 
The research consultant and the Internews office in Nairobi of an urban, low-income, informal settlement and a rural agri-
jointly decided on the study sites. Data for this report was col- cultural region with low to medium income. 
lected in two districts in Kenya: Korogocho slum in Kasarani This study used qualitative research and incorporated quanti-
District in Nairobi, and Matungu in Mumias District in Western tative components to facilitate the analysis. Quantitative data 
Kenya. collected included the numbers of community health workers 
A qualitative research design with quantitative components and traditional birth attendants assessed, numbers of CHWs 
was adopted for the study. Qualitative methods enabled the and TBAs making use of mobile phone texting technology, and 
collection of respondents’ perspectives, while quantitative data numbers of organizations working in the focus districts. The 
was gathered to provide context for qualitative information. methodological design of this study was deemed appropriate 
Relevant project documents were analyzed to provide addi- because of its flexibility and ability to capture the beneficia-
tional insight into the work of community health workers and ries’ perceptions, providing valuable quantitative information 
traditional birth attendants. to draw a holistic picture of the situation.
Sampling of respondents was done using purposive sampling 
methods designed to identify a selection of respondents 
appropriate for the study requirements. Data Collection Process
Tools used in the study included interview guides, question- Data was collected through one-on-one interviews, question-
naires and guides for focus group discussions. More detail on naires and focus group discussions. In addition to collecting 
the study design and methodology follows. field data at the two research sites, researchers gathered sec-
ondary data from policy documents, research documents, and 
project documents from various organizations. Before on-site 
Study Design data collection began, the research consultant and research 
assistants visited the research sites to contact prospective 
Research for this study was conducted in two locations: 
respondents and schedule interviews. The research consul-
Korogocho and Matungu. Korogocho is one of Nairobi’s largest 
tant also wrote letters and emails to prospective participants 
slums, a shanty town where an estimated 150,000 to 200,000 
people live packed into just 1.5 square kilometers. “Korogocho” explaining the purpose of the study and requesting their per-
is in fact a Kiswahili term meaning “crowded shoulder to shoul- mission to be interviewed.
der.” Matungu is a small town in the Mamias District in Western Approaches to data collection depended somewhat on the 
Kenya, where neonatal mortality rates are among the high- prevailing realities on the ground, as described below. At both 
est in the country. This rural region is home to many sugar- research sites, the researcher organized participatory work-
cane farmers and the Mumias Sugar Company is the largest shops for TBAs and for CHWs. In addition, in-depth interviews 
employer. These two settings are good examples, respectively, were conducted with key respondents. Respondents’ interviews 
 8 ImprovIng HealtH CommunICatIons In Kenya
were recorded and reviewed at the end of the day of data col- It was evident that this workshop was not the most effective 
lection to identify gaps and fill them before leaving the sites. approach to reach TBAs, and after lunch, they were released. 
In Korogocho, the first participatory workshop was held with However, researchers later arranged for each of them to be 
CHWs. A total of 17 community health workers attended approached individually by someone they knew personally who 
could gather data from them in a way that cultivated trust. This 
the session. The group composition was diverse, including 
experience was an indication of the challenges that research-
men and women spread across age groups. The session was 
ers could face in working with TBAs in Korogocho.
organized into two parts. First, a moderated plenary session 
allowed participants to contribute to a discussion on differ- The data collection process in Matungu was similar to that con-
ent issues related to this research. This session was open and ducted in Korogocho. However, the process of organizing the 
very productive. Participants exchanged information freely, field research was smoothed through the cooperation of Umoja 
revealing many insights into their work. In the second session, Women’s Group and the Ministry of Health. An officer from 
participants were broken into three groups during which they the District Medical Office and a representative from Umoja 
mapped their areas of operation and answered questions on Women’s Group attended the workshops.
4 In Matungu, all CHWs 
topics such as the structure of their work, the organization and most TBAs work closely with the District Medical Office as 
they work with, and the training they have undergone. well as organizations such as Umoja Women’s Group. Both sets 
of respondents were open and shared information freely. As in 
The second participatory workshop was conducted with TBAs. Korogocho, the composition of the CHW workshop was mixed, 
Participants were mostly older women. The original plan was while the TBA workshop consisted entirely of older women.
to follow the structure of the CHW workshop, that is, to hold an 
In addition to the participatory workshops, researchers con-
open session and a group mapping exercise. There were, how-
ducted individual in-depth interviews with TBAs and CHWs to 
ever, some differences in the whole data collection process. 
gain deeper insight into their work. Researchers also conducted 
The TBAs arrived very late for the workshop: the group was 
in-depth interviews with other key stakeholders, as summa-
supposed to meet at 8:30 a.m., but only a handful had reported 
rized in the table below.  
by 10:00 a.m., when the session started. The rest trickled in 
through the morning as the session continued. The first ses- Interviews were conducted in different languages. In Korogocho, 
sion was general; it included everyone giving a history of their TBAs and CHWs were interviewed in Kiswahili while officials and 
work, training, and the organizations they have worked with. organization leaders were interviewed in English. In Matungu, 
However, when the discussion touched on information such as interviews were conducted in Kiswahili and in some instances, 
births they had attended, most TBAs claimed they hadn’t deliv- in Kiluhya through an interpreter. All data was transcribed for 
ered any babies recently, some saying they last delivered in reference. 
1985. Generally, the TBAs reported that they had not delivered Relevant documents and reports were studied to provide con-
for years, yet they were able to discuss issues that affected text for the study. This also provided background information 
them as TBAs. for the proposed health texting project to be conducted in 
Korogocho. 
Midway through the process, it became clear that participants 
harbored deep suspicions about the workshop’s mission. Given The following table shows the number of each type of respon-
the current Kenyan government position that TBAs should not dent interviewed in Korogocho and Matungu.
deliver babies, participants feared that the organizers might 
be collecting information that could implicate them for wrong-
doing. In fact, one TBA who had said in the group discussion 
that she hadn’t delivered for years was heard whispering, 
“They should release us quickly because I have five clients at 
my place.”3 
3 Based on the information obtained through this research, TBAs in 4 Researchers were concerned when they learned that an officer from the 
Korogocho are visited by women who need delivery assistance. Some of District Medical Office would be in attendance, fearing it could affect 
these women come to the TBA’s home where they have small rooms to participants’ openness. However, during the session, participants spoke 
serve their clients. Women stay here for delivery, sometimes for as long freely. Also, the DMO presence was helpful in that it gave researchers an 
as 48 hours. aura of legitimacy in the eyes of participants.
ImprovIng HealtH CommunICatIons In Kenya  9   
NUMBER oF RESpoNDENTS iN KoRogoCHo AND govERNMENT AND Ngo/CBo/FBo RESpoNDENTS
MATUNgU government officials and CBos
Respondents Locations Korogocho √ District Medical Officer
Korogocho Matungu Total √ Health Officer
Community Health 17 10 27 √ St. John’s Catholic Church priest who 
Workers has initiated projects involving CHWs in 
Traditional Birth 16 15 31 Korogocho
Attendants √ Pambazuko Mashinani, a CBO working 
with Koch FM, youth, Health Officers, area 
Medical Health Officers 2 3 5 chief, CHWs and TBAs in Korogocho
NGO/CBO/FBO 3 1 4 √ Koch FM, a community radio station that 
Total 36 29 65 covers health issues in Korogocho
* Non-Governmental Organizations, Community-Based Matungu √ Umoja Women’s Group, a CBO working with 
Organizations, Faith-Based Organizations women, youth, Health Officers, CHWs and 
TBAs in Matungu. 
√ Acting District Medical Officer
The following table lists the organizations interviewed at the 
√ Health Officer
two research sites, including government medical officials, 
√ District Public Health Office
community-based organizations, a Catholic priest and a com-
munity radio station.
 10 ImprovIng HealtH CommunICatIons In Kenya
FINDINGS ON CHWS AND TBAS IN 
KOROGOCHO AND mATuNGu 3
Research Findings on Community Health Workers
EDUcATIOn AnD AgES 
This study found that 89% of CHWs had at least a basic education and could therefore read and write. The majority of CHWs polled, 
48%, fell within the 30-40 year age group. The tables below provide more detail.
TABLE: CHW EDUCATioN
Site Total Education Level
Primary Primary Secondary Secondary Some Post 
Incomplete Complete Incomplete Complete Secondary
Korogocho CHWs 17 2 3 6 5 1
Matungu CHWs 10 1 1 3 5 0
Total 27 3 4 9 10 1
% Total 100% 11% 15% 33% 37% 4%
TABLE: CHW AgE RANgES
Site Number Age Range
20-30 30-40 40-50 50-60 60-70 70-80
Korogocho CHWs 17 3 8 6 0 0 0
Matungu CHWs 10 2 5 2 0 0 1
 Total 27 5 13 8 0 0 1
% Total 100% 19% 48% 30% 0% 0% 4%
TyPIcAl PROFIlES 
In the course of this research, several distinct profiles emerged of CHWs in Korogocho and Matungu. In terms of health issues and 
activities, there are marked differences between the urban, low-income setting of Korogocho and the rural setting of Matungu; the 
practice of community health workers varies accordingly. It is not possible to draw a single profile of a health worker in these two 
locations because they assume very diverse sets of duties and responsibilities and work under different arrangements. Some of 
these arrangements are organized and structured; others are less so. 
However, it can be said that most CHWs work with organizations that are directly or indirectly involved in providing healthcare. 
These include government health agencies and institutions such as the Ministry of Health, district hospitals, health centers and 
dispensaries; non-governmental organizations (NGOs); community-based organizations (CBOs); and faith-based organizations 
(FBOs). 
ImprovIng HealtH CommunICatIons In Kenya  11   
The study showed that CHWs operate under four distinct work- The second arrangement observed in Matungu is what one 
ing arrangements. The first such arrangement was noted in could call composite CHWs. A composite CHW is one who works 
Matungu where CHWs work under the auspices of the Ministry within the government health system but also engages in other 
of Health. This is by far the most organized system. CHWs are activities with an NGO or a CBO that is active in their area. Most 
recruited at the local level through local administrators and of these CHWs have more experience; some have been working 
community members. The community then votes on the CHW. in healthcare for 30 years. As a result, they are well connected 
To ensure that the elected individual will provide continuity in the field and able to work with different organizations. Some 
in their work, candidates must be local residents and must are recruited for the new working structure but maintain their 
have long-term plans to stay in the village. These positions previous working relationships. 
are unpaid. Composite CHWs also exist in Korogocho, and they share the 
There is a CHW in every village in Matungu. Villages vary in characteristic of being highly experienced. However, there they 
size and composition. Some villages are organized by clans, are less organized and their practice is more fluid. They work 
which simplifies the work of CHWs because they are able to with multiple organizations and, unlike CHWs in Matungu, they 
use some existing mechanisms to address health issues. This receive no established royalties. In Korogocho, the Ministry of 
group of CHWs is primarily trained by the Ministry of Health. Health does not have a very strong presence. The Nairobi City 
Under this arrangement, CHWs are organized into Community Council supports some projects, but these address only one 
Units (CU), each of which is overseen by a Community Health health issue at a time, such as tuberculosis or HIV, while in 
Extension Worker (CHEW). Every Community Unit has 50 com- Matungu the CHWs address health issues holistically.
munity health workers. CHWs are also attached to a specific The third type of arrangement might be called CHWs/
health facility. TBAs, comprising community health workers who double as 
MATUNgU ARRANgEMENT: CHWS WoRKiNg WiTH THE MiNiSTRy oF HEALTH
DISTRIcT MEDIcAl HEAlTH OFFIcE
HEAlTH  HEAlTH  
FAcIlITIES FAcIlITIES
cHEW cHEW
cHW cHW cHW cHW
 12 ImprovIng HealtH CommunICatIons In Kenya
traditional birth attendants. (In Matungu, TBAs are also called patients who have stopped taking their medicine in Korogocho. 
safe delivery advocates.) Researchers found very few cases of The CHW may continue to work on that particular area, but 
this arrangement in Matungu. As noted elsewhere, most TBAs more often than not, he or she is recruited to work in another 
were older women who do not fit the profile of individuals project. As a result, some CHWs have multiple areas of compe-
who would be recruited to work in the new community health tency. These may include:
extension structure. However, in Korogocho, researchers found 
n	 Screening for common ailments such as malaria and giving 
many CHWs who said they also work as TBAs. pregnancy tests;
The fourth and last group of CHWs were those who were n Conducting routine health procedures, including measuring 
recruited by a specific organization to carry out a specific duty. temperature and blood pressure, administering oral vac-
An example from Korogocho is a group of young people who cines, and giving injections;
were selected and trained by the community-based organi-
n Providing counseling in areas such as HIV/AIDS, and advising 
zation Pambazuko Mashinani. Their work includes commu- expectant mothers;
nity mobilization, organizing support groups for tuberculosis 
n Advocating for better sanitation and hygiene practices in 
patients, providing home-based care to patients, tracing those the community, such as teaching families the importance of 
who have stopped taking their prescription drugs, identifying digging latrines, washing their hands after using the bath-
potential new cases of TB, and health counseling. room, and cleaning utensils thoroughly;
Appendix 1 provides profiles of each of these four types of n Urging community members to seek advanced health ser-
community health workers.    vices in case of illness and helping them overcome fears and 
biases against such care;
TRAInIng n Encouraging pregnant mothers to deliver in health facilities;
CHWs do not have formal health training, but they receive n Assisting in the collection and collating of data for various 
some basic training that may cover one or more health issues health stakeholders,  e.g. maintaining the community regis-
in depth. Experts are usually invited to train CHWs on a particu- ter of household health records and working as assistants in 
lar course and subject, depending on the health problems they health-based research studies in their localities;
will be addressing. CHWs working with the Ministry of Health in n Participating in health campaigns for issues such as child 
Matungu reported that they had had two weeks of induction immunization. 
training, and those working in Korogocho had gone through 
one week of training by NGOs working in the area. For many, REcRUITMEnT AnD SElEcTIOn 
that is the only medical training they have undergone. Some 
In both Matungu and Korogocho, there are two distinct genera-
CHWs have participated in a variety of training sessions by dif-
tions of CHWs. There is an older group that has been working 
ferent organizations. These trainings usually reflect an organi-
in the area for over 30 years. These were trained by a variety of 
zation’s thematic focus. 
government and private organizations and health institutions. 
Merciline Osanya from Matungu has been working as a CHW for Another CHW cohort consists of CHWs who were recruited in 
the last 28 years. She shed some light on how she was trained: the last few years, starting in 2008 in Matungu and as recently 
I started working in health work with missionar- as 2011 in Korogocho, where 400 CHWs have recently been 
ies. When they left I trained with GTZ and as a CBD. trained by the Ministry of Health. 
Then we went on to training with St. Mary’s Hospital, Dickson Otsieno is from Nanyeni Sub-location, Mung’ungu vil-
Mumia. I also got training at Khalava Health Center lage, which held a competitive recruitment process for two CHW 
with Eco Day. I also used to come to train here at positions. He became a CHW three years ago. Otsieno shared 
Matungu. Since 1983 long before I started and I am that following a district health report that identified the need for 
going continuing to this point. CHWs, every sub-location was directed to select two community 
Generally, CHWs are trained to respond to a specific area of health workers. Village elders were charged with leading the pro-
health intervention. The health issue is mainly defined by the cess of identifying two individuals for these positions.  
organization that trained them and the project they are work- He related that the process involved the whole community. 
ing on at the time of time of training, for example, maternal People gathered and held an election to select the individuals 
and child health in Matungu or TB diagnosis and tracking TB to represent them. The following minimum qualifications were 
ImprovIng HealtH CommunICatIons In Kenya  13   
required for candidates: (1) have completed at least form four the administrative work area and the health facility with which 
at school, (2) come from the village, (3) have good rapport with they were associated. All introductions were framed along 
village members, and (4) plan to stay in the area long-term. these lines:
After the sub-locations completed their selection process, the My name is Wilson Munyekenye from Mundindi vil-
new members were taken to a five-day training where they lage and I am attached with Lunganyiro dispensary.
were taught basic health skills. The training focused on map- There is clearly a good working relationship among the vari-
ping the area where they would practice and introducing their ous parties involved in healthcare delivery in Matungu, includ-
duties and responsibilities as CHWs. The CHWs are supervised ing the Ministry of Health, CBOs such as Umoja Women’s Group 
by a Community Health Extension Worker (CHEW) in Matungu. and the CHWs. There is also cooperation with other health 
In Korogocho, there is no consistent structure such as organized providers such as mission hospitals. For example, several older 
by the MoH in Matungu. However, most CHWs in Korogocho CHWs mentioned that they were trained at St. Mary’s Hospital 
are affiliated with local organizations that supervise them. In Mumias. Although new administrative boundaries have sepa-
Korogocho, the recruitment process is conducted by different rated the town of Mumias from Matungu, there remains some 
stakeholders in the area. There is a strong emphasis on spe- overlap, as the new systems are not yet fully set.
cific qualifications that are not necessarily related to health or 
work skills. For example, St. John’s Catholic Church emphasizes 
individuals’ religious faith, respect from community residents, DUTIES 
passion for volunteering in the community, and family values. CHWs perform a variety of functions, depending of course on 
Father John Weboosta of St. John’s Catholic Church, Kariobangi, the particular context in which they work. Two factors appear 
important in defining CHWs’ work: the nature of the organiza-
described the process to researchers as follows:
tion to which they are answerable, and individual motivation. 
First of all, they [CHWs] must have a strong compas- CHWs focus on the duties that are defined by their individual’s 
sion, a strong understanding and love for the sick and organizations, and therefore tend to work best when working 
skills of handling sick people. They should also be within an organized framework. In Matungu, CHWs’ duties are 
committed to having a conducive environment that more extensive than in Korogocho, encompassing both direct 
can prevent illnesses and help one get cured, and and indirect health issues. Below are the key duties that CHWs 
that person should also be in touch with God because perform.  
it is only when you are in touch with the origin of life 
that you will be able to understand the importance maintaining the Community register
of life. So I say that because I know there are no CHWs in Matungu maintain the community register for the vil-
atheists in Korogocho. So that [requirement] is very lage. A community register consists of records that help CHWs 
important notwithstanding which religion or denomi- to follow up on health issues in their work area. The register 
nation one is coming from, and somebody who basi- describes individual households and their members, including 
cally has a family background and is respected in the gender, age, and education level. For each household under 
community. their jurisdiction, CHWs use the register to monitor health 
behavior, maternal and child health issues such as family plan-
ning, immunization and maternal death, and environmental 
In Korogocho, there are more than 400 CHWs, of which about and sanitation issues. The register is updated every month and 
35 are active. Because of the lack of a real framework in forwarded to the District Medical Health Office. 
Korogocho and the unsystematic and sometimes overlapping CHW Dickson Otsieno provided researchers with a picture of 
way in which organizations work, it is hard to get a clear picture how the community register works and shared one that he has 
of CHW activities. maintained. He explained that he handles about 200 clients in 
Matungu District, in contrast, is impressively organized. In each 39 households. In his area, there are two social workers in one 
of the 12 health facilities that fall under the Ministry of Health, sub-location, which is in turn divided into two villages. Each vil-
there are 25 CHWs. As a result, there are about 300 CHWs, all lage is inhabited by a group of people from the same clan; for 
of whom readily identify themselves with the structure. During instance, Otsieno’s area of operation, Mung’ungu A, is peopled 
the workshop conducted for this study, researchers noted how by the Abamucheka clan. The health work he does is integrated 
CHWs in Matungu tended to start their introduction by citing with other forms of village organization. For example, the clan 
 14 ImprovIng HealtH CommunICatIons In Kenya
holds a monthly meeting where they discuss different topics of to treat water and have leaking can at the toilet sites 
concern. As a CHW, Otsieno always gets a time slot to discuss and to have a clothes drying line, to dig toilets and 
health-related issues in the village. so on. We tell them to treat water to control water-
Below is a copy of the community register that Otsieno has borne diseases, we also tell them to wash their hands 
maintained. before they eat, to wash fruits before they eat. We 
also tell them to clean utensils properly before they 
educating Households on sanitation use them, personal hygiene.
Community health workers, especially in Matungu, reported 
that a large part of their work involved educating their com- encouraging people to seek medical Care
munity on sanitation as an important part of disease preven- CHWs in both Matungu and Korogocho serve a large segment of 
tion. CHW Wilson Munyekenye said, “I deal with sanitation, I low-income families. For various reasons, these families gen-
address toilets, clean water, educating women at home to erally do not seek medical care from available facilities when 
plant vegetables.” they need them. Pregnant mothers are reluctant to visit clinics 
for pre-natal care or to deliver in health facilities, even when 
CHW Michael Otsieno explains this work: they are relatively accessible. While some parents take their 
With sanitation, we encourage families to have a sick children to the hospital, others don’t seek professional 
clean and safe [utensil] drying place, we encourage medical care because of cultural and religious beliefs. CHW 
them to have a place to take bath and not in the river, Mohammed Asman gave an example of this type of work:
A community register maintained by Dickson Otsieno, a community health worker for nanyeni 2 Sub-location (Mung’ungu Village) in 
Matungu district.
ImprovIng HealtH CommunICatIons In Kenya  15   
The other day I had a woman who had just delivered. CHWs address a range of health problems. 
We had advised her to deliver at a health facility We teach them so much in a slum like in Korogocho, 
but they delivered at home. When we sat with her, we have many public health problems like TB, diar-
I advised her to go to the clinic and we discovered rhea, which is associated with poor waste disposal; 
she was HIV positive. We then followed [up] and real- there are also issues of pain and headache. Simple 
ized she is married in a household where the hus- solutions – we equip them with oral dehydration salts 
band believes that wife should not go to the clinic to deal with diarrhea although we don’t give them 
for any kind of test. Luckily, the child is healthy but antibiotics. We also give women who want them 
the mother is very weak, sometimes coughing and contraceptive pills. They know those people who are 
diarrhea. She is strong but the kid is vomiting and has using pills, but any complication arising due to use of 
diarrhea. I advised her to go to Mushivila [clinic]. My a pill, there is a referral form that we give them and 
advice was for her to go to Matungu Hospital but she they give it to their clients.
is afraid of the husband. 
CHW Wilson Munyekenye also explained these duties, among 
others: cHAllEngES 
This research found that community health workers must con-
I am a volunteer and I encounter malaria, pregnant tend with a daunting array of difficulties in their everyday work.
mothers, sick children, tuberculosis, HIV-positive 
people, and family planning [needs]. When it comes 1. In most cases, CHWs work on a voluntary basis. In rural 
to malaria, you may find a mother or father has Matunga, CSWs are not paid for their day-to-day activities. 
malaria and has no help. They will ask for your help. Most say that they have never received any remuneration 
“My child, I am sick and have nothing.” Sometimes I for their work. However, once in a while, CHWs in Matunga 
just take them to the dispensary. We also find chil- are able to participate in health-related activities such as 
dren who have marasmus [a sign of malnutrition], research and implementation of projects such as immuniza-
you take them tion and de-worming. During these activities, they are given 
some compensation in the range of 300 Kenyan shillings 
Clearly, CHWs are on the frontlines of healthcare in their com- (3.60 USD). For other activities, CHWs receive some trans-
munity. They have developed a reputation as the person to go portation allowances, such as when they submit the com-
to if one has any health challenge. munity register each month.
specific disease Intervention 2. The community’s lack of understanding of the role of CHWs. 
Some CHWs work in projects that address a particular health Because CHWs work with local organizations or government 
problem. Researchers found a number who are working to agencies, the community sees them as representative of 
address tuberculosis, HIV/AIDS, malaria and maternal health. those entities. This can lead to unrealistically high expecta-
These projects were more likely to be found in Korogocho. tions that CHWs are in position to provide resources to take 
care of health needs. When CHWs explain their position, cli-
Saidi is a CHW based in Korogocho working on a TB project:
ents sometimes believe they are lying.
I am based in Nyayo estate within Korogocho and 3. CHWs generally lack equipment to use in their daily work. 
I am mostly involved with TB patients. I am also Dickson Otieno, a CHW from Mang’ungu, recalled that when 
involved in patient follow-ups that cover the whole his group was trained three years previously, they were 
of Korogocho… I am with an organization called promised health kits to use in their daily work. These kits 
MALTISA… MALTISA is an organization involved in TB. have never been delivered, making it difficult for him to ful-
We make follow-ups on patients who have come for fill some of his duties.
TB medication in order to make referrals and TB test- 4. Community health workers are constantly traveling to 
ing. If a patient is still infected with TB we do follow- visit their clients. Some villages are well-populated, which 
ups. If the TB diagnosis is negative, we refer them means the CHW must service a large clientele. However, 
for X-ray at other hospitals. We also educate young most CHWs do not own any form of transportation. Many 
people on various reproductive health issues from male CHWs in rural areas who were interviewed mentioned 
sexually related infection including HIV and AIDS. the need for vehicles such as bicycles. In some areas, CHWs 
 16 ImprovIng HealtH CommunICatIons In Kenya
have been given bicycles; others have been promised bicy- experienced poor treatment at the medical institution they 
cles that have yet to materialize. are being encouraged to visit. 
5. CHWs find that while they are supposed to encourage clients 6. Time is a real constraint for community health workers. 
to use clinics and hospitals, access to such facilities is lim- Since most CHWs work on a voluntary basis, they need to 
ited. For example, CHWs are asked to encourage pregnant spend time earning income to support their families, for 
women to visit health outlets for essential maternal ser- example, through tailoring, selling groceries, farming or 
vices. However, some of these facilities are only open during operating other family-based businesses.
the day, so a pregnant woman who needs to deliver at night 
cannot access these services. Other clients have previously 
Research Findings on Traditional Birth Attendants
EDUcATIOn AnD AgES 
Only 23% of TBAs in Matungu and Korogocho had completed primary school, as indicated in the tables below. As a result, many of 
the TBAs polled could not read or write, and were less receptive to the use of new technology.
The largest group of TBAs polled, at 35%, fell in the 50-60 year age range.
TBA EDUCATioN
Site Total Education Level
None Primary Primary Secondary Secondary 
Incomplete Complete Incomplete Complete
Korogocho TBAs 16 8 5 1 2 0
Matungu TBAs 15 4 5 2 1 1
Total 31 12 10 3 3 1
%Total 100% 39% 32% 10% 10% 3%
TBA AgE RANgES
Site Number Age Range
20-30 30-40 40-50 50-60 60-70 70-80 80-90
Korogocho TBAs 16 1 3 6 5 1 0 0
Matungu TBAs 15 0 3 1 6 2 1 2
 Total 31
% Total 100% 3% 19% 23% 35% 10% 3% 6%
SKIll lEVEl 
Traditional birth attendants (TBAs) have been fixtures of African communities for countless generations, providing vital care for 
pregnant women and their babies, especially for less affluent families. However, Ministry of Health officials interviewed for this 
research felt that TBAs should be considered “unskilled” practitioners. For instance, Alex Taiywa, an immunization extension officer 
with the Ministry of Public Health and Sanitation in Matungu, said:
ImprovIng HealtH CommunICatIons In Kenya  17   
When we talk of skilled [practitioners], it should be in midwifery, gynecology and all matters related 
somebody who is able to comprehend the physiol- to reproductive health. But these people still have 
ogy of what is happening. [They] should be able to knowledge; this could be knowledge that has been 
understand reproduction from conception to deliv- passed from maybe grandparents or parents.
ery and should be able to understand the anatomy 
of human reproduction. They should have acquired 
the skills such that if the mother cannot have a nor- TyPIcAl PROFIlES 
mal vaginal delivery, they should be able to operate There are five main types of traditional birth attendants in 
on them and the client is safe. A skilled attendant is Kenya. First, there are TBAs who have had no formal training, 
someone who can perform comprehensive maternity but who pass on skills from one generation to the next. Peter 
services. These skills can only be obtained through Muguna, the health officer in charge of Korogocho, explained:
formal training. You see in the African society, there are some fami-
However, community leaders interviewed felt that TBAs should lies that… produce TBAs. These people got some 
be considered “skilled” and that it would be discriminatory and form of training to handle childbirth and all issues 
stigmatizing to say otherwise. Father John Weboosta, a priest related to reproductive health. Sometimes they pass 
with Comboni Missionaries in Korogocho, said of TBAs: this knowledge from generation to generation, for 
example if you have a daughter, you can pass this to 
These people are… even more skilled than those your daughter if you become too old… Where people 
who have gone to study in colleges. They are people are quite poor and cannot afford formal care or con-
who are very much in touch with the natural system ventional medicine, people are still relying on these 
of [the] human person and everything traditional is TBAs. And they are still effective. However, there are 
everything linked to nature. Whatever these people not well trained to deal with emergencies and com-
[professional birth attendants] learn for a short time, plications associated with childbirth and all that.
it has taken years for a TBA to learn through practice. 
Secondly, there is a group of TBAs who initially practiced home 
TBAs therefore do things that are in them, and it is 
delivery, and were then selected and trained by the Kenyan 
not just a profession but it’s kind of a calling… not 
government to improve their skills. This cadre of TBAs was 
everyone can become a TBA. Anyone can go to study 
then seconded to health facilities where they received hands-
medicine, anyone can go and get those skills but still 
on experience under the supervision of skilled attendants. The 
cannot be as people- friendly as TBAs.
trained TBAs were then given basic equipment to perform nor-
Women of reproductive age who were interviewed also consid- mal deliveries. Unfortunately, according to interviewees, there 
ered TBAs to be skilled. Interviewee Jane Munyendo explained: has been no follow-up or refresher trainings for this group. 
It’s a bit stigmatizing calling [TBAs] unskilled because Josephine Ameyo, is one such TBA cum CHW from Korogocho 
I want to give this example that one mama gave me who was trained by the government:
. . . This mama told me, “Look here, my mother gave The third type of TBAs is made up of retired midwives who cur-
birth to us twelve children in our family and all of us rently perform home deliveries within their communities. They 
were born in the TBA’s home, and we are still alive, have the skills and experience for the task, but they do not 
we are healthy. This is the sixth pregnancy I am hav- have the requisite equipment. 
ing and from the first pregnancy to this one I have 
The fourth category is made up of TBAs who also serve as com-
been coming to the clinic but giving birth at home. 
munity health workers, in a composite role as described in the 
So why should I stop going there [to the TBAs]? So section on CHWs.
these TBAs are skilled, this person can manage me.
The fifth and last category is a new role introduced in Matungu, 
While Kenyan government officials discourage the work of TBAs where TBAs are currently being trained to serve as Safe Delivery 
to some extent, at least some acknowledged that TBAs have Advocates (SDAs). Under Kenya’s National Reproductive Health 
skills and information on how to care for expectant and birth- Policy, TBAs are encouraged to transition their role from per-
ing mothers that they have learned from each other. As one forming deliveries themselves to providing support for preg-
medical officer put it: nant women and advising them to seek care at health centers. 
A TBA is someone who does not have formal training Jane Munyendo, program manager for Umoja Women’s Group in 
 18 ImprovIng HealtH CommunICatIons In Kenya
Matungu, described the evolution to the role of Safe Delivery be OK if these people could be the link so that they 
Advocates (SDAs): can refer. Our emphasis is that primigravida and mul-
In Matungu district, the TBAs were like, “We should tipara deliver children within health institutions. 
change our names now.” So they said they wanted This policy has, however, been strongly criticized by local 
to call themselves the community Safe Delivery opinion leaders as self-defeating. Father John Weboosta of 
Advocates so that they bring people to the hospi- Korogocho says:
tal. So what we agreed was that the MOH office will, [TBAs] are very important because if the government 
through the nurses in charge of the health facilities, really cares it would have given us health facilities 
come up with a health committee and this health here where women can give birth.  If you stay here, 
committee will set a figure for the number of referrals there are no government-funded health facilities. 
that the SDAs [should] bring to the hospital and also Those that are here are private and costly. Many chil-
look into ways in which these SDAs can be motivated. dren are alive here because of TBAs… TBAs save lives 
of the poor. If we follow the conditions given by the 
gOVERnMEnT APPROAcHES government, many children and women will continue 
In interviews with government health officers, they were unani- to die.
mous in the belief that TBAs should not be allowed to continue 
overseeing deliveries. Nevertheless, the government takes REcRUITMEnT AnD SElEcTIOn 
harder or softer approaches towards TBAs depending on the In Matungu, strategies for selecting TBAs involved use of com-
medical officer in charge of a particular region. For example, munity leaders such as village elders, assistant chiefs and 
health officers in Matungu are taking the innovative approach especially women leaders during public meetings within the 
of transitioning the role of TBAs into Safe Delivery Advocates, villages. The process was tedious and time-consuming. Jane 
as described above. TBAs there have been mobilized and orga- Munyendo of Umoja Women’s Group explains:
nized into support groups and assigned specific health facilities 
to which they refer pregnant women. When we came in, in Matungu, to start working on 
MNH [Maternal and Neonatal Health] project, the 
In Korogocho, however, the district medical officer absolutely health facility was just wondering what they would 
discourages any partnering with TBAs in promoting maternal do to bring back the TBAs on board. We then began 
and child health, even though the health officers under him by identification [of potential TBAs] through the 
believe it is important to do so. Peter Muguna, health officer in community leaders. Thereafter we sat with the MOH 
charge of Korogocho, explained the policy: office and brought in the names on the table and we 
[TBAs] were actually not stopped completely, but pledged that Umoja Women will cater for the train-
they are not licensed to practice formally as midwives. ings, and expenses of the venue, food… We brought 
Structures are there so that they can make referrals in the health professionals, the nurse in-charge, and 
to the nearest health facilities and can also be the [afterwards we led] the health professional training 
link between the main hospitals, and they are actu- on what they expect the TBAs to be doing.  
ally not condemned though not licensed to conduct In some instances, TBAs have been identified through “snow-
deliveries. Why? We are having so many people dying balling,” in which current TBAs are asked to recommend oth-
in the houses, many women die due to complications ers they know. This was the case of the community group 
associated with home deliveries, especially mothers Pambazuko Mashinani in Korogocho, where the Ministry of 
who are delivering for the first time. Because those Health has a hard stance against TBAs. 
are the mothers at risk: mothers who are delivering 
for the first time, called primigravida, [women] after 
the age of 35 years, and also mothers whom we call cHAllEngES 
multipara, those who deliver for the sixth or seventh This research study identified several serious hindrances to the 
time. These are people who are likely to get com- work of traditional birth attendants in Kenya.
plications associated with childbirth. So the govern- 1.  Although they may be highly experienced and love working 
ment felt that [TBAs] are kind of increasing maternal with pregnant women, most traditional birth attendants are 
mortality rates, so the government felt that it could 
ImprovIng HealtH CommunICatIons In Kenya  19   
poorly educated and cannot read and write. When asked to immediately and this often results into her devel-
give reports, illiterate TBAs must rely on their memory. oping more complications. This has resulted in 
2. Non-payment for services is a recurring problem: some women shunning hospitals in preference for TBAs. 
women who give birth at the homes of TBAs then fail to pay At times we do not have efficient abilities to assist 
them for their services, as is expected. This creates financial them, as a lady may give birth but lack sufficient 
hardship for the TBAs. blood in her body, lack adequate water in her sys-
3. TBAs are generally ill-equipped to tackle complications of tem or energy to push the baby out. 
pregnancy. Many patients who end up at the health centers 4. Some pregnant women do not want to know their HIV sta-
were initially tended by TBAs but then faced complications. tus. In such cases, they may shun health centers because 
These include excessive vaginal bleeding, neonatal sepsis they know that they will be asked to go through the man-
(severe infection of the newborn), ruptured uterus during datory program for prevention of mother-to-child transmis-
prolonged labor, systemic complications from unhygienic sion of HIV (PMTCT). Such women prefer to deliver in the 
conditions, and fetal death in the uterus. As a result, health homes of TBAs. As one Muslim TBA explained:
practitioners have accused TBAs of delaying women from Some of them even come when HIV-positive. 
obtaining urgently needed obstetric care by skilled atten- This is mostly amongst people from my religion. 
dants. However, TBAs indicate that they face myriad obsta- Muslims fear that if they are HIV-positive they will 
cles to getting women to health facilities in a timely fashion. be put to shame, yet it’s not shameful, as God is in 
Key among these challenges are the cost of transportation, control. It would be better if they were tested and 
poor roads, lack of communication facilities, and opposi- got medication for their own defense system. At 
tion of the pregnant women’s husbands. Anne Mbala, a TBA hospitals we are told that if [women] are found to 
in Korogocho, explained the difficulties in getting birthing be HIV-positive, if they are expecting, there is med-
mothers to health facilities: ication they should take during labor and medica-
There’s usually a problem of excessive bleeding by tion to take after labor. We traditional midwives do 
expectant mothers. At such a time, if she has no not have that kind of medication and it perplexes 
money to take her to hospital, it compels us to lend us why the ladies due for labor still want to come 
money, hire a car and rush her to hospital. When we to us.
get to the hospital, at times she is not attended to 
 
 20 ImprovIng HealtH CommunICatIons In Kenya
uSE OF TExTING FOR HEALTHCARE 4
The technological leap offered by mobile phones presents an opportunity for frontline health workers in 
Kenya such as community health workers and traditional birth attendants to address gaps in healthcare 
information. This study found that most CHWs and TBAs use mobile phones in their daily work, though pri-
marily to make and receive voice calls. Some CHWs and a few TBAs have also begun to incorporate mobile 
phone text messaging into their work as a health communication tool.
Text messaging is proving particularly useful for the following: All CHWs who owned cell phones used them for work purposes, 
n Appointment reminders for patients and some who did not own phones reported that they borrow 
them from relatives for work-related communications. Fully 
n Field reports by CHWs
93% of CHWs reported that they use cell phones in their work.
n Physicians’ queries
n Monitoring of CHWs MoBiLE pHoNE oWNERSHip AND USAgE AMoNg TBAS
n Mobilizing CHWs for meetings Site Number own cell % Use phone %
of TBAs phone for work*
This section summarizes findings on the use of mobile phones 
Korogocho 16 12 75% 13 81%
by frontline healthcare providers, and analyzes benefits, chal-
Matungu 15 10 67% 11 73%
lenges, and possible solutions to incorporating text messaging 
in such work. Totals 31 22 71% 24 77%
* Totals may be higher than number who own phones, as some 
respondents borrow phones for work.
Ownership and Usage of Mobile 
Phones by CHWs and TBAs Seventy-one percent of all TBAs interviewed owned mobile 
phones, including 75% in Korogocho and 67% in Matungu. As 
To understand aspects of mobile ownership and use among with the CHWs, TBAs who don’t have cell phones of their own 
CHWs and TBAs in Korogocho and Matungu, data was collected borrow from their relatives to use them for work as needed. 
from 27 CHWs and 31 TBAs via a short questionnaire. Seventy-seven percent of TBA respondents use cell phones for 
MoBiLE pHoNE oWNERSHip AND USAgE AMoNg CHWS their work.
Site Number own cell % Use phone % The tables above illustrate heavy reliance on mobile phones by 
of CHWs phone for work* the two groups of healthcare providers, with some differences. 
Korogocho 17 14 82% 15 88% The CHWs, who are overall younger and better educated, are 
Matungu 10 10 100% 10 100% more likely than TBAs to own and use mobile phones. 
Totals 27 24 89% 25 93% However, researchers found that both CHWs and TBAs mainly 
* Totals may be higher than number who own phones, as some used cell phones for voice calls; very few used their phones to 
respondents borrow phones for work. send text messages. In general, the extent to which both CHWs 
Of the 27 CHW respondents at both sites, a combined aver- and TBAs used the various functions and services available on 
age of 89% owned mobile phones. All Matungu respondents their cell phones was highly dependent on their age and lit-
had their own cell phone, compared with 82% in Korogocho. eracy level. Younger, more educated CHWs and TBAs are more 
ImprovIng HealtH CommunICatIons In Kenya  21   
open to mobile technology than older, less educated ones. Some of the phone functions, including text messaging, require a bit of 
technical understanding as well as literacy. One has to be able to read and write in order to navigate the text messaging function 
and write the message. Voice calls are much simpler: it only takes a push of a button to receive a phone call. 
Who Gets Called: Use of Mobile Phones for Work Communications
This research sought to identify with whom healthcare workers communicate in their day-to-day work using mobile phones. Five 
categories were identified: clients, fellow CHWs and TBAs, non-governmental organizations (NGOs), civil society organizations 
(CSOs), and village elders who serve as administrative lynchpins for their communities. Respondents were asked to mark all groups 
with whom they communicate by cell phone in the course of their work. The following tables detail the responses.
WoRK-RELATED CoMMUNiCATioN By CHWS 
Site Respondents Clients CHWs TBAs Ngos/CSos  village Elders
Korogocho 17 14 15 12 12 13
% 82% 82% 71% 71% 71%
Matungu 10 8 8 5 1 4
% 80% 80% 50% 1% 40%
Totals 27 22 23 17 13 17
%  Totals 81% 85% 63% 48% 63%
WoRK-RELATED CoMMUNiCATioN By TBAS 
Site Respondents Clients CHWs TBAs Ngos/CSos village Elders
Korogocho 16 13 12 12 11 11
% 81% 75% 75% 69% 69%
Matungu 15 10 7 6 4 5
% 67% 47% 40% 27% 33%
Totals 31 23 19 18 15 20
%  Totals 74% 61% 58% 48% 65%
The tables above show that 81% of CHWs use their cell phones to communicate with clients and 85% use their phones to contact 
each other. Seventy-four percent of TBAs use their phones to communicate with their clients; the next most frequently listed 
categories were village elders, CHWs and fellow TBAs.
 22 ImprovIng HealtH CommunICatIons In Kenya
How CHWs Use Mobile  “Peter and muyodi are visiting, angenda; forms, ua payments , tomorrow malanga 9am there after 11,30am at mung’ung’u 
Phone Texting don’t miss!make sure your forms are upto date”
Text messaging technology is proving particularly useful in the This message from the cluster coordinator of Mung’ungu 
fields of sexual health, disease prevention and management, Dispensary was sent to five CHWs to meet Peter, a doctor at 
patient compliance, patient adherence reporting by CHWs, Moi Referral and Teaching Hospital, and a Dr. Muyodi, also from 
appointment reminders, physicians’ queries and prevention of Eldoret. The aim of the meeting was to discuss forms used on 
communicable diseases. Below are examples of communica- an ongoing neonatal sepsis study in the area. The message also 
tions by CHWs in the field. informed the CHWs who are helping in the project that they 
would receive payments for their work and the venue would be 
A CHW FiELD REpoRT viA TExT MESSAgE at Malanga, a dispensary in Busia. 
Peter Muguna, the health officer in charge of Korogocho, 
described the role of text messaging in his region:
At [the organization] Pambazuko Mashinani, I have 
seen CHWs dealing with TB issues reporting to their 
field coordinator through texting. Meetings would 
be convened through texting, the field coordinator 
would monitor CHWs through mobile phones and 
CHWs also gave reports through mobile phone tex-
ting. This has reduced the instances of CHWs going 
to offices of Pambazuko Mashinani, which is in 
Kariobangi, on a daily basis. We also had a polio cam-
paign a few weeks ago. We reached about 4000 chil-
dren in Korogocho, and I made use of mobile phones 
Me:   HH vsited-169; New pregn-11, infnd<24 hrs-9, Infnd>24 to call, mobilize and coordinate the CHWs.
hours 24 hrs-5, Rfferd-1. Dickson
This is a message summarizing CHW Dickson Otsieno’s record How TBAs Use Mobile  
for the month of December. According to the report, 169 
households were visited, 11 infants were captured within 24 Phone Texting
hours of birth while 9 infants were captured after 24 hours of Researchers found that, as they are older and many cannot 
birth. One infant was referred to a health facility. read or write, most TBAs do not use mobile phones for tex-
ting. Some do not own mobile phones of their own, but borrow 
phones from their children or other family members as needed. 
A TExT MESSAgE To MoBiLizE CHWS FoR A MEETiNg
 However, this study found that a few CHWs who double as 
TBAs, especially in Korogocho, are beginning to make limited 
use of texting. Anne Mbala, a CHW who also serves as a TBA in 
Korogocho, said:
We have found ourselves using mobile phones 
because of the distances between us and the many 
patients that we take care of. We have therefore made 
phone calls to colleagues to ask how they are faring. 
In the field, we have called fellow TBAs in Korogocho 
to discuss pregnancy issues, and we have also called 
the sick people under our care, including their close 
family members, when need be. Sometimes, depend-
ing on circumstances, we have texted each other. 
ImprovIng HealtH CommunICatIons In Kenya  23   
Benefits of Using Texting  will be quickly taken. So it will change the whole 
for Health Care system of working, and it will also transform our operations. 
As a tool for health communications, mobile phones have tre-
mendous potential. Some of the benefits include:
1. Affordability. Mobile telephones are no longer just a tool for Challenges of Using Texting for 
the wealthy; low-income segments of the population can Healthcare
increasingly afford to own these phones Text messaging in A number of challenges were identified that could hinder wider 
particular is cheap in Africa, costing considerably less than adoption of mobile phone texting for healthcare in the two 
voice calls. research sites. The biggest challenges include: 
2. Interactivity: Mobile phones present opportunities for two- 1. Cost: Although the cost of owning and using a mobile phone 
way interactive communications between individuals at is falling and text messages are inexpensive to send and 
relatively low cost. Text messaging can serve as a simple receive, cost is still a consideration in developing country 
way to facilitate greater participation and engagement. contexts. For instance, since sending a text message costs 
3. High penetration-to-cost ratio: Mobile can be a cost-effec- the user, designing communications so that people have to 
tive way of reaching people with health messages, espe- SMS to take part can seriously constrain uptake. 
cially when compared to other media. For instance, radio 2. Literacy: Reading of text on a mobile phone requires at least 
penetration is very high in Kenya, as is cell phone penetra- some level of literacy, as does writing a message; care-
tion, but radio production and advertising costs can be much ful assessment of a target market’s literacy levels is thus 
higher than creating a mobile phone campaign. necessary.
4. Reaching people anywhere: Obviously, mobility is a funda- 3. Content length restrictions: As mobile screens are small, it is 
mental characteristic of mobile phones, enabling health difficult to read large amounts of content. In any case, tex-
communications in a wide range of places. Since individuals ting may be limited to 160 characters per message. It takes 
on either end do not need to be in a fixed physical location, a certain level of skill to fit meaningful content into such a 
this is particularly useful for healthcare workers who are short space, and the use of nuanced language is severely 
frequently on the move. constrained.
5. Personal technology: As the mobile phone is generally car- 4. Network coverage: It cannot be assumed that mobile 
ried on the person, text messages are more likely to reach phones can be used anywhere in a country. Sometimes 
an individual than, for instance, communications that rely networks do not penetrate into certain areas, such as very 
on the person seeing a billboard message. Further, text remote or mountainous areas like Matungu.
messages can be retained for future reference. 5. Variability of phones: All mobile phone are not equal; some 
6. Dealing with stigma and confidentiality: Mobiles can be use- have more functionality than others. While all phones enable 
ful where privacy is important, for instance where there text messaging and USSD (for instant messaging and other 
is stigma associated with a disease, such as HIV/AIDS. Of services), only some have Java and WAP, providing Internet 
course, this is largely dependent on the user having his or capabilities.
her own phone rather than sharing one. 6. Phone sharing: In some instances, where mobiles are used 
7. One device, many uses: Mobiles facilitate both voice and for health communications that are of a very personal 
nature or involve sensitive topics, phone sharing may pres-
text communications, the latter in a variety of ways. 
ent privacy risks. For instance, if a message implies that 
In both research sites, respondents were optimistic that mobile the recipient is HIV-positive, this could cause problems if 
phone texting would make their work more efficient and the phone is shared and an unintended recipient sees the 
effective. Jacqueline Awino, Field Coordinator for Pambazuko message. 
Mashinani, noted:
7. User familiarity with the technology: While SMS is very pop-
You know information quickly delivered is a big prog- ular among the younger generation, it is not widely used 
ress because so many lives have been lost because amongst those with limited literacy. As older people also 
information has been delayed. In this kind of project, use fewer of the functions on their phones, this difficulty is 
the information will be quickly delivered and action compounded with an older target market.
 24 ImprovIng HealtH CommunICatIons In Kenya
8. Participation of target communities: If a campaign wishes to 2. Have Internews partner with major mobile phone service 
involve the community in message development, this can providers to offer a special line for free texting for health-
be challenging on mobile, as the technical constraints (such care workers.
as character limitations) make it hard for inexperienced 3. Provide TBAs and CHWs with smartphones, or at least 
people to participate. For instance, youth may be able to mobile phones with more capability than basic voice and 
design posters or banners for their neighborhood, but get- texting. As one TBA put it, “We have simple small phones 
ting them to write effective SMS texts for a campaign is not that cannot access the Internet. So if we can have phones 
likely to be viable. that can access the Internet and [have] other capabilities, 
9. Integration of technology: In implementing projects that that will be helpful in connecting us with other TBAs and 
involve new technology, it can be difficult for a local orga- CHWs.”
nization to sustain such systems. For example, Koch FM, a 4. Train CHWs and TBAs in how to use mobile phone technol-
community radio station in Korogocho, was unable to main- ogy, especially functions that involve using codes. 
tain a project involving mobile phone texting once initial 5. Install solar panels at strategic locations where CHWs and 
donor funding ran out: the Internet service and the service TBAs could charge their mobile phones. A CHW at Matungu 
for listener text messages proved unaffordable. Charles said, “We come from regions where we have not electricity. 
Kimani, a presenter at Koch FM, explained: If you have solar charge or have phones . . . which [don’t] 
Last year Koch FM partnered with Internews and require constant charging, that can help.”
mobikash for a project. The project pilot phase is  Power outages in Korogocho have also affected the work 
now complete and with that, the Internet is no longer of Koch FM in Korogocho. The station is forced to depend 
affordable to us. Koch FM is currently shopping for an on a generator, which is very expensive to run. Charles 
alternative which is affordable, as it cannot afford to Kimani, the Communications and Fundraising officer at Koch 
pay 13,000 Kenyan shillings per month [156 USD]. FM, shared that the station relies on this generator at least 
seven days out of each month, costing about 30,000 shil-
Possible Solutions for Using  lings per month (360 USD).
Texting for Healthcare 6. Support local organizations that are already making use of emerging media technology, including bulk mobile phone 
In the course of this research, several ideas emerged from texting, in order to spread the use of such technology to 
discussions with interviewees that could solve the problems other potential users.
described above. These include: 7. Identify or establish a central facility with Internet con-
1. Provide cell phone airtime to participating CHWs and TBAs, nectivity that CHWs and TBAs could use for work-related 
either as weekly allowances or in the form of reimbursing Internet communications.
them for their costs. 
ImprovIng HealtH CommunICatIons In Kenya  25   
The following table summarizes the benefits, challenges, and potential solutions for having CHWs and TBAs use mobile phone 
technology for healthcare. It also summarizes how two local healthcare organizations are currently using such technology in 
Korogocho and Matungu. 
USE oF MoBiLE pHoNE TECHNoLogy iN KoRogoCHo AND MATUNgU
Access How mobile  Challenges faced Suggested  Benefits of using organizations 
phones are used  solutions mobile phones using mobile phone 
in both sites texting
Number of TBAs in a) Appointment a) Cost of sending text a) Provide free airtime a) Reach many poor Umoja Women’s Group: 
Korogocho who own a reminders for patients messages to CHWs/TBAs people Basic texting to indi-
mobile phone = 75% b) Field reports by b) High illiteracy espe- b) Provide toll-free b) Greater interactiv- vidual CHWs and health 
CHWs cially amongst TBAs texting support from ity amongst various officers in Matungu
c) Physicians’ queries c) Content length mobile phone service stakeholders
TBAs in Matungu = 67% d) Monitoring of CHWs restrictions for texting providers
c) High penetration-to- Pambazuko Mashinani:
c) Supply CHWs with cost ratio (reach many CHWs in Korogocho e) Mobilization for d) Not all phones have a) Send bulk texts to people cheaply)
= 82% meetings all functionalities smartphones CHWs, TBAs and other d) Reach people 
CHWs in Matungu = e) Threat to confiden- d) Train CHWs/TBAs beneficiaries of their anywhere 
100% tiality when sharing on the use of new projectse) Personal technology 
phones technology f) Reduces stigma b) Update Twitter, 
f) TBAs not familiar e) Provide solar panel and enhances Facebook accounts
with technology for communal mobile confidentiality c) Monitor interactions 
g) Participatory SMS phone charging g) One device, many generated by their 
texting campaigns f) Partner with local uses  other social media e.g. 
unlikely organizations already  crowdmapping
using mobile phone d) Monitor & receive 
texting in their reports from CHWs
work 
Potential E-Health Project
A major goal of this study was to explore the potential for using a mobile technology platform to improve the spread of health 
information in Korogocho and/or Matungu through text messaging, in conjunction with local radio stations. Researchers surveyed 
the field to see which health groups have been active in those regions, and also queried current stakeholders to gauge their level 
of interest in such a project.
 26 ImprovIng HealtH CommunICatIons In Kenya
HEAlTH ORgAnIzATIOnS WORKIng WITH cHWS AnD TBAS 
Over the years, a number of international and local entities have worked with CHWs and TBAs to address health issues in Korogocho 
and Matungu, as listed below.
oRgANizATioNS WoRKiNg WiTH CHWS iN KoRogoCHo
years the organiza- organization Health issues addressed Allowances paid to 
tion was active the CHWs, in Ksh
1993 to 2000 ActionAid sanitation, traditional birth attendants, none
microfinance 
1997 Redeemed Gospel Church counseling, hygiene, nutrition, family planning, none
first aid
2000 MAP International home-based care none
2001 World Vision sponsorship of orphans and vulnerable none
children (OVCs), HIV/AIDS, home-based care, 
microfinance 
2004 APHIA home-based care 2000 per month 
2004 AEE home-based care, sanitation, Training of none
Trainers (TOTs) 
2006 to 2010 JPHIEGO/city council home-based care, community-based distri- none
bution, reproductive health, environment, 
peer education, sanitation, child rights, rape, 
domestic violence
2007 Oscar Foundation home-based care, community-based distribu- none
tion, reproductive health
2008 St. John’s Catholic HOSPICE home based care, institution-based care none
2009 Concern Worldwide nutrition, livelihood, breast feeding 2000 per month 
2010 MALTESER TB 2000 per month 
2010 KAPLTD TB none
2010 WOFAK HIV/AIDS none
2011 to date Pambazuko Mashinani governance, TB, HIV/AIDS, maternal and child 2500 per month
health, income generation for women 
 
oRgANizATioNS WoRKiNg WiTH CHWS AND TBAS iN MATUNgU
year the organization  organization Health issues addressed Allowances paid to the 
was active CHWs
???? Umoja Women’s Group maternal and child health, none
HIV/AIDS, family planning
   
The only organization currently working with TBAs in Korogocho is Pambazuko Mashinani. In Matungu, Umoja Women’s Group 
works with both CHWs and TBAs (SDAs).
ImprovIng HealtH CommunICatIons In Kenya  27   
POTEnTIAl PARTnERSHIPS WITH lOcAl STAKE- keen to take part in such a health text project and ensure that 
HOlDERS it is sustained. Father John Weboosta, explained the church’s 
In discussing a potential health texting project with research- health staffing:
ers, respondents identified the following as the most effective We have nurses, and a doctor who comes from time 
means of identifying and mobilizing target families: to time, and the nurses are almost permanent. There 
n Local administration: chiefs, assistant chiefs and elders is one doctor who is in Kariobangi dispensary. So we  
n Churches refer to him, and from there they can be referred 
n FBOs, CBOs and NGOs working with vulnerable communities to other health facilities such as Mbagathi District 
 Health facilities Hospital.n
n Government offices: local Ministry of Health and district pambazuko mashinani in Korogocho
health officials The community-based organization Pambazuko Mashinani is 
Many of the organizations and individuals in Matungu and willing to put its resources, including staff, towards sustaining 
Korogocho said that they would support a health texting proj- the health text project. The organization notes that it is already 
ect, as discussed below.  making use of multiple new media technologies to address 
social issues in Korogocho. David Oketch, the director of pro-
district medical offices grams, reported:
District medical officers at the two research sites indicated 
that they would be willing to support an e-health initiative by First of all, as we will be working with different people 
assigning health officers to work with community health work- and partners, we would want to sustain something 
ers and community-based organizations. Peter Muguna, the that is good. We would not want to see the health 
health officer in charge of Korogocho said: text project die because of sustainability issues. It 
could be done even if it means help raising resources 
I can be of very much assistance because… I can train 
for it. If we put our hands inside there, it also means 
them on any issues related to health. I can become 
we put our resources inside there too because it is 
a good link between the MOH and the people at the 
helping our people. We are already making use of 
grassroots… I can also refer to higher hospitals those 
Frontline SMS technology to send bulk mobile phone 
cases that I cannot handle.
texting; we are on Facebook, Twitter, YouTube and 
The acting district medical officer, the district public health LinkedIn. We are also making use of crowdmapping 
officer and the health officers interviewed in Matungu also technology. 
indicated that they would help integrate health text activities 
into their daily activities as long as they received the requisite Koch Fm radio station in Korogocho
technological support. The community radio station 99.9 Koch FM currently airs 
several health-related programs. The station has partnered 
umoja Women’s group in matungu with APHRC, AMREF and Pambazuko Mashinani to broadcast 
Umoja Women’s Group is a community-based organization that 
coverage of health issues. In 2011, Koch FM also partnered 
works with CHWs and TBAs on projects of preventive care for 
with Internews and mobikash. The station is an important 
maternal and child health. The group is also engaged in peace 
mouthpiece for Korogocho: one study found that that 43% of 
building and reconciliation, youth rehabilitation, micro-finance 
Korogocho residents most prefer receiving health information 
for women, and civic education in Matungu. Umoja indicated 
through the radio (Otieno, 2011). The management and report-
that the health text project would make its work easier, and 
as a result, it would be willing to support the project however ers of Koch FM say they look forward to embracing the use of 
possible. emerging technology to disseminate health news and informa-
tion in Korogocho. Koch FM will be critical in spreading such 
st. John’s Catholic Church in Korogocho information and will provide a feedback mechanism among the 
The church welcomed the potential health text project, saying various actors involved; the station is also willing to undertake 
that health is one of the most basic human needs. It would be awareness campaigns on health issues in Korogocho. 
 28 ImprovIng HealtH CommunICatIons In Kenya
CONCLuSION AND RECOmmENDATIONS 5
This study has found that community health workers and traditional birth attendants constitute an extensive 
network that is potentially capable of expanding access to comprehensive health care for poor communities 
in Kenya. Most of these frontline health workers are eager to collaborate in such ventures, but few have been 
involved in any such efforts so far. Many are also eager to learn how to incorporate emerging media technol-
ogy in their work. A handful are already using mobile phone texting in their work to some degree.
Initial research and discussions with frontline health work- should include building their skills through joint project plan-
ers and key local organizations in Korogocho and Matungu ning and training them in project management. Respected local 
have demonstrated the potential for a health texting project partners could also be key to mobilizing community support for 
to improve the sharing of vital medical information in these the project. 
regions. Such a health texting project, once proven on a small In the course of this research, several local organizations in 
scale, could be expanded and/or replicated in other regions. 
Korogocho and Matungu offered assistance in the implemen-
To be successful, this project would require several elements. 
tation of the proposed health text project. Internews should 
These include building strong partnerships on the ground with 
explore opportunities for collaboration with such groups, as 
healthcare organizations, mustering local political support, 
detailed in the section “Potential Partnerships with Local 
obtaining project funding, and providing frequent, regular train-
Stakeholders.”
ing to CHWs and TBAs/SDAs. 
In addition, chiefs and their assistants as well as village elders 
Based on this research, following are recommendations for 
would be useful in identifying and mobilizing residents to 
improving the dissemination of health information in Kenya 
using a mobile technology platform. embrace the health text project. They could also be asked to 
make announcements and mobilize CHWs and community 
members for events and activities.
Choice of Pilot Site Also, health facilities such Nairobi City Council Clinic and the 
The Nairobi slum of Korogocho would make an appropriate health centers in Korogocho run by Provide International could 
site for launching a health text project. It is representative of potentially host CHWs and provide some organizational and 
Kenyan slum realities and there is real potential for achieving logistical support. 
concrete improvement in the health of its residents. Basing the 
project in Korogocho, rather than spreading it among several 
areas, would also ensure a more efficient and focused effort. Establishing a Working Group
In addition to relying on the region-specific knowledge and 
connections of local partner organizations, Internews might 
Working with Local Partners also consider forming a working group of such groups to help in 
In planning a health text project, Internews should identify coordinating project activities and soliciting the support of the 
local partner organizations that have the capacity not only local administration, particularly village chiefs, assistant chiefs 
to implement the project but also to sustain project activities and village elders. Such a working group could make the proj-
once outside funding ends. Such work with local organizations ect more manageable and also improve monitoring of results. 
ImprovIng HealtH CommunICatIons In Kenya  29   
Selecting Community Health The proposed health text project should be designed to address these needs. Among others, project activities could include 
Workers training CHWs and SDAs in mobile phone technology, training 
This study revealed that there are no reliable statistics on the Koch FM reporters in health coverage, and advising Ministry of 
number of CHWs and TBAs/SDAs in Matungu and Korogocho. It Health officials in getting CHWs and SDAs to refer patients to 
is estimated that there are 450 and 300 CHWS in Korogocho health facilities. Internews could also design and implement 
and Matungu respectively, but it is difficult to ascertain the mobile phone applications for CHWs and TBAs to use in record-
number of those who are active. ing, managing and disseminating data collected for the com-
It is therefore recommended that Internews collaborate munity register.
with those CHWs already working with local organizations in 
Korogocho and Matungu or with the respective district health 
offices. This way, the proposed project will involve only those Implementing E-Health  
who are truly active in the field. Technology
The study showed that e–health technology is already in use 
in both Matungu and Korogocho at a very basic level: CHWs 
Addressing Priority Needs use mobile phone texting in their work, for instance to contact 
This study found that, given their limited time and resources, patients, to report on household visits, and to send and receive 
CHWs, TBAs, and local health organizations face numerous meeting reminders.  
challenges in providing healthcare to people over a wide geo- It is recommended that the proposed health text project build 
graphic area. These frontline providers had the following prior- on the practices and technology already in use, developing 
ity needs: additional skills and tools as needed. This could include devel-
n training in how to use emerging communications technology; oping and disseminating a standardized list of codes for health 
n organizational capacity-building in order to efficiently man- providers to text information. 
age project communications; An e-health project that is modelled on these lines will help 
n solutions for streamlining paperwork; and ensure that marginalized communities in Kenya have access 
n improved access to health information and referral services. to the information
 30 ImprovIng HealtH CommunICatIons In Kenya
 AppENDIx 1: pROFILES OF FOuR TypICAL 
COmmuNITy HEALTH WORKERS
FEATURES pRoFiLE
profile A profile B profile C profile D
Description Has been working as a CHW in the Has been working as a CHW for Has been working as a CHW for the Experienced CHW who doubles 
last five years in a defined location. Is the past ten years in multiple but last five years in a defined location. as a TBA.
strongly grounded in his or her work. geographically close locations.
Training & Has at least a form four certificate. Has at least an eighth grade Has at least a form four certificate. Has at least a form four 
Background Had no background (work or training) certificate. Had no background (work or train- certificate.
in health prior to recruitment as CHW. Had some background (work) in ing) in health prior to recruitment Had no background (work or 
Was carefully selected (elected) by health and has continually built as CHW. training) in health prior to recruit-
the community. on this. Self-selected and works on own ment as CHW.
Has had cumulative training of less Has cumulative training of more than initiative. Was carefully selected (elected) 
than three months. three months. by the community.
Age Between 25 and 30 years of age Over 40 years of age Between 25 and 40 years of age Between 25 and 30 years of age
Work Arrangement Works under and reports to the Works for multiple programs. Works with an NGO/CBO project. Works under and reports to the 
Ministry of Health at the district level. Is in the Ministry of Health’s new Work is confined to a specific Ministry of Health at the district 
Activities are coordinated by the CHW arrangement as in Profile A project. level. Activities are coordinated 
District Health Officer through the but may also have other duties with There is little follow-up or connec- by the District Health Officer 
Community Unit that is overseen by a NGOs or CBOs. tion with the organization. through the Community Unit 
Community Health Extension Worker Involved in work beyond healthcare that is overseen by a Community 
(CHEW). (e.g. peace building). Health Extension Worker (CHEW).
Works as a resource for health-based Is attached to multiple health Works as a resource for health-
activity including research, studies, facilities. based activity including research, 
outreach and campaigns. studies, outreach and campaigns.
Performs both volunteer and paid 
Works as a volunteer but gets allow- activities. Works as a volunteer but gets 
ance for other activities. allowance for other activities.
Duties and Maintains community register. Maintains community register. Duties defined by the individual Maintains community register.
Responsibilities Serves as liaison between the village Serves as liaison between the village project. Serves as liaison between the 
and health facilities. and multiple health facilities. May include community education, village and health facilities.
Performs duties defined by NGO/CBO peer counseling etc.
they are associated with.
Jurisdiction Clearly defined as a specific village Not clearly defined, traverses one Clearly defined, specified by a Clearly defined as a specific vil-
and connected to a specific facility. region. project. lage and connected to a specific 
facility.
Extra-CHW Activities Modest income-generating activity Health work is the main occupation. Various activities including manual Modest income-generating 
such as farming, small business etc. labor. activity such as farming, small 
business etc.
Knowledge Level Elementary/Intermediate Intermediate Elementary Intermediate
Recruitment Selective Mixed Open Selective
Location Matungu Matungu and Korogocho Korogocho Matungu
Technology Use Receptive to mobile technology. Moderately receptive to mobile Receptive to mobile technology. Receptive to mobile technology.
Uses to communicate with fellow technology. Uses to communicate with fellow Uses to communicate with fellow 
CHW, MOH officers, nurses, CHEW, Uses to communicate with fellow CHW, MOH officers, nurses, CHEW, CHW, MOH officers, nurses, CHEW, 
clients. CHW, MOH officers, nurses, CHEW, clients. clients.
clients.
CHW Persona Dickson Otsieno, Matungu Mohammed Asman, Matungu Dickson Otsieno, Matungu
ImprovIng HealtH CommunICatIons In Kenya  31   
AppENDIx 2: SAmpLE COmmuNITy REGISTER
Household Age Sex Date R/ship Cohort Educ Chronic House Immunization Water Family Environment Preg Under 5 Remarks
Name Illness Type Source Planning Mother Deaths
Pit Refuse Dish Clothe 
Latrine Pit Rack line
Moses 31 M 17 1 5 Sec None Semi 619/05 Bore YES √ √ √ √ No X Maintains 
Hellen 26 F July 2 5 Sec Perm hole hygiene 
Samantha 7 F 2010 3 3 Pri & sleep 
Elvis 5 M 3 2 Pri under ITN
Innocent 19M M 3 2
Gift 19M M 3 2
Cris 28 M 17 1 5 Pri None Semi 335/06 Bore NO √ √ X √ NO X Advised to 
Dorcas 25 F July 2 5 Pri TB Perm Hole construct 
Stephen 3 M 2010 3 2 a dish 
rack
Patrick 33 M 17 1 5 Pri Nose Semi 07/2001 Spring NO √ √ √ √ NO X Advised/
Edith 27 F July 2 5 Pri bleed Perm 620/04 referred 
Crayan 7 M 2010 3 3 Pri Energy 91/07 to go to 
Elvis 4 M 3 2 loss the health 
Lilian 2 F 3 2 facility for 
checkup
Enoka 27 M 17 1 5 Pri Body Temp -110 Spring NO √ √ √ √ NO X Advised on 
Mily 25 F July 2 5 Pri rash the impor-
Jose 6 M 2010 3 2 tance of 
Jerita 19M F 3 2 FP
Seferio 23 M 17 1 4 Pri None Temp 63/08 Spring NO √ X √ √ NO X ITN Use
Judy 20 F July 2 4 Pri
Elias 2 M 2010 3 2
               
 
Cohort:   Organized by age group. 
Relationship:  1-Husband; 2- Wife; 3- Son/Daughter; 4- Relative
ITN:   insecticide-treated net
FP:  family planning
 32 ImprovIng HealtH CommunICatIons In Kenya

ABOUT THE InTERnEWS cEnTER FOR InnOVATIOn & lEARnIng
The Internews Center for Innovation & Learning supports, captures, and shares innovative approaches to communication 
through a creative program of research and development worldwide. Founded in 2011, the Center seeks to strike a balance 
between local expertise and needs and global learning in order to develop a comprehensive approach to understanding and 
catalyzing information exchange. 
In Internews’ 30-year history of promoting independent media in more than 75 countries around the world, the last five 
years have arguably seen the most changes in the global media and journalism environment. Across all Internews programs, 
adoption of cutting-edge technology is integral to advancing the work of the journalists, bloggers, citizen reporters, schol-
ars and others who provide a vital interpretive role for their communities. The Internews Center for Innovation & Learning 
deepens and enhances our capacity to link existing expertise to research that helps define, understand and monitor the 
critical elements of changing information ecosystems and to pilot projects that apply and test the data, platforms and 
digital tools to meet information needs of specific communities. This is far from a solo endeavor. A network of partners, 
ranging from technologists to academics to activists is critical to creating and sustaining a dynamic and iterative collabora-
tive space for innovation.
Internews Washington, dC office Internews is an international non-profit organization whose mission is 
1640 Rhode Island Ave. nW Suite 700 to empower local media worldwide to give people the news and infor-
mation they need, the ability to connect and the means to make their 
Washington, Dc 20036 USA voices heard.
+ 1 202 833 5740
Internews provides communities the resources to produce local news 
and information with integrity and independence. With global exper-
Internews administrative Headquarters tise and reach, Internews trains both media professionals and citizen 
PO Box 4448 journalists, introduces innovative media solutions, increases coverage 
Arcata, cA 95518 USA of vital issues and helps establish policies needed for open access to 
+1 707 826 2030 information. 
Internews programs create platforms for dialogue and enable informed 
www.internews.org debate, which bring about social and economic progress.
E-mail: info@internews.org Internews’ commitment to research and evaluation creates effective 
Twitter: @internews and sustainable programs, even in the most challenging environments. 
facebook.com/internews Formed in 1982, Internews is a 501(c)(3) organization headquartered 
in california. Internews has worked in more than 75 countries, and cur-
rently has offices in Africa, Asia, Europe, the Middle East, latin America 
and north America. 
