eCOMPLIANCE 
Ensuring high-quality delivery of health care among tuberculosis patients in 
resource-constrained settings 
SERVICE DELIVERY 
Implementation date: Cambodia (December 2013), Dominican Republic (November 2013), India 
(December 2010), Kenya (August 2014) & Uganda (July 2012)  
Tuberculosis (TB) has been declared a health emergency by the World Health Organization (WHO). Over nine million people are 
newly infected with TB and 1.4 million die annually1. Incomplete TB treatment has led to an alarming rise in multi-drug resistant 
TB (MDR-TB), a man-made epidemic. It is estimated that 3.7 percent of all newly infected individuals in the world have MDR-
TB2. In 2015, it is estimated that USD 2 billion will be required for the diagnosis and treatment of MDR-TB. MDR-TB, if not fully 
treated, leads to the dreaded XDR-TB (Extremely Drug-Resistant TB), causing greater suffering and economic loss. 
Operation ASHA, an international non-governmental organization working to combat TB, is using an  innovative solution called 
eCompliance, a combination of Operation ASHA’s comprehensive model and a high leverage, low-cost biometric technology. The 
application assists with monitoring every dose taken by TB patients. The intervention aims to minimize development of multi-drug 
resistance, because MDR-TB treatment is often left incomplete due to long duration and debilitating side effects.  The technology 
supports the directly observed therapy (DOTS) model, which is an essential part of TB treatment programs. 
About eCompliance 
eCompliance, is a portable biometric identification system The eCompliance system is highly interactive and easy to use 
c apable of identifying patients by their unique fingerprint and even for semi-illiterate health workers. eCompliance is 
compiling patient adherence data. The system is operated by linked to an Electronic Medical System (EMR), which allows 
C ommunity Health Workers (CHW). During patient automatic generation of all reports, improves transparency 
enrollment, their fingerprints are saved in the system and and reliability, increases productivity and eliminates human 
subsequently, every time the patient consumes a dose error. 
o bserved by the CHW, the patient provides their 
fingerprint. This provides indisputable proof that the CHW eCompliance technology has been customized to suit the 
observed the patient taking the medication. local requirements of the dosage regimen for the country. 
For example – In rural Uganda, Columbia University’s Earth 
  
When a patient misses a scheduled dose, the system sends Institute adapted the Operation ASHA strategy for a rural 
the CHW a text message. The CHW has to do the required African setting. In that context, patients no longer go to the 
f ollow-up in the next 48 hours in the patient’s home, and clinic while on TB treatment, but rather a community health 
again take a fingerprint before giving the medicine and worker goes to the patient’s home with an eCompliance 
reemphasizing the importance of adherence. This prevents system to observe the patient taking the drugs and record 
a ny dose from being missed as well as prevents tampering the drug intake. 
with the system to obtain extra incentives. 
58  |  mHealth Compendium Volume 4 
Evaluation and Results 
eCompliance has achieved tremendous success, having raised  the “Treatment Success Rate’ to 86.9 percent, (from 32 
percent), as noted by a WHO consultant in 2011, in Chhattisgarh state of India. The application has been used to enroll 
nearly 9,800 TB patients and clocked over half a million transactions on over 170 machines in India & Cambodia. The 
application has successfully reduced treatment default rates from as high as 36 percent to as low as 1.5 percent, thus 
minimizing the risk of MDR-TB. In 2011 in Ruhiira, Uganda, there were 52 TB cases diagnosed and placed on treatment and 
eight patients died. The eCompliance system was implemented in July 2012; since then, 31 patients have been enrolled in the 
system, and have been lost to follow-up or died3. The eCompliance initiative comes at a cost of $3 per patient, which is 
more than offset by increased productivity of CHWs and office staff so it does not add to the per patient cost.  
Lessons Learned 
 The implementation of a good quality DOTS program 
is the first priority for TB control in the country 
 As the price of technology falls, technological and 
biometric approaches towards TB control are viable 
even in poor areas; The current DOTS program allows 
opportunities to apply novel technological solutions, 
which have shown significant results in preventing 
MDR-TB 
 An automatic follow-up procedure reduces the 
response time to defaulting patients and focuses 
counseling on first-time and repeat missed dose 
patients 
Conclusion 
eCompliance is a solution that enhances and improves upon the Geographic Coverage: Cambodia, Dominican 
DOTS model. The system has been able to verify that patients were Republic, India, Kenya, Uganda  
present for treatment by enhancing observation with biometric 
Implementation Partners: Operation ASHA, 
identification. It provides a method to quickly respond to missed 
RNTCP (India), CENAT (Cambodia), Uganda, 
doses by patients with up-to-date attendance information. 
Kenya (Columbia University), Dominican Republic 
eCompliance is a low cost, high impact, high visibility, scalable and (Clínica de Familia) 
replicable technology.  
Funder: USAID, Columbia University  
Contact Information: 
Columbia University | Yanis Ben Amor, Director 
of the HIV/AIDS and TB Initiative, Director of the 
Tropical Laboratory Initiative 
(yba2101@columbia.edu) 
See References on page 89. 
 
mHealth Compendium Volume 4  |  59 
