 
PRE-ECLAMPSIA INTEGRATED ESTIMATE 
OF RISK ON THE MOVE  
Preventing the deadly complications of pre-eclampsia using a mobile phone 
Pre-eclampsia is the second-leading cause of maternal centers for coordination of triage, transportation and 
death in childbirth globally, killing 76,000 pregnant treatment.   
women and 500,000 fetuses and infants each year.  
Over 99% of the women and babies who die or suffer Development of the user interface for the PIERS on the 
complications related to pre-eclampsia live in middle Move application involved three phases of usability 
and low income countries.  Pre-eclampsia, a rapidly testing with target end-users in South Africa. Users 
progressive condition characterized by high blood were asked to complete clinical scenarios, speaking 
pressure and the presence of protein in the urine, aloud to give feedback on the interface and then to 
arises during pregnancy and following delivery, and complete a questionnaire to rate all aspects of the tool. 
affects both the mother and the unborn baby.  Deaths A final stage in development included piloting the tool in 
related to pre-eclampsia are often preventable and Tygerberg Hospital, Cape Town, South Africa to 
typically due to delays in diagnosis and treatment.  confirm accuracy of the decision algorithm.  
The Child & Family Research Institute (CFRI) at the 
University of British Columbia developed a ground- Evaluation and Results 
breaking solution to this global health challenge with Thirty-seven nurses and midwives (15: Tygerberg 
Saving Lives at Birth seed funding in 2011.  The Hospital; 22: Frère Maternity) evaluated the user 
technological solution integrates two separate previously interface between November 2011 – January 2013. 
successful innovations: the miniPIERS (Pre-eclampsia During the first round of usability testing, major issues in 
Integrated Estimate of Risk) predictive model and a the functionality of the touch-screen keyboard and date 
Phone Oximeter.  By combining these innovations in a scroll wheels were identified; during the second, major 
mobile phone application, they can be made immediately improvements in navigation of the application were 
available in rural, low-resource community settings.  suggested; and finally during the third round, the 
Together they produce a cutting-edge mHealth feedback was satisfactory and only minor improvements 
application that empowers community healthcare to navigation were required. Overall, users felt the 
providers in rural, low-resource settings to rapidly and application was pleasant and would improve their ability 
reliably assess risks to mothers and children, and to save to care for hypertensive women.  
lives by providing appropriate treatment and/or referral 
to higher level health centers.  Pilot clinical evaluation at Tygerberg Hospital occurred 
from September 2012 -October 2013. During this time, 
Implementation date: September 2012 to 165 inpatient women with a hypertensive disorder of 
October 2013 pregnancy were evaluated. Among them, three had an 
adverse maternal pregnancy outcome, two of whom 
were correctly classified as high-risk by the PIERS on the 
About PIERS on the Move Move tool. 
"PIERS on the Move" integrates the miniPIERS (Pre-
eclampsia Integrated Estimate of RiSk) predictive model, The next step is a larger clinical evaluation when the 
which can accurately stratify women into risk categories developers will seek to leverage the existing research 
up to one week before complications arise and without framework and collaborations in Mozambique and 
laboratory tests with a Phone Oximeter, a cellphone Pakistan to provide clear evidence of the innovation’s 
based pulse oximeter (a non-invasive device which can impact and develop a sustainable economic model for its 
measure blood oxygen saturation levels).  The mobile implementation through local demand, value and supply 
phone application assists community health workers in chain creation in Mozambique.  
rural, low-resource settings to provide local, rapid and  
accurate risk assessment, referral, and treatment advice 
for pre-eclampsia, and transmits information to referral 
62 mHEALTH COMPENDIUM   |   VOLUME 3 
 
PRE-ECLAMPSIA INTEGRATED ESTIMATE 
OF RISK ON THE MOVE  
Preventing the deadly complications of pre-eclampsia using a mobile phone  SERVICE DELIVERY 
-------------------------------------------------------- 
Geographic Coverage: South 
Africa; planned for Mozambique and 
Pakistan  
Implementation Partners: Child 
& Family Research Institute (CFRI) at 
the University of British Columbia 
Funder: Saving Lives at Birth Grand 
Challenge partners, including USAID, 
the Government of Norway, the Bill 
& Melinda Gates Foundation, Grand 
Challenges Canada, and the World 
Bank 
Contact Information:  
CFRI: Mark Ansermino, Senior 
Associate Clinician Scientist and 
Director of the Innovations in Acute 
Care & Technology (iACT), 
Research Cluster (+1-604-875-2000 
x6669, part@cw.bc.ca), Peter von 
Lessons Learned Dadelszen, Senior Clinician Scientist, Reproduction & 
 Usability evaluation with target end-users leads to a Healthy Pregnancy Cluster (+1-604-875-2424 x5545, pre-
user friendly, intuitive application even for those empt@cw.bc.ca) 
who have little familiarity or training with Grand Challenges Canada: Kristen Yee, Associate 
smartphone technology Program Manager (+1-416-673-6536, 
Kristen.yee@grandchallenges.ca) 
 Larger scale evaluation is required to determine the  
full scope and breadth of the possibility of global References: 
application 1. http://cfri.ca/news/news/2013/07/25/vote-for-piers-on-the-move-
for-a-people-s-choice-award-at-saving-lives-at-birth  
 By using ubiquitous smartphone technology, health 
2. http://savinglivesatbirth.net/summaries/276  
care workers in low-resource settings are 
3. http://savinglivesatbirth.net/summaries/37  
empowered to make decision that can save lives 
Conclusion 
In low-resource settings, referrals for pregnant and 
delivering women typically occur only when life-
threatening events have occurred.  By harnessing the 
processing and battery power of mobile phones, and 
leveraging the widespread availability of cellular services 
in Africa and South Asia, "PIERS on the Move" 
overcomes the barriers of skill, distance and resources.  
  mHEALTH COMPENDIUM   |   VOLUME 3 63 
