IQSMS provides district, 
regional, and national 
stakeholders with up-to-
date, vital information and 
assists with decision making 
about the distribution 
and re-distribution of HIV 
commodities to avoid 
disruption in the testing 
of pregnant mothers and 
exposed infants. 
IQSMS  
International Quality Short Messaging System
IMPLEMENTATION DATE:  October 2012 to March 2016 
Using mobile technology to improve distribution and availability of HIV 
commodities in remote health facilities in Tanzania
The Local Partners Excel in Comprehensive HIV & AIDS Service Delivery (LEAD) project, funded by 
the Centers for Disease Control under PEPFAR, supports prevention of mother-to-child transmission 
(PMTCT) services at 509 facilities in the Mara and Tanga regions of Tanzania. Most are health centers 
and dispensaries in remote locations with unreliable or no sources of funds to transport reports and 
travel to collect medical supplies. These factors contribute to regular stock outs of health commodities 
needed for HIV testing of pregnant women and exposed infants. In July 2010, LEAD introduced the use 
of International Quality Short Message Software (IQSMS) to support facilities to share HIV commodity 
information. 
About IQSMS
IQ SMS uses healthcare workers’ mobile phones to send sumptions to product reallocations and forecasting. Districts preformatted commodity reports to a central server via and facilities have been able to boost HIV testing services, 
SMS.  Messages sent to the server undergo quality checks, improve proper medicines distribution according to con-
with responses sent to the sender before the data is integrated signments, and ensure successful preparations of Report and 
into the server. These messages contain key HIV stock status Request (R&R) forms. The application at glance provides 
for Determine, Unigold, and Dried Blood Spot (DBS) test real time data from the root cause at health facilities; the 
kits. The stock reports are then retrieved, analyzed, and tool facilitates health care workers to submit national core 
shared with key stakeholders for immediate action. reporting indicators that are found on the national reporting 
The application enables facilities, districts, and implementing tools (MTUHA), capturing monthly data. In a single button 
partners to make profitable decisions about HIV commod- click, the tool enables districts to receive a full order of all 
ities ordering cycles and quantity levels, from product con- commodities as quantified by the system based on what has 
66  n  LOGISTICS
JSI
actually been consumed. All quantifications and calculations treatment, six were reported dead, and five were lost to 
are handled by the system with consideration to physical follow up.
stock taking. 
To avoid parallel reporting, the system is now interoperable Lessons Learned 
with both DATIM and DHIS2, based on OpenHIE us-
ing DXF2. The system is able to use Application Program 
n Combining both a mobile system and a Web-based 
Interface (API) to feed data collected from the health facility system helps ensure that data collected from facilities 
level directly into DHIS2’s central server. During data expor- are made easily available for use by MOHs and are 
tation, IQSMS performs information comparison to see if interoperable with systems at  the central/national level.
data has already been captured by DHIS2 and quantifies the 
relationship. n Mobile phone SMS technology is a cost-effective, quick, 
and simple mechanism that requires minimal train-
ing for system use and implementation by health care 
Evaluation and Results workers.
n The use of IQSMS to trace exposed infants has reduced 
Using a snapshot of reports sent by 509 sites in October the number of infants lost to follow up rates and 
2013, analysis indicated that 77 percent of 12,475 newly can be applied across various program areas for effective 
enrolled pregnant women were tested. A total of 44 facilities monitoring.
had no Determine, 58 had no Unigold, and 194 had no 
DBS test kits. A total of 25,071 Determine, 4,820 Unigold, 
and 1,791 DBS kits were available at the sites, which Conclusion 
could enable testing of all pregnant women enrolled. This 
information helped program, district, and facility staff to IQSMS provides district, regional, and national stakeholders 
support re-distribution of test kits to sites that had none. The with up-to-date, vital information and assists with decision 
November 2013  PMTCT stock report indicated 90% of making about the distribution and re-distribution of HIV 
13,564 newly enrolled pregnant women in all 509 sites were commodities to avoid disruption in the testing of pregnant 
tested, there were no stock-outs of Determine, and only three mothers and exposed infants. This mHealth innovation has 
facilities reported no Unigold. A total of 797 stock status and also enabled data collection and direct reporting from lower 
PMTCT reports sent to the IQSMS server were exported to level health facilities to sub-national and national levels. 
the national DHIS2 system. This reduced multiple entries of IQSMS reduces the burden of paper-driven data collection 
the same data in various systems because district health care and assists program implementation in areas where challenges 
workers could export their data from IQSMS directly into are inevitable. n
DHIS2.   
IQSMS was also used to identify infants who were not 
tested for HIV during their initial clinic visit in 293 
facilities in Tanga region. Through automated monthly 
reports generated by IQSMS, an analysis of the reports for 
infants who had not been tested was sent to the respective 
facilities whereby multidisciplinary teams, including home-
based care providers, traced the untested infants using the 
infants’ mother/guardian home address, mobile phones, or 
treatment supporters’ contact information retrieved from Geographic Coverage:  Tanzania
the facility register. Between October 2013 and September 
2014, there were 1,757 registered exposed infants from 293 Implementation Partners: Futures Group International, Catholic Relief Services (CRS), MGIT, Tanzania Ministry of Health, 
facilities located in remote areas with limited resources in CSSC, IMA 
Tanga region.  A total of 1,749 (99.5 percent) were traced Donor: Centers for Disease Control and Prevention, Tanzania 
and tested for HIV within 12 months of their birth using Contact Information: Bobby Jefferson, Director, Futures Group 
DNA-PCR; of these 50 (2.9 percent) were diagnosed HIV International, BJefferson@futuresgroup.com 
positive. Of the identified positive, 39 (78 percent) initiated 
mHEALTH COMPENDIUM  VOLUME 5  n  67
