Integrating Mobiles into 
Development Projects
CLICK HERE TO START
This handbook was prepared for the U.S. Agency for International Development by 
FHI 360 and OpenRevolution as part of Associate Award AID-OAA-A-12-00073 
under the FIELD-Support Leader Award EEM-A-00-06-00001-00. It does not 
necessarily reflect the views of USAID or the U.S. Government. 
By Josh Woodard, Jordan Weinstock, and Nicholas Lesher
AUGUST 2014
How to Use this Document
Text with a blue underline will 
Select buttons to 
take you to another component navigate through the 
inside the document different components
How should the  mobile devices are faster, cheaper, and more 
implementing partner  accurate (see the Mobile Data Factsheet for some Even lack of mobile network 
capture and validate data? examples). There are a range of survey applications coverage is no longer a compelling Text with a gray underline links  
specifically designed for smartphones and tablets. reason to not use mobile devices. In to an external document
A key element of a PMP is a discussion of how an These applications enable the user to easily create Myanmar, Pact used mobile devices 
to collect data offline and then upload it using 
implementing partner will capture and validate data. project specific instruments and include collection office WiFi instead of the mobile networks.
USAID should carefully review the draft PMP and and tabulation features. Unless there is a compelling 
hold multiple discussions with the implementing reason, USAID should encourage the use of mobile-
partner on how data will be collected and validated. based data collection tools.
Where practical, USAID should also hold meetings 
with the mobile service provider and develop 
an understanding of their standard reporting ICONS
capabilities and the ease to which reports can be 
customized. This is a particularly important role for 
USAID Missions to play in countries where multiple Additional 
implementing partners might be using mobile Resource
services from the same provider. Whereas individual 
projects might not have the influence to convince the 
service provider to share some types of data, USAID 
can use its convening power to represent all of its Example
implementing partners in these discussions. For your 
reference, a Sample M4D-oriented Performance 
Indicator Reference Sheet can be found in the 
Resources section.
Interesting 
Certain performance metrics dealing with Factoid
the attitudes of beneficiaries typically requires 
field-based data collection and surveys. Mobile 
technology is ideally suited to support these types Critical Success 
of data collection efforts either through the use Factors
of enumerators or through self-reporting. Recent 
experience indicate that surveys conducted using 
Contact us
79 Integrating Mobiles into Development Projects
i Integrating Mobiles into Development Projects
INTRODUCTION COMPONENT 1 COMPONENT 2 COMPONENT 3 COMPONENT 4 COMPONENT 5 CONCLUSION RESOURCES
INTRODUCTION COMPONENT 1 COMPONENT 2 COMPONENT 3 COMPONENT 4 COMPONENT 5 CONCLUSION RESOURCES
Table of Contents
Foreward  vi
Acknowledgements  viii
About the Authors  viii
Acronyms  x
Introduction   1
 How is this handbook intended to be used?  1
 
UNDERSTAND  3
 
Component 1: Understanding Mobiles for Development (M4D) 4
Start here for the basics on everything you need know about mobiles for development
  What are some of the different functional uses for mobiles in development?  5
          
 What devices and delivery models exist?  8
 What else should I know about M4D?  15
 What lessons have we learned so far about M4D?  17
 What is the current mobile landscape in Southeast Asia?  19
  How are mobiles being used in development projects in Southeast Asia?  25
Note:
 If you are new to mobiles, you may want to focus on the Understand components. If you have some experience and are already thinking about how to integrate mobiles 
into a project, you may want to focus on the Implement components, particularly the six-step process in Component 3. See the Introduction to better understand how to 
use this handbook.
ii Integrating Mobiles into Development Projects
INTRODUCTION COMPONENT 1 COMPONENT 2 COMPONENT 3 COMPONENT 4 COMPONENT 5 CONCLUSION RESOURCES
Component 2: Understanding the Mobile Ecosystem  28  
 
If you are interested in learning about mobiles from an ecosystem perspective, this component will get you up to speed
 What are the different elements of the mobile ecosystem?  28
 What are the building blocks of mobile services?  33
  What role can USAID play to help strengthen the ecosystem?  36 
IMPLEMENT  38
 
Component 3: Project Design   39
Thinking about using mobiles? This component takes you through a six-step process to determine how to best integrate mobiles into your project
  Where do you begin with incorporating mobiles into your project design?  41
  S TEP 1: I dentify potential roles for mobiles to reinforce project goals  43
  STEP 2: Determine requirements for using mobiles  44
  STEP 3: Collect data to understand the landscape   45
  STEP 4: D ecide if use of mobiles in the project is feasible and appropriate  50
  STEP 5: Validate assumptions and preliminary findings  53
  STEP 6: Integrate conclusions into Concept Paper  55
Component 4: Procurement  56
Planning to issue a procurement? Check out this component for tips related to integrating mobiles into solicitations and evaluating proposals
  What core elements specific to M4D should be included in solicitations?  57
 W hat are some techniques for developing cost estimates for integrating mobiles into projects?  63
  How do you critically evaluate solicitation responses with an M4D component?  67
iii Integrating Mobiles into Development Projects
INTRODUCTION COMPONENT 1 COMPONENT 2 COMPONENT 3 COMPONENT 4 COMPONENT 5 CONCLUSION RESOURCES
Component 5: Monitoring Implementation and Program Evaluation  69
Already working with a project using mobiles? This component is full of useful suggestions and ideas for critically monitoring and evaluating it for success
  What are the key attributes of mobile that influence monitoring and evaluation?  70
 What information do service providers commonly capture?  73
 What are some commonly used M4D indicators?  73
  How should you determine which performance metrics are most appropriate?  76
 How should the implementing partner capture and validate data?  79
  How should you critically assess project milestones at key junctures along the project life cycle?  80
  How can you evaluate the impact that mobiles are having on a project?  81
Conclusion  84
RESOURCES  85
  
Digital Development Factsheets 88 
  
These factsheets from USAID’s Digital Development team provide additional details on some of the areas mentioned in the handbook 
   
  Digital Inclusion Factsheet: An overview of the key elements for improving mobile technology access  88
 Digital Finance Factsheet: An overview of digital financial services, such as mobile money 90
 Mobile Data Factsheet: An overview of using mobile for data collection 92
Guiding Questions for Meetings with Key Partners  94
 These guiding questions, developed by USAID’s Digital Development team, are a useful starting point to prepare for meetings with potential partners 
 Greentree Consensus: Principles for Technology in Development  97
Developed and endorsed by multiple donors, including USAID, these nine guidelines are important to keep in mind when developing any M4D initiative 
iv Integrating Mobiles into Development Projects
INTRODUCTION COMPONENT 1 COMPONENT 2 COMPONENT 3 COMPONENT 4 COMPONENT 5 CONCLUSION RESOURCES
Mobiles for Development Checklist  99
Our six-step process to determining if and how mobiles can help you achieve your broader development objectives 
ICT Option Selection Worksheet  103
Use this worksheet to help figure out what types of information and communications technologies might be useful in your project
Current Mobile Services Template  104
Use this template to keep track of all of the mobile services that already exist in your country that might be relevant to your project design
Sample M4D Evaluation Template  105
A handy template for evaluating M4D-related elements of proposals
Sample Performance Indicator Reference Sheet (PIRS) 108
This is a sample of a PIRS from a USAID project in Malawi focused on mobile money
M4D Inventory  110
A selection of mobile services being used in development in Southeast Asia to give you an idea of what is possible
USAID Projects in Southeast Asia Using Mobiles  127
A selection of USAID projects in Southeast Asia that are already using mobiles in their work
Glossary of Terms  133
Your guide to all of those words you have heard related to mobiles in one convenient place
v Integrating Mobiles into Development Projects
INTRODUCTION COMPONENT 1 COMPONENT 2 COMPONENT 3 COMPONENT 4 COMPONENT 5 CONCLUSION RESOURCES
Foreword
This past spring USAID launched the U.S. Global Development Lab, an entity Here are a few examples of the powerful use of mobile and information 
that builds upon the Agency’s growing use of science, technology, innovation communication technology (ICT) solutions that have inspired me:
and partnerships to achieve development goals. Reflecting the proven impact of 
science and innovation, USAID has increased its investments not only in research, •	 In Uganda, Grameen’s Community Knowledge Workers provide  
but innovation and applied solutions in science and technology. Evidence from information to farmers by mobile phones through a trained mediator.  
this work across our Missions’ portfolios demonstrates the transformative power A recent IFPRI study found that farmers receiving information this way  
of science and technology to deliver more effective, cost-efficient results. had a 22% increase in improved practices and price gains than the  
control group.
We believe that a new digital economy is emerging which affords new 
opportunities to promote broad-based growth, empower citizens and improve •	 Catholic Relief Services in the Central African Republic achieved  
service delivery in developing countries. Technologies like the mobile phone  huge efficiency improvements by switching to mobile-enabled data  
are exciting because they place an incredible channel for information and  collection methods. They went from a process that required 20 staff  
service delivery in the hands of the poor at a never before seen scale. Today’s over two weeks to one that now only needs five staff and three days  
phones are more powerful than the first computers and, therefore, are tools  to collect data on the performance of their programs.
for two-way communication that can support rich content and a diverse array  
of applications. •	 Research by the K4Health project in Malawi found that using SMS  
and voice calls to improve information sharing and communication  
The opportunities to harness mobile technology to solve development between community health workers and district-level teams were four  
challenges are immense. I am delighted that Regional Development Mission  times cheaper and 134 times more efficient for receiving feedback than  
for Asia (RDMA) has seized the initiative in developing this first USAID the typical method of traveling to meet with district-level supervisors  
handbook and associated course on Integrating Mobile Solutions into directly. In fact, worldwide we see that simple text message reminders  
Development Projects. This handbook draws on the extensive work and to mothers have doubled vaccination rates of children.
expertise of our Digital Development (formerly Mobile Solutions) Team in 
Washington. The Digital Development Team, as well as the growing Science  •	 The Afghan Institute for Learning halved the time required for adult learners 
& Technology Team at the regional mission, is available to help Missions fully to reach basic literacy simply by adding text messaging to the curriculum. 
use digital and mobile solutions, and other emerging technology, to accelerate  
development results. I urge you to reach out to them to further explore  
these opportunities.
vi Integrating Mobiles into Development Projects
INTRODUCTION COMPONENT 1 COMPONENT 2 COMPONENT 3 COMPONENT 4 COMPONENT 5 CONCLUSION RESOURCES
•	 A 2011 MIT study found that families that do not use M-Pesa in Kenya—the This is where the expertise of USAID staff can make an important difference.  
largest mobile money service in the world—suffer a seven percent drop in It is not enough to expect our implementing partners to solve these problems. 
consumption when hit with a negative income shock, while consumption of All of us must work together in applying our insights, talents, and energy in 
families who use M-Pesa remains unaffected. helping to identify and capitalize on opportunities for science and technology  
to build a better future. You have a critical role to play in engaging directly  
•	 Mobile phones are enabling services such as off-grid electricity to reach  with policy makers and regulators to address the barriers that can limit the 
the poor both by enabling new financing models and tightening maintenance potential of technology to deliver impact. You are best positioned to ensure  
and operations through automated feedback loops. our technology programs are mutually reinforcing across portfolios. And it is 
your job to ensure good design principles are built-in from the beginning.
This handbook is intended as a practical and actionable guide to help  
USAID staff consider the challenges that can impede the realization of a more Technology will not solve all our problems. There are no silver bullets in 
sustainable and equitable future powered by mobile technology and other development. But I am confident that thoughtfully integrating technology  
digital solutions, and to think critically about when and how to deploy mobile and science in all that we do is at the heart of becoming a more modern  
solutions. Across the world, I have observed countless examples of exciting and high-impact development agency. I hope this handbook will inspire you  
mobile programs that have failed to scale beyond donor funding. The execution and your colleagues to do just that.
of mobile solutions can often be more challenging than anticipated. Many 
remain underpowered because the policy/regulatory environment hampers the 
expansion of affordable Internet or mobile services, business models are not 
aligned to meet the commercial interests of the private sector at a price point 
that works for low-income communities, and, too often, mobile services are 
not designed with the end-user in mind. Finally, the often siloed nature of our  Andrew Sisson 
development programs mean that mHealth, mAgriculture, mFinance and other  
“m-“ efforts are not built to support each other and, in some cases, are working Acting Executive Director 
at cross-purposes. U . S . G L O B A L  D E V E L O P M E N T  L A B
vii Integrating Mobiles into Development Projects
INTRODUCTION COMPONENT 1 COMPONENT 2 COMPONENT 3 COMPONENT 4 COMPONENT 5 CONCLUSION RESOURCES
Acknowledgements About the Authors
This handbook was developed under USAID’s Mobile Solutions  Josh Woodard is the Technical Manager for the mSTAR project at  
Technical Assistance and Research (mSTAR) project (Cooperative  FHI 360, where he currently manages the technical direction of mSTAR work 
Agreement No. AID-OAA-A-12-00073), which is implemented by  for USAID RDMA and an activity in Bangladesh facilitating the adoption of 
FHI 360 and overseen by USAID’s Digital Development team. Funding  mobile financial services by USAID implementing partners. He is the author of 
and guidance for the development of the handbook was provided  numerous publications, including Integrating Low-cost Video into Agricultural 
by USAID’s Regional Development Mission for Asia (RDMA). Development Projects: A Toolkit for Practitioners, Interactive Radio for 
Agricultural Development Projects: A Toolkit for Practitioners, and Social Media 
Dr. Teresa Leonardo, Senior Regional Science & Technology Advisor at  Handbook for Agricultural Development Practitioners (co-author). He has been 
USAID RDMA, was the USAID activity manager for the handbook and  experimenting with using affordable information and communications technology 
provided technical input and guidance throughout its development. Christine (ICT) tools to improve communication and enhance impact for more than a 
Martin contributed to some of the research and content, including the  decade. He has in-country technical experience working in Thailand, Indonesia, 
Glossary of Terms. Erica Buckingham from FHI 360 copyedited the handbook Bangladesh, India, Macedonia, Mozambique, Ethiopia, Kenya, Ghana, Zambia, 
and developed the M4D Inventory and USAID Projects list found at the  Senegal, Liberia, Malawi, and Rwanda.
end of the handbook. Shannon Dyson and Michelle Ghiotti from FHI 360's 
Design Lab designed the handbook. Jordan Weinstock leads OpenRevolution’s Advisory Services Group  
and brings over 25 years of management and technology consulting experience 
It was also created with the input and suggestions of a number of different to OpenRevolution from Booz Allen Hamilton, BearingPoint, and Zefer. He 
people within USAID all of whose contributions helped to make this handbook began his career in telecommunications at the US Government Rural Utility 
more relevant to USAID staff. Particular acknowledgement goes to each of the Service where he developed loan packages for rural independent telephone 
following individuals: Jayce Newton (formerly with Governance & Vulnerable companies. Jordan’s focus has been the expansion of telecommunications and 
Populations at USAID RDMA), Teresa Trusty (formerly with USAID’s Mobile mobile services in both emerging and developed markets, and the application 
Solutions team), Brooke Patterson (USAID’s Digital Development Asia Regional of communications technology to address a range of development and business 
Representative), and Joshua Haynes (Senior Development Technologist & Media challenges, including financial access. He has led telecommunications projects 
Advisor from USAID), for their foundational input during the inception of the in over 20 countries, including the privatization of state-owned telcos and the 
first handbook outline; participants at the Mobiles for Development course held licensing of new GSM mobile entrants. Recently, Jordan has supported mobiles 
in Bangkok in January 2014 for their helpful input on some of the tools included projects in Afghanistan, Ghana, Haiti, Indonesia, Vanuatu, Zimbabwe, and Malawi. 
in the handbook, which were piloted during this course; and the entire USAID He has focused on sector analysis and action plans, and the development of 
Digital Development team for their suggestions and contributions to the outline mobile money pilots.
and draft handbook, particularly Charley Johnson, Chris Burns, Jonathan Dolan, 
Paul Nelson, Nandini Harihareswara and Priya Jaisinghani. 
viii Integrating Mobiles into Development Projects
INTRODUCTION COMPONENT 1 COMPONENT 2 COMPONENT 3 COMPONENT 4 COMPONENT 5 CONCLUSION RESOURCES
 
Nicholas Lesher is an Associate Director at OpenRevolution with experience in About mSTAR
branchless banking and mobile money pilot feasibility assessments, agent network 
strategy and management, project design and management, pilot implementation The Mobile Solutions Technical Assistance and Research (mSTAR) program is  
and evaluation, as well as monitoring and evaluation. He also provides strategic a strategic investment by USAID to advance mobile solutions and close the gaps 
guidance to public, private, and non-governmental organizations seeking to that hold back access and uptake. mSTAR supports broad-based coordinated 
integrate mobile technology across programs or initiatives aimed at a variety of action by a range of market stakeholders including governments, donors, mobile 
sectors, including: financial services, agriculture, health, education, and civil society.  service providers and their customers. mSTAR works closely with the USAID 
He has in-country project experience in Indonesia, Haiti, Malawi, Georgia, and Digital Development team and USAID Missions abroad to identify opportunities 
Morocco, and has undertaken market landscape assessments for the delivery of to leverage the power of mobile technology to improve development outcomes. 
mobile financial services in several countries in Central Asia, the Caucasus, and Activities are carried out by FHI 360 and a group of highly qualified partner 
Eastern Europe. organizations. mSTAR’ s period of performance is from 2012 through 2017.
To learn more about how you can work with mSTAR, contact Nandini 
About the Regional Development Harihareswara (AOR) at nandini@usaid.gov and/or Shailee Adinolfi  
(mSTAR Project Director) at sadinolfi@fhi360.org. 
Mission for Asia
USAID’s Regional Development Mission for Asia (RDMA) serves as a major 
regional center providing program, technical, and support services to South, 
Southeast, and East Asia, and the South Pacific. USAID RDMA manages regional 
programs throughout Asia as well as substantial bilateral programs in countries 
without bilateral USAID missions, including China and Laos. The USAID Asia 
Bureau has charged USAID RDMA with serving as a forward operating base 
to support implementation of USAID Forward reforms in the region, including 
Science, Technology, Innovation and Partnerships (STIP). USAID RDMA is 
additionally one of USAID’s twenty STIP priority Missions. USAID RDMA’s 
role as a regional platform includes strengthening the identification and sharing 
of STIP successes and best practices, assisting Missions in integrating STIP into We want to hear from you. If you have questions  
their activities and processes, and developing trainings and tools—such as this or comments regarding anything in this handbook,  
handbook—to strengthen USAID capacities. To learn more about USAID or want to share your experience with using it,  
RDMA's related activities please contact Teresa Leonardo, Senior Regional please email Josh Woodard at jwoodard@fhi360.org.
Science & Technology Advisor (tleonardo@usaid.gov).
ix Integrating Mobiles into Development Projects
INTRODUCTION COMPONENT 1 COMPONENT 2 COMPONENT 3 COMPONENT 4 COMPONENT 5 CONCLUSION RESOURCES
Acronyms
API Application Program Interface MMS Multimedia Messaging Service
ASEAN  Association of Southeast Asian Nations MNO Mobile Network Operator
ATL Above-the-Line MSTAR   Mobile Solutions Technical Assistance  
BTL Below-the-Line and Research
CDMA Code-Division Multiple Access OTC  Over-the-Counter
DFS Digital Financial Services P2P Person-to-Person
G2P Government-to-Person PMP Performance Management Plan 
GDA Global Development Alliance POS Point-of-Sale 
GPL  General Public License RDMA Regional Development Mission for Asia
GPS Global Positioning Systems SMART S pecific, Measurable, Attainable, Relevant,  
GSM Global System for Mobile Communications and Time-bound
ICT  Information and Communications Technology SMS Short Message Service 
ICT4D Information and Communications Technology  STIP S cience, Technology, Innovation  
 for Development and Partnerships
IP Implementing Partner TOT Train-the-Trainers
IPR Interim Project Review TVWS TV White Space 
IVR Interactive Voice Response USSD  Unstructured Supplementary Service Data
LTE Long Term Evolution WAP Wireless Application Protocol
M4D Mobiles for Development  
x Integrating Mobiles into Development Projects
INTRODUCTION COMPONENT 1 COMPONENT 2 COMPONENT 3 COMPONENT 4 COMPONENT 5 CONCLUSION RESOURCES
Introduction
How is this handbook intended to be used?
The primary audience of this handbook is USAID staff, although much of the KEY RESOURCES 
content is relevant to anyone interested in integrating mobiles into development 
projects more effectively. Most of the examples highlighted are from Southeast •	 Guiding Questions for Meeting with Key Partners
Asia, although the relevance of the content is global. Since the mobiles for 
•	 Principles for Technology in Development
development space is evolving rapidly, the handbook is intended to equip readers 
with a set of questions to ask when using or considering mobiles, rather than •	 Mobiles for Development Checklist
providing a prescription for how to use mobiles in a given country or sector. •	 M4D Evaluation Template
The handbook is divided into two sections. The first section is entitled  
Understand, and is meant to be an in-depth guide of everything you might need  
to know about mobiles. The second section is entitled Implement. It provides 
practical tips and information related to integrating mobiles into a project in 
practice. The components in the Implement section mirror the different phases 
associated with USAID programming to situate you in a familiar framework  
when introducing new concepts and topics. 
The two sections and each component within them are designed to be 
complementary, although they do not need to be read sequentially. Call-out  
boxes and tips are placed throughout the handbook to allow you to quickly  
scan and rapidly identify specific issues of interest. Worksheets and other  
relevant resources are included in the Resources section towards the end  
of the handbook. Several of the resources are editable forms that you can  
type directly into.  The resources section also includes a Glossary of Terms  
and an M4D Inventory and list of USAID Projects using mobiles, which  
provide an overview of the many different mobile services and applications  
being used in development programs in Southeast Asia. © 2013 Sarah V. Harlan/JHU•CCP, Courtesy of Photoshare
1 Integrating Mobiles into Development Projects
INTRODUCTION COMPONENT 1 COMPONENT 2 COMPONENT 3 COMPONENT 4 COMPONENT 5 CONCLUSION RESOURCES
Below is an overview of the handbook’s five components within its  
two sections:
UNDERSTAND IMPLEMENT
•	 Understanding Mobiles for Development provides an overview of  •	 Project Design focuses on techniques for integrating mobiles into project 
almost everything that you would need to know about using mobiles  design. It starts by providing lessons learned for good M4D design, followed 
for development (M4D). It includes an explanation of the different mobile by a six-step process for integrating mobiles into concept design. It introduces 
devices and delivery models that currently exist, the different functional  both sectoral and context-specific considerations that should be kept in mind 
uses of mobiles, the difference between open source and proprietary  when designing a concept, as well as providing an introduction to  
software, and much more. Last, it includes some examples of how mobiles  user-centered design and resources for employing this approach into  
are being used for development in Southeast Asia to give you an idea of  one’s own work.
what is already being done.
•	 Procurement deals with the nuts and bolts of incorporating mobiles into 
•	 Understanding the Mobile Ecosystem provides a breakdown of the  solicitations. Building upon the project design component, it further explores 
different elements that make up the mobile ecosystem and an overview of how to determine the pre-requisites and requirements for using mobiles in a 
the basic building blocks for any M4D intervention. In other words, it covers development project. It also covers techniques for calculating associated costs 
everything you need to know about the elements that need to be in place and comparing the costs and benefits of mobiles over other methods. Finally, it 
before it is possible to effectively use mobiles for development. It also includes includes suggestions for critically evaluating solicitation responses with mobile 
some ideas about the role that USAID can play in helping to strengthen the device components.
mobile ecosystem.
•	 Monitoring Implementation and Program Evaluation is written with a focus 
on enabling you to effectively monitor and evaluate the implementation of 
M4D activities. It includes an introduction to some of the commonly used 
indicators for determining the impact of mobile-based activities, as well as tips 
for critically assessing project outputs. Finally, it includes suggestions for how to 
evaluate the impact that mobiles are having on a project.
2 Integrating Mobiles into Development Projects
INTRODUCTION COMPONENT 1 COMPONENT 2 COMPONENT 3 COMPONENT 4 COMPONENT 5 CONCLUSION RESOURCES
UNDERSTAND
3 Integrating Mobiles into Development Projects
INTRODUCTION COMPONENT 1 COMPONENT 2 COMPONENT 3 COMPONENT 4 COMPONENT 5 CONCLUSION RESOURCES
C1OMPONENT Understanding Mobiles for  
Development 
(M4D)
By	the	time	you	have	finished	this	component	you	will:
•	 Understand	functional	uses	of	mobiles,	as	well	as	specific	examples	 
of how they are being used for development
•	 Understand the different devices, delivery types, software access  
models, and other introductory information needed to know how  
to apply mobiles to development.
4 Integrating Mobiles into Development Projects
INTRODUCTION COMPONENT 1 COMPONENT 2 COMPONENT 3 COMPONENT 4 COMPONENT 5 CONCLUSION RESOURCES
This component is intended to help you understand exactly what people 
mean when they talk about mobiles for development (M4D). It includes  
an explanation of functional use types, as well as the mobile devices and 
delivery models that currently exist, the difference between open source  
and proprietary software, and much more. Lastly, it includes some examples 
of how mobiles are being used for development in Southeast Asia.
What are some of the different functional  
uses for mobiles in development?
There are a number of different ways that the functional uses of mobiles in development can  
be catalogued. For the purposes of this handbook, they have been divided into the following types 
of functions:
•	 Push: Push refers to any type of service that allows the central user (i.e. a development organization) to  
send information or content to other individuals using a mobile device. Push services can be used on any 
device, although the delivery method available will depend on the device type. An example of a push service 
is an SMS sent to people’s phones encouraging people to wash their hands before eating in order to avoid  
the spread of cholera.
•	 Pull: Pull refers to any type of service that allows the central user to request information or content from 
other individuals using a mobile device or for an individual to request information directly from the central 
user. In some cases this is done remotely by sending a request to the individual by mobile phone, although 
it can also be collected by an intermediary, such as a data enumerator, to gather information directly from 
individuals. Like push services, pull services can be used on any device, although the delivery method available 
will depend on the device type. An example of a pull service is a market price information service where 
farmers can send an SMS to in order to request price information for a specific product. © 2004, Courtesy of Photoshare
5 Integrating Mobiles into Development Projects
INTRODUCTION COMPONENT 1 COMPONENT 2 COMPONENT 3 COMPONENT 4 COMPONENT 5 CONCLUSION RESOURCES
•	 Storage: Storage refers to any type of service that uses the memory on a mobile device to store information In some cases, a mobile service includes more 
or content, either directly onto a SIM card or onto an SD or microSD memory card. The storage function can than one of these functions. For example, a service 
be used on any mobile device, although the extent of storage available will depend on the device. SIM cards may include both push and pull, where the central 
generally have fairly limited storage capacity, ranging from 32KB to 128KB, meaning that they cannot store user sends messages out to users and also collects 
much more than text. SD cards, on the other hand, can hold several gigabytes of data. An example of storage information from those users. These functions can 
is pre-loading content onto SIM cards that can be disseminated to local communities, such as the Smart also be applied using one or more of the delivery 
TXTBKS initiative in the Philippines, which has loaded grade school text books onto refurbished SIM cards. models mentioned earlier. A service may have 
both an SMS and voice message push service, and 
•	 Transaction: Transactions are any service that allow a user to make a financial transaction with another an interactive voice response (IVR) pull service. It 
user, which can be another individual, a merchant, service provider (such as a utility company), or other third is generally beneficial to integrate both push and 
parties (such as the government or NGO). This can be done through using mobile money, which is cash that pull, in order to ensure that targeted individuals 
is converted into digital currency and held in a mobile wallet, or through airtime top up. Often, transactions have a chance to provide input, thereby creating 
rely on USSD, which is generally available on all mobile phone devices. An example of transactions are mobile opportunities for a robust feedback loop, rather  
money services, such as Wing in Cambodia, or mobile voucher services that allow for the transfer of voucher than only receiving information. 
numbers that can be redeemed for payment at participating vendors. 
There are also overlays that are used to enhance 
•	 Interactive: Interactive refers to any service that allows for simultaneous communication, such as chat the way that functions can be delivered. Increasingly 
platforms like WhatsApp, Facebook Messenger, or Google Talk. These tend to be primarily available only  common among these is geo-location, which uses 
on feature phones and smartphones. GPS (global positioning systems) to tell the mobile 
service the location of the user at a point in time 
(such as at registration) or in real-time. Using geo-
location, a service can be customized to the specific 
location of the user. For instance, a mobile weather 
information service will provide registered users with 
weather updates closest to their location, as opposed 
to general weather information for the country. Or, a 
mobile data collection service that has a pull function 
For a helpful introduction to mobile may record the location of individuals reporting data 
money, watch this self-paced course  so that this data can be visually displayed on a map.
by USAID, QED and TechChange.
6 Integrating Mobiles into Development Projects
INTRODUCTION COMPONENT 1 COMPONENT 2 COMPONENT 3 COMPONENT 4 COMPONENT 5 CONCLUSION RESOURCES
Overviews of mobile data, digital finance, and digital inclusion developed by USAID’s Digital 
Development team are provided in the Resources section, which give a more detailed sense 
of how mobiles can be used within each of those areas.
Within each functional use, there are also several ways that the communication can be conducted. For instance, 
services can be one-to-one, one-to-many, or many-to-many. One-to-one refers to interactions that are between 
two individuals, generally the development organization and one of the target users. This is more commonly seen 
in pull services or transactions where an individual is requesting information or making a transaction with another 
user. In the development context, most push services and some transaction and pull services tend to be one-
to-many, meaning the development organization interacts with many people at the same time (i.e. sending out 
the same SMS or mobile transactions to hundreds of users). Many-to-many almost always exists with interactive 
services, and in some cases may exist within push and pull services that facilitate collective sharing.
Finally, there is the issue of complexity, which can vary depending on factors such as how robust the service is, and 
what delivery models and device types are used. For the sake of this handbook, complexity is divided into three 
categories: basic, intermediate, and advanced. While these classifications are somewhat arbitrary, they do help to 
give a sense of how the same type of service can vary depending on complexity. 
One-to-One
One-to-Many Many-to-Many
© 2005 Hari Fitri Putjuk, Courtesy of Photoshare
7 Integrating Mobiles into Development Projects
INTRODUCTION COMPONENT 1 COMPONENT 2 COMPONENT 3 COMPONENT 4 COMPONENT 5 CONCLUSION RESOURCES
© 2012, Courtesy of Photoshare
What devices and  
Let’s take a look at a mobile push service to explore what it might look like within each category: delivery models exist?
•	 Basic: The service sends generic SMS messages to all registered users on health information. Users cannot Although people often refer to mobile devices  
respond back to the service to pull additional information. as if they are all the same, there is actually a lot of 
variety that exists both in terms of mobile devices 
•	 Intermediate: The service sends generic SMS and voice messages to registered users. Users can also call the and the different delivery models that can be used  
system back directly via an IVR interface that they can interact with to pull additional information. to communicate via mobile phones. Understanding 
the differences between each device and delivery 
•	 Advanced: The service uses geo-location to identify the location of registered users in order to send model will enable you to understand how mobile 
customized SMS and voice messages. Users can also call the system back directly via an IVR interface that they services might be appropriate to specific context 
can interact with to pull additional and customized information. and needs. For example, while a basic SMS poll can 
be sent to individuals on pretty much any device 
While each of these services use mobile phones to provide information to a group of individuals,  type, mobile data collection apps that make use of 
the complexity of the service alters how that information is delivered. Generally, the more complex the service, multimedia, geo-location, and more complex survey 
the more expensive it will be to set up and implement. As a rule of thumb, it is best to not be more complex questions require features that do not exist on basic 
than necessary in order to achieve program objectives in a way that is appropriate to the context. phones and even some feature phones.
8 Integrating Mobiles into Development Projects
INTRODUCTION COMPONENT 1 COMPONENT 2 COMPONENT 3 COMPONENT 4 COMPONENT 5 CONCLUSION RESOURCES
DEVICES
Let’s start with the devices themselves. Generally speaking, mobile phones are divided into three different 
categories: basic, feature, and smartphone. You have likely seen and even used each of these types of phones, 
although you might not have known what sets one apart from the other. 
Here is each explained:
Basic phones, sometimes also disparagingly referred to as ‘dumb’ phones, are no-frills mobile phones that can 
use voice and text-based services, as well as basic embedded applications (such as calculators, calendars, etc.). 
Chances are that basic phones are the majority in most rural communities. They tend to be durable and low-
energy consumers, so that they can last for days—or even weeks—without a charge. An example is the Nokia 
1100, which is the world’s top selling mobile phone of all-time at 250 million units.1
Feature phones are exactly what the name implies, phones with additional features beyond voice and text.  
They are internet-enabled, allowing users to connect to the internet through a mobile browser. They can also 
run Java-based applications (often associated with games, but more than that as well), download audio, send 
multimedia content such as images and short video clips through MMS (multimedia messaging service), and 
typically tend to come with an on-board camera. An example is the Nokia 5130, which has sold 65 million  
units worldwide.2 
Smartphones are the next step up from feature phones and are currently the most sophisticated mobile 
phones on the market. The features that generally set them apart are their touch-screen capability, larger screens 
and more graphical interfaces, and integrated WiFi and GPS. They also tend to have higher quality cameras than 
feature phones. In many ways, they function like pocket computers, with powerful operating systems and full-
featured apps. Apps are a great example of how features that exist on feature phones (such as GPS) can be 
applied in countless directions. Unlike feature phones, which have only basic GPS functionality, smartphone apps 
can use GPS to provide users with location-specific information for whatever someone has dreamed  
up and developed.
1. http://tech.ca.msn.com/the-world’s-best-selling-cell-phones?page=8
2. http://www.telegraph.co.uk/technology/picture-galleries/9818080/The-20-bestselling-mobile-phones-of-all-time.html?frame=2458985
9 Integrating Mobiles into Development Projects
INTRODUCTION COMPONENT 1 COMPONENT 2 COMPONENT 3 COMPONENT 4 COMPONENT 5 CONCLUSION RESOURCES
INTERESTING FACTOID
Smartphones have 100 times more computing 
power than the average satellite. 
Source: NASA
It is worth noting that different smartphone operating systems have slightly 
different functionalities and not all apps are compatible with each operating system. 
Currently, the most popular smartphone operating system is Google’s Android, 
followed by Apple’s iOS and then Windows Phone. Examples of smartphones are 
the iPhone and Samsung Galaxy. Increasingly, there are also a number of Chinese-
made smartphones that are finding their way into Southeast Asian markets and sell 
for much less than the globally known brands.3
While there has been lots of excitement around smartphones, as of 2012 they still 
represented less than a quarter of all mobile handsets shipped for sale—and in 
most of Southeast Asia those figures were likely even lower.4 Although smartphone 
penetration will continue to grow, especially as prices decline, the vast majority of Although they are not phones, tablets are another mobile device that are 
the world is still connected by either a basic or feature phone. This is reflected in increasingly becoming popular. From 2012 to 2013, tablet sales increased by 101% 
the fact that 80% of mobile services are still designed for basic or feature phones, in Southeast Asia to over 3 million units, as prices dropped by around 27%.6 They 
compared to just a third for smartphones.5 In the meantime, there are also a are, for the most part, similar to smartphones in terms of functionality, albeit with a 
number of firms that are designing services to enable feature phones to act more bigger screen. Unlike smartphones, however, tablets are available in both WiFi only 
like smartphones, such as VascoDe, which has products that provide access to sites and WiFi plus mobile models. The former can only be connected to the internet via 
like Facebook, Twitter and Gmail using USSD, or Vuclip, which delivers streaming a WiFi connection, where the latter can also connect via a 3G or 4G connection 
video over a feature phone similar in quality as videos viewed on a smartphone. with a mobile data plan.
3. http://blogs.wsj.com/digits/2013/09/11/china-smartphones-challenge-cheap-iphone/
4. http://www.gsmamobileeconomy.com/GSMA%20Mobile%20Economy%202013.pdf
5. https://gsmaintelligence.com/files/analysis/?file=130828-scaling-mobile.pdf
6. http://www.gfk.com/th/news-and-events/press-room/press-releases/pages/tablet-and-laptop-markets-in-southeast-asia-report-uptrend.aspx
10 Integrating Mobiles into Development Projects
INTRODUCTION COMPONENT 1 COMPONENT 2 COMPONENT 3 COMPONENT 4 COMPONENT 5 CONCLUSION RESOURCES
DELIVERY MODELS
This leads us into the next part of this section: delivery models. Generally speaking, there are four 
different ways through which a mobile phone user can interact: voice, messaging, web browsing, and 
apps. Each of these is subdivided into service types, as follows:
Voice
There are two main categories of voice services. The first is a voice call between mobile phone users (often 
referred to as native voice), which normally occurs on a peer-to-peer basis but can also occur with multiple 
individuals through three-way and conference calling. The second is interactive voice response (IVR), which is 
In addition, there are an increasing number of a computer-based system that callers can interact with using their device keypad (via touch tone) and/or voice 
other types of devices that use mobile networks to recognition. IVR systems are generally menu-based and allow callers to navigate a series of menu options to find 
transmit information but that most people would out specific information or to leave a message. An example of IVR is calling a bank and receiving an automated 
not immediately think of when they hear the term menu saying to “press 1 for...”.
mobile device. These include point-of-sale devices 
for credit and debit transactions at stores, weather Messaging
stations to collect localized weather information, and Messaging can take many forms, but for the purposes of this handbook, only those that are inherently built into 
irrigation pumps, such as Nano Ganesh in India, that mobile phones have been included—not apps that are used for messaging (such as WhatsApp).  
are connected to SIM cards and can be controlled  
remotely by calling them. There are also a growing The most widely known of these are Short Message Service (SMS) or text messages. As mentioned in the 
number of services and utilities that use mobile introduction, SMS messages usually have a limit of 160 characters in Latin-based alphabets and enable people to 
money to enable people to access them on a pay-as- communicate via text between phones—or also from a computer to phones via an SMS gateway in the case of 
you-go or lease-to-own basis, such as Kamworks solar services such as FrontlineSMS, which provides an interface that allows users to send many text messages at the 
home kits in Cambodia. same time, referred to as bulk messaging. 
Less known by name is USSD (Unstructured Supplementary Service Data), although anyone who has ever 
For more examples on services and checked their airtime balance has likely used it. USSD allows phones to communicate directly with their mobile 
utilities linked to mobile money, visit network operator’s computers, which in some cases then link to a third-party service provider. It is accessed by 
CGAP’s Digital Finance Plus page. dialing a number that starts with an * and ends with a # (such as *1234#). USSD generally appears as a text-
based menu interface that callers can use to navigate and input information. It is often used for messaging that 
11 Integrating Mobiles into Development Projects
INTRODUCTION COMPONENT 1 COMPONENT 2 COMPONENT 3 COMPONENT 4 COMPONENT 5 CONCLUSION RESOURCES
requires multiple responses, as multiple interactions can take place during one USSD session, which is less costly 
than sending multiple SMS messages in order to accomplish the same goal. Unlike SMS, connecting via USSD is 
generally free to the user and any text called up during the session is not stored on the phone. This is in contrast 
to SMS messages, which are stored on the phone until actively deleted by the user, or until the phone’s memory 
is full. Setting up a USSD service, however, is more complicated than SMS and requires an agreement with the 
mobile network operator or an aggregator, which are third-party service providers that negotiate agreements 
directly with the MNOs (see the Glossary for a more detailed explanation).
The last form of messaging, MMS (multimedia messaging service), is a protocol accepted on most feature 
phones that enables users to send and receive audio images and videos. The current protocol for MMS only 
allows sending messages up to a maximum of 600kb, which is a relatively small file size. As a result, images and 
videos sent by MMS are generally of low quality. 
Web Browsing
Mobile devices can be used to access and browse the web primarily in two different ways. The first is through 
using WAP (Wireless Application Protocol), a protocol through which mostly older feature phones access the 
internet. The mobile phone user accesses the web through a gateway that translates information on the World 
Wide Web into a format recognizable by WAP—although in some cases sites have been directly designed for 
WAP.  Web pages viewed using WAP are more basic and have less content than they would if the site was viewed 
using a web browser on a computer. However, to improve the user experience, many WAP-enabled feature 
phones also include an additional application, Java (more on this below), which allows software developers to 
build better applications that improve the user’s experience when accessing the internet on lower-priced phones.7 
The other way for browsing the web is to do so directly via an HTML-capable mobile browser, which are 
basically scaled down versions of the same browsers used on computers. All smartphones, and most newer 
feature phones, are capable of connecting to the web directly without the need to convert the site using the 
WAP protocol. The site appears just as it would on a computer, albeit on a much smaller screen. For that reason, 
many websites create mobile optimized versions of their sites that are designed to be viewed on a mobile phone 
or tablet. When the site notices that a user is accessing it on a mobile browser, it will automatically redirect to its 
mobile optimized version.
7. For more details, see “WAP vs. J2ME: Which is best for mobile?” http://www.itworld.com/IW001127tcpcp
12 Integrating Mobiles into Development Projects
INTRODUCTION COMPONENT 1 COMPONENT 2 COMPONENT 3 COMPONENT 4 COMPONENT 5 CONCLUSION RESOURCES
Apps
The commonly used term app refers to a wide range of products with vastly different levels of functionality. 
While the term app originally referred to software applications designed specifically for mobile phones, it is now 
also used to describe software applications for tablets and increasingly for computers as well. Mobile phone apps 
provide a way for a user to directly access a service rather than accessing through a web browser, often providing 
a much more user-friendly experience. 
When people use the term ‘app,’ they tend to be referring to those applications that have been designed 
specifically to function on one of the leading smartphone operating systems, such as Android, iOS, or Windows 
Phone. In most cases the app needs to be downloaded directly onto the phone from a menu on the user’s 
phone, generally referred to as an app store. There are literally smartphone apps for almost anything—from 
games to information to data collection and everything else in between. In fact, in 2013 the number of apps  
on the Google Play store, which houses all of the apps compatible with Android phones, surpassed the  
1 million mark.8
While the sheer number of smartphone apps is staggering, as previously mentioned, the majority of the world 
is not yet using smartphones. The vast majority of the world’s app experience is through Java-enabled feature 
phones (running on Java ME, formerly known as J2ME), which currently represent over 3 billion phones globally. 9 
These apps are much less robust in terms of features as compared to smartphone apps and are often referred  
to as ‘lite’ versions of applications. Even so, they enable people to interact with their phones in much broader  
ways than they could do through voice, messaging and WAP-enabled browsing alone. 
In some cases, apps may also come pre-installed or embedded on the phone, such as Nokia Life Tools, which 
is on select Nokia phone models (see the M4D Directory for more information). SIM cards can also come 
For a helpful comparison of  embedded with series of commands that are programmed directly onto the card to tell it how to interact and 
the major differences between  initiate applications with the mobile network, thereby enabling it to offer menu-based functions, similar to USSD.10 
Android apps and Java ME, check  Although still fairly uncommon, there are also SIM overlays, which are thin, plastic sheets embedded with contact 
out this side-by-side overview  points and a chip that can be stuck on top of a SIM card enabling it to run additional services or features. The 
8. http://mashable.com/2013/07/24/google-play-1-million/
9. http://www.oracle.com/technetwork/java/javame/javamobile/overview/about/index.html
10. The standard that enables SIM cards to be embedded is known as SIM Application Toolkit (STK)
13 Integrating Mobiles into Development Projects
INTRODUCTION COMPONENT 1 COMPONENT 2 COMPONENT 3 COMPONENT 4 COMPONENT 5 CONCLUSION RESOURCES
technology was originally developed in China and has been primarily used to offer cheap roaming services. In 
Kenya, Equity Bank is rolling out a mobile banking service in the second half of 2014 using this technology in 
partnership with a mobile virtual network operator (see Glossary for more on MNOs). This will enable them  
to offer their services to individuals on any mobile network, which is currently not possible in Kenya.11
The GSMA Mobile For Development Intelligence has developed a helpful illustration to show the intersection  
of device type and delivery model, which has been adapted slightly with their permission to include examples 
from Southeast Asia. More information on many of the examples highlighted below can be found throughout  
the handbook and in the M4D Inventory at the end of the handbook.
Phone type
Basic Feature Smart SE Asia Examples
Voice Interactive Voice Response (IVR) SPICE IVR (Cambodia)
SMS Fansipan Challenge (Vietnam)
Messaging USSD WING Mobile Money (Camodia)
MMS Amputee Screening via CellphoneNetworking (Philippines)
WAP
Browsing
Web 8villages (Indonesia)
Embedded Nokia Life Tools (Indonesia)
Apps Java Me (J2ME) WhatsApp (Global)
Android Nutrient Manager for Rice(Indonesia, Philippiines
Content value
Simple Sophisticated
© www.mobiledevelopmentintelligence.com [Scaling Mobile for Development: A developing world opportunity, August 2013]
© 2011 Johns Hopkins University Global mHealth Initiative, Courtesy of Photoshare 11. http://mondato.com/blog/skin-sim-safari/
14 Integrating Mobiles into Development Projects
INTRODUCTION COMPONENT 1 COMPONENT 2 COMPONENT 3 COMPONENT 4 COMPONENT 5 CONCLUSION RESOURCES
What else should I know about M4D?
When to use custom-built
 
OFF-THE-SHELF VS. CUSTOM-BUILT  
There are no hard and fast rules, but here  
Mobile services can generally be placed into three classifications of readiness: off-the-shelf (they already exist  are some things to consider before using a 
and are ready to use), custom-built (they do not exist and need to be built), or customized (something close custom-built service:
exists, but it needs to be adapted).
•	 A re there any mobile services that  
can fulfill your needs or does something  
As the M4D space becomes increasingly more saturated with different mobile services, the need for completely similar? GSMA’s Mobile for Development  
custom-built services is on the decline. In many cases, off-the-shelf mobile services already exist to meet the Intelligence is a good place to start to see 
needs of a development project. This is not to say that there is an off-the-shelf service that exactly addresses  what already exists.
each need, but rather that with some customization most of the development needs that involve mobile can •	 I f something similar exists, what would it  
already be addressed by what is available on the market. Therefore, as a general rule, it is advisable that  cost to customize? How does this price  
you encourage partners to use existing services, where possible, over custom-built ones. Of course, compare with the cost to custom-build?
there will always be some instances where an idea is so unique and nothing quite like it already exists on the 
market, or where a service is not open source and it is not possible or cost-effective to work with the current •	  Is there any additional value to customizing  
an existing service (i.e. broadening service  
provider. In these cases, it may be necessary to custom-build the mobile service, but these should be treated  options for users)?
as the exception rather than the rule (see text box for more details). In addition, when custom-built services  
are used, open source services should be invested in by default so that the code can be publicly shared and 
improved upon.
Note, however, that simply because open source 
OPEN SOURCE VS. PROPRIETARY software is free, it does not mean that using open 
source software is cost-free. It may be necessary 
One of the most important considerations related to any mobile service or app—or software in general—from to pay for things like customization, training, and/
a sustainability perspective, is whether it is open source or proprietary. The term “open source” implies that the or technical support in order to use the software 
software, including its core design, code, and blueprints are universally free and wholly available to any user that appropriately. Whichever software model is used, 
wants access to it. This allows the broader technology community to build from, modify, and reuse the original. the good news is that generally both open source 
This in turn drives innovation, provides a better return on USAID’s investment, and fosters transparency and and proprietary software are of similarly high quality. 
interoperability. When software is proprietary or “closed source”, the ability to use it effectively is tied to the Analysis by Coverity, Inc. of more than 450 million 
implementer who had the software developed. Using open source tools provides the greatest potential for lines of software code found defects at roughly the 
continuity of a tool by the host country after project completion. same level for both open source and proprietary.12
12.  http://www.coverity.com/company/press-releases/read/annual-coverity-scan-report-finds-open-source-and-proprietary-software-quality-better-than-industry-average-for-
second-consecutive-year 
15 Integrating Mobiles into Development Projects
INTRODUCTION COMPONENT 1 COMPONENT 2 COMPONENT 3 COMPONENT 4 COMPONENT 5 CONCLUSION RESOURCES
DID YOU KNOW?
An excellent example of the benefits of open source software is the EXELearning software platform. This was originally funded by the New Zealand Ministry of 
Education in 2004 to provide teachers who lacked programming skills a tool with which they would be able to develop point and click courseware. By 2009, numerous 
eLearning applications from all around the world had built on and modified the eXe platform. Applications for mobile phones have also been developed that allow  
eXe-based content to be downloaded and used on feature phones, providing eLearning tools for populations without access to computers. The key aspect of the 
Ministry’s project design was that the eXe platform was developed under a GPL (General Public License), allowing anyone to use, modify, and build from the original 
software at zero additional cost to the Ministry.
VERTICAL VS. HORIZONTAL PERSPECTIVES
For more detailed guidance on the use  
GSMA’s Mobile for Development team has divided M4D into vertical and horizontal perspectives. The vertical of mobiles along the vertical perspective,  
perspective is sector focused. This is what most mobile services for development are designed for, which is check out the following resources: 
why many mHealth or mAgri services define themselves singularly by their sector. The horizontal perspective is 
technology focused. It applies a technology service that can be used across a range of sectors, such as the SPICE FOOD SECURITY
IVR system that is discussed in more detail later in this component. Given their lack of sector-specific focus, they 
tend to be more generic and require customization to meet specific user needs. Mobile data collection services •	 Mobile Market Information  
are a common example of services that have been designed from the horizontal perspective. for Agri VAS Operators:  
A Quick Start Guide
GSMA suggests that development practitioners begin to look at using mobiles from a systematic perspective that 
•	 Mobile Learning Toolkit
combines both the vertical and horizontal perspectives. This requires that practitioners start viewing the mobiles 
for development landscape as a whole and target users more holistically where this makes sense. For example, a HEALTH
mobile health service being used with community health workers may have the same functionality needed for an 
agriculture service used with extension agents. Having one mobile service that can meet the specific and identical •	 mHealth Planning Guide
needs of both audiences is preferable to promoting the development of two different mobile services, in some •	 mHealth Basics: Introduction  
cases by two different developers. Of course, it may not always be possible to do this. In some instances there are to Mobile Technology for Health
very unique functionalities that are required that may not fit within a more holistic approach. The key takeaway 
is that if you are planning on using mobiles in a project, consider both the specific sector need as well GOVERNANCE
as existing technologies that can be built upon, which may accelerate uptake of the new service. •	 Mobile Technologies  
and Empowerment
To learn more about these two perspectives to M4D, you can read the six-part series.
16 Integrating Mobiles into Development Projects
INTRODUCTION COMPONENT 1 COMPONENT 2 COMPONENT 3 COMPONENT 4 COMPONENT 5 CONCLUSION RESOURCES
What lessons have we learned so far about M4D? 2. Policy and enabling environment can impact success. The policies, 
regulations, and business operating environment of a country can positively 
Before we start with incorporating mobiles into a project, let’s take a moment first or negatively impact the ability to implement, scale, and sustain M4D services. 
to step back and review what we know about what makes mobiles more likely to As an example, mobile money in Kenya has grown extremely rapidly due to 
have positive impact. an accommodating and permissive regulatory environment, which contrasts 
with countries like India that have had somewhat more restrictive policies and 
Unfortunately, as a relatively new practice area, there is still somewhat limited in turn have seen slower growth.13 USAID has a strong history of supporting 
formal research into impact in the mobiles for development space. To help improved policy and enabling environments in other sectors, and this is a role 
improve understanding of the role that USAID can play in this space, in mid-2013 that is just as important in the M4D space. 
the USAID Digital Development team commissioned a team of information and 
communications technology for development (ICT4D) specialists to interview 3. Good project design principles are essential. Starting with a mobile service 
more than 40 experts from donors, implementers, vendors, academic institutions, in	mind	and	then	trying	to	force	it	to	fit	into	a	project’s	design	is	generally	a	
and other commercial ventures to identify guiding principles and best practices recipe for failure. Instead, you should start with the objective you are trying to 
for the use of web and mobile technologies in development. What follows is a meet or the problem you are trying to solve, and then determine the most 
summary of those findings from the perspective of what role USAID staff can play, appropriate service—whether mobile or other—that is best suited to enhance 
along with other lessons learned from the experience of the authors. the ability to achieve that objective given the context that you are working in. 
By identifying when good project design principles are not being used, Mission 
1. USAID M4D expertise plays a role in the success of interventions. staff can stop implementing partners from failing before they have begun.
Given the limited amount of time that mobiles have been used in development 
projects on any degree of scale, it should come as no surprise that many 4. Collaboration, not isolation. A couple of years ago in Uganda, there were 
USAID staff do not yet have adequate expertise in relation to M4D throughout so many organizations implementing their own mHealth initiatives across the 
the project life cycle, from concept design, to procurement, to managing country that the Ministry of Health had to issue a letter ordering a halt of new 
implementation. This is exactly why this handbook was developed. This initiatives until a framework was put in place to coordinate these efforts.14 
handbook and the associated Mobiles for Development training piloted in Unfortunately, it is not uncommon for development organizations to work in 
Thailand in January 2014 are intended to build USAID staff capacity so that isolation on their M4D initiatives. In the case of USAID-funded projects, Mission 
they can more successfully ensure the success of M4D interventions they staff can help to prevent this by taking the same proactive steps towards 
design and oversee. enabling collaboration as the government of Uganda.
13. http://www.cgap.org/blog/mobile-payment-systemswhat-can-india-adopt-kenya-E2-80-99s-success 
14. http://www.ictworks.org/2012/02/22/ugandan-mhealth-moratorium-good-thing/ 
17 Integrating Mobiles into Development Projects
INTRODUCTION COMPONENT 1 COMPONENT 2 COMPONENT 3 COMPONENT 4 COMPONENT 5 CONCLUSION RESOURCES
5. Consider the long-term business case for M4D initiatives. As stressed 
in Component 2, it is important to think about the sustainability of a mobile 
service before its development or deployment. If an implementing partner 
proposes to use a mobile service that is going to have lasting value, they 
should be able to make the case for how that service will be sustained after 
the project ends. If a business case does not exist from the start, proceed with 
caution. Poorly considered business plans are one of the main reasons behind 
the long list of pilots that fail to scale in the M4D space. Identifying which ideas 
are unlikely to succeed early on and not funding them can help to avoid the 
continuation of poorly conceived and unsustainable pilots.
© 2014 Elson T. Elizaga, Courtesy of Photoshare
6. Avoid recreating the wheel. There has been a proliferation of mobile 
services that are either explicitly targeting development projects or have a This research prompted USAID to work with a number of donors and bilateral 
development use case. Although not completely up-to-date, GSMA’s Mobile institutions, including DFID, World Bank, Bill & Melinda Gates Foundation, 
for Development Intelligence site lists almost 1,600 mobile-enabled products Omidyar Network, UNICEF, and SIDA to develop a list of best practice principles, 
and services in the developing world. That’s a lot. If an implementing partner dubbed The Greentree Consensus, to inform the design of technology-enabled 
is proposing creating a new mobile service from scratch, make them defend development programs. The full list is included in the Resources section at the end 
exactly why a new service is necessary and why their needs cannot be met  of this handbook.
by	an	existing	service	or	modification	to	an	existing	service.
Keep each of these in mind as you read through the rest of the handbook. While 
7. Mobile can be part of the solution, but is rarely the solution. Mobile, each of these do not guarantee the success of any mobile service for development, 
like any other technology, is simply a tool for performing a task that can they can be important contributors, and are therefore worth considering 
also be performed in other ways. In some cases it can be used to replace throughout all phases of the project life cycle.
inefficient	manual	processes,	while	in	others	its	value	comes	from	its	ability	
to complement and enhance existing services (for example, to improve the 
outcomes from radio programs).15 In both instances, however, mobiles are   For another perspective on lessons learned in M4D, read Karl Brown 
still being used as part of a broader approach. Mobile services that are part  from the Rockefeller Foundation’s 10 Theses on Power and Efficacy  
of an integrated approach to development are more likely to generate  of ICT4D Indulgences.
benefits	than	those	that	are	stand	alone.
15.  If you are interested in learning more about how mobile phones can enhance radio, check out USAID and FHI 360’s Interactive Radio for Agricultural Development Projects: A Toolkit for Practitioners, available online at http://ictforag.org/radio/
18 Integrating Mobiles into Development Projects
INTRODUCTION COMPONENT 1 COMPONENT 2 COMPONENT 3 COMPONENT 4 COMPONENT 5 CONCLUSION RESOURCES
What is the current mobile 
landscape in Southeast Asia?16 
The significant global growth of mobile phone access 
over the past few years has brought about much 
excitement among the development community. 
While figures such as 6.5 billion mobile phone 
connections, representing more than 90% of the 
world population, make it sound like mobile phones the mobile landscape beyond the aggregate figures USAID’s Regional Development Mission for Asia 
are truly ubiquitous, they actually only reveal a part of of connectivity, therefore, is crucial to being able to (RDMA) which funded this handbook. This includes 
the story. Access to mobile phones has grown rapidly effectively design and implement any sort of mobile Cambodia, Indonesia, Laos, Malaysia, Myanmar, 
across the world, with the desire for individuals to be for development project. This is, in part, because Philippines, Thailand, and Vietnam.
connected, declining costs, and willingness for people infrastructure alone does not guarantee people 
to pay serving as the main drivers for this growth. can use mobile products and services at equal 
That said, not everyone’s access to and experience levels. Specifically, this section provides an overview Check out this Introduction  
with mobile phones is the same. Aggregate data does of connectivity, literacy, and user habits within the to mAccess video for a helpful  
not apply consistently to everyone across age group, developing countries in ASEAN (Association of overview of perceived versus  
actual mobile ubiquity.
gender, and socioeconomic status. Understanding Southeast Asian Nations), a priority region for 
16. F or the purposes of this handbook, Southeast Asia is defined as the ASEAN region. This section of the handbook is focused on the developing countries  
in ASEAN countries. All data is the most recently available as of 2013.
19 Integrating Mobiles into Development Projects
INTRODUCTION COMPONENT 1 COMPONENT 2 COMPONENT 3 COMPONENT 4 COMPONENT 5 CONCLUSION RESOURCES
CONNECTIVITY
Connectivity is often defined in two different ways. The most 
common is the penetration of SIM cards in a country. The table 
shows that SIM card penetration in most of the countries listed 
exceeds 100% of the total population of the country. While that 
may seem impressive, it is important to keep in mind that in each of 
these countries it is not uncommon for one person to own multiple 
SIM cards in order to take advantage of preferential rates offered 
by mobile network operators (MNOs) for calls made within their 
network. In fact, chances are that you or someone you know keeps 
more than one SIM for exactly this purpose.
The more useful measurement of connectivity is the market 
penetration rate of subscribers. This figure is calculated based 
on the number of unique mobile subscribers divided by the total 
population. The market penetration rate gives a better sense of how 
many people in a country actually own a mobile phone, which as 
indicated in the table, is between 40% and 55% of the population 
in every country with the exception of Myanmar.  These figures are 
growing across every country in the region, as are mobile phone 
purchases, which totaled more than 118 million units in FY12 alone.17
   GSMA INTELLIGENCE’S RESEARCH NOTE 
‘Measuring mobile penetration’ provides some interesting additional insight into this question  
of measurement. 
17. http://www.gfk.com/Documents/Press-Releases/2012/20120917_Telco-Asia-efin.pdf
20 Integrating Mobiles into Development Projects
INTRODUCTION COMPONENT 1 COMPONENT 2 COMPONENT 3 COMPONENT 4 COMPONENT 5 CONCLUSION RESOURCES
Country SIM penetration/ Market penetration % of 2G, 3G, Number of The other thing that this table shows is the growth 
(growth past year) (growth past year) 4G connections mobile network of more advanced mobile network systems (such 
(growth past year) operators as 3G and 4G) across the region. The percentage 
of subscribers who have 3G connectivity is growing 
Cambodia 138% (+6.31%) 50.83% (+3.33%) 84.25% (+3.02%) 6 at an even faster pace than SIM penetration—from 
15.75% (+48.53%) 16% growth rate in Malaysia to a whopping 134% 
0% in Myanmar and 231% in Thailand—meaning that 
Indonesia 125% (+11.52%) 41.24% (+12.34%) 71.16% (+3.75%) 6 more people are gaining access to all of the benefits 
28.84% (+44.01%) that come along with 3G connectivity. While overall 
0.01% (N/A) access to 3G in these countries is still fairly limited 
Laos 93% (+13.39%) 45.06% (+13.30%) 84.46% (+9.18%) 4 at less than 35% in the majority of Southeast Asia, 
15.54% (+68.84%) the rapid growth of 3G means that over the next 
0% few years it is likely that some of the individuals and 
Malaysia 141% (+1.23%) 54.04% (+2.27%) 47.29% (-11.09%) 7 communities that USAID works with will gain access 
48.02% (+15.97%) to these faster connections (see text box for more 
4.69% (+78.57%) details on 2G/3G/4G). To give you a sense of how 
Myanmar 14% (+38.79%) 11.68% (+33.09%) 79.37% (+25.11%) 1* fast that growth has been, in 2012 global mobile 
20.63% (+134.57%) data traffic was roughly twelve times more than the 
0% entire global internet traffic (not just on mobiles) in 
2000. By 2017, we will use 11 exabytes of data per 
Philippines 110% (+3.51%) 49.38% (+4.60%) 64.24% (-3.70%) 6
35.11% (+24.95%) month (that’s 1 billion gigabytes!).18 Within Southeast 
0.64% (+355.25%) Asia, it is estimated that by 2017 about 52% of 
mobile connections will be on either a 3G or 4G 
Thailand 138% (+10.39%) 54.48% (+6.06%) 63.37% (-20.09%) 6
36.47% (+231.94%) connection,
19 and will account for 9% of total 4G 
0.15% (N/A) 
Vietnam 134% (-8.98%) 55.58% (+1.08%) 79.90% (-13.95%) 5 For a more detailed, though  
20.10% (+25.77%) slightly dated, analysis of the mobile 
0% landscape in Southeast Asia, read  
MobileMonday’s Mobile Southeast  
Asia Report 2012.
*  Myanmar awarded licenses to three additional mobile network operators in January 2014. They should be operational by the end of 2014. 
Data accurate as of Q4 2013, source: https://gsmaintelligence.com
18. http://www.cisco.com/c/en/us/solutions/collateral/service-provider/visual-networking-index-vni/white_paper_c11-520862.html 
19. https://gsmaintelligence.com [subscription required] http://www.gsmamobileeconomy.com/GSMA%20Mobile%20Economy%202013.pdf
21 Integrating Mobiles into Development Projects
INTRODUCTION COMPONENT 1 COMPONENT 2 COMPONENT 3 COMPONENT 4 COMPONENT 5 CONCLUSION RESOURCES
What is 2G, 3G, and 4G?
The ‘G’ stands for the generation of the mobile 
system (for example, 3G is third generation 
technology). The main difference between 
each of these is data speed. Phones on a 2G 
network can generally only get speeds of 9.6 
kbit/s to 28.8 kbit/s, roughly equivalent to old 
modem speeds from dial-up days. Phones 
operating on a 3G network, however, need to 
have a minimum stationary speed of 2mbit/s 
and 348 kbit/s when moving. 4G networks 
(the most common 4G standard is called Long 
Term Evolution or LTE) can provide peak 
speeds of up to 100mbit/s (and potentially 
as high a 1gbit/s with newer, advanced 4G 
technologies). The difference in bandwidth 
makes accessing multimedia content, using 
sophisticated apps, and location-based services 
possible. At peak speed, a 4G phone could 
download a 30 minute TV show in 7 seconds, 
whereas it would take almost 6 minutes on 
3G, and just under 7 hours on 2G!
connections in Asia, up from only 0.5% now.20 And although for the near future the majority of mobile phone 
users in Southeast Asia will be using feature phones, smartphone growth is expanding rapidly, with sales “expected 
to grow in Vietnam, Indonesia, and Thailand at compound annual growth rates of 37%, 31%, and 27%, respectively, 
from 2011 through 2016.”21
Knowing whether end users have 2G, 3G, or 4G access—or no access at all—and what types of phones they 
are using will play a significant role in shaping what type of mobile intervention is going to be most relevant. This 
process is discussed in more detail in the project design component later in the handbook.
20. https://gsmaintelligence.com [subscription required]
21. http://www.accenture.com/SiteCollectionDocuments/PDF/Accenture-Surfing-ASEAN-Digital-Wave-Survey.pdf
22 Integrating Mobiles into Development Projects
INTRODUCTION COMPONENT 1 COMPONENT 2 COMPONENT 3 COMPONENT 4 COMPONENT 5 CONCLUSION RESOURCES
Another factor related to mobile connectivity is access to electricity. If a community does not have affordable 
INTERESTING FACTOID
and convenient access to electricity to keep their devices charged, this can drastically impact how they are 
able to benefit from having mobile network coverage. However, lack of electricity does not necessarily mean The former chairman of the nonvoice 
that mobile phones cannot be used by people in those communities. Even in communities that are completely services committee at the Global System for Mobile  
off-the-grid without access to electricity, there are some people who value their phones so much that they are Communications (GSM) came up with the 160  
willing to walk significant distances and pay money to charge their phone. What this tells us is that while locally- character limit for a single text message by, among  
other things, counting the average character length  
available electricity is not absolutely required for mobile connectivity, it does play a role in how people make of postcard messages. 
use of their mobile phone.
Source: LA Times
LITERACY
Country Adult literacy rate  
Often overlooked, but equally as important in understanding the mobile landscape of any country, is literacy (% of people ages  
rate. While there are plenty of anecdotal stories about illiterate or low literate individuals using mobile phones, 15 and above)
the reality is that literacy does have an impact on the ways in which an individual can use a mobile device. The 
good news is that within Southeast Asia, basic literacy rates—defined by the World Bank as anyone “who can, Cambodia 74% (2009)
with understanding, read and write a short, simple statement on their everyday life”—tend to be fairly high, 
exceeding 90% of the adult population in most countries. Indonesia 93% (2009)
Laos 73% (2005)
Of course, all of these literacy rates are based on the individual’s native tongue. Unfortunately, in some 
countries in the region, such as Laos and Myanmar, there is often limited availability of phones that can display Malaysia 93% (2010)
their languages’ scripts. This is much less of an issue in countries that use Latin scripts or in countries with a large 
enough market to incentivize the investments required for displaying local scripts (such as Thailand). That said, Myanmar 92% (2010)
even when local scripts do exist it is not uncommon for mobile services to not support those local languages. 
For example, many of the mobile money platforms that are developed by international firms use English. In Philippines 95% (2008)
addition, not all scripts are treated equally for SMS messages. While mobile phones can send SMSs up to 160 
characters long for Latin-based scripts, that number can be as little as 70 characters for non-Latin-based scripts, Thailand 94% (2005)
such as Thai or Khmer. This, plus the fact that the average number of characters per word varies by language, 
means that the amount of information that can be included in one SMS can vary greatly by country. Vietnam 93% (2010)
Source: http://data.worldbank.org/indicator/SE.ADT.LITR.ZS
23 Integrating Mobiles into Development Projects
INTRODUCTION COMPONENT 1 COMPONENT 2 COMPONENT 3 COMPONENT 4 COMPONENT 5 CONCLUSION RESOURCES
Related to literacy, there is also the issue of digital literacy. Even when 
people are able to read languages supported by mobile phones, they may 
not have sufficient experience with mobile devices to enable them to utilize 
a particular mobile app or service. While this may seem strange to digital 
natives to whom using a mobile phone is second nature, not everyone 
has the same level of comfort with device use. Researchers, such as Susan 
Wyche at Michigan State University, have come across what they refer to as 
‘green button, red button’ users who only know how to answer and place 
calls, and not much else. And this is not just among the least educated of the 
population. Research by CA Technologies of nine Asian markets found that 
a majority of Chief Information Officers surveyed felt that “a lack of digital 
literacy amongst senior executives could be hampering business growth”, a 
figure that reached as high as 93% among Malaysian CIOs.22 Digital literacy 
can also vary among other demographical differences, such as age, urban/
rural, gender, and socioeconomic status. Understanding demographic 
differences in target countries and communities should inform how 
interventions are designed.
USER HABITS
Somewhat related to digital literacy are user habits, which can vary 
significantly by country, and can be influenced by both financial and cultural 
reasons. Knowing how people are using their phones is an important part 
of understanding the mobile landscape in a given country or community. In 
Thailand, for example, the average mobile phone user speaks on the phone 
for 322 minutes per month, compared to only 228 minutes per month in 
Malaysia.23 In this case, the difference appears to be due to culture and not 
a reflection of income or cost of usage; Malaysia has a higher per capita 
GDP than Thailand, and calling rates are around US$0.06 per minute in 
both countries. The Philippines provides an example of how user habits can 
22. http://www.ca.com/sg/news/press-releases/apac/2012/low-digital-literacy-may-hamper-business-growth.aspx
23. https://gsmaintelligence.com/files/analysis/?file=130828-scaling-mobile.pdf 
24 Integrating Mobiles into Development Projects
INTRODUCTION COMPONENT 1 COMPONENT 2 COMPONENT 3 COMPONENT 4 COMPONENT 5 CONCLUSION RESOURCES
How are mobiles being used 
in development projects in 
Southeast Asia? 
Although previous mobiles for development studies 
have tended to focus on what is happening in Africa 
and South Asia, there are a number of interesting 
applications of mobiles to development challenges 
in Southeast Asia. In October 2013, USAID, together 
© 2013 Francis Gonzales, Courtesy of Photoshare with the mSTAR project, held a contest to help 
identify promising examples in the region. After 
change quickly as the result of access to new applications and services. Once referred to as the texting  receiving a total of 16 applications, five finalists were 
capital of the world, it saw SMS usage drop from an average of 660 per month in 2010 to 400 in 2011, primarily selected based on the following criteria: design, 
due to increased use of mobile messaging and chat services.24 Unlike SMS, mobile messaging and chat services impact, creativity, and organizational capacity. 
(such as WhatsApp) are not subject to character limits. In addition, users can share multimedia content via these 
services. It is important to point out here that while sending each message may technically be free within the Each of those finalists is highlighted below. Some 
messaging or chat service, users need to have a 3G or 4G data connection to use them. Unless users have an of the examples are targeting individuals directly, 
unlimited data plan, this use of data will cost extra. while others require an intermediary (such as a 
community health worker). There is also a mix of 
More so than elsewhere, though, Southeast Asians also appear to be extremely open to using their mobile custom-built services and apps that were built for a 
phones to get online. Research by Accenture found that a portion of the region’s population expressed an specific purpose, as well as those that are off-the-shelf 
interest in doing their internet surfing exclusively on mobile devices: 65% of Indonesians, 61% of Filipinos,  services. In addition, some of them are open source, 
60% of Thais and 55% of  Vietnamese, compared to the global average of only 31%.25 while others are proprietary. 
24. http://www.phonearena.com/news/Report-SMS-messaging-on-the-decline-replaced-by-messages-sent-via-Facebook_id30124
25. http://www.accenture.com/SiteCollectionDocuments/PDF/Accenture-Surfing-ASEAN-Digital-Wave-Survey.pdf
25 Integrating Mobiles into Development Projects
INTRODUCTION COMPONENT 1 COMPONENT 2 COMPONENT 3 COMPONENT 4 COMPONENT 5 CONCLUSION RESOURCES
A more detailed list of all of the mobile services 
and apps uncovered during desk research USAIDFUNDED
conducted as part of the development of this 
handbook can be found in the M4D Inventory Individual 
Access Custom Open source Proprietary
USAID 
Funded Off-the-shelf
Intermediary 
Access
at the end of the handbook. 
NOTE: Grayed out items apply to some elements of the service.
 
 
 
SPICE IVR (Contest winner)  8villages (Runner up)  
Website: http://www.open.org.kh/spice Website: http://www.8villages.com/ 
 
Through the USAID Structuring Partnerships for an Innovative 8villages offers a rural social networking platform that allows  
Communications Environment (SPICE) program, Open Institute developed smallholder farmers and other agricultural value chain players to join  
an interactive voice response (IVR) platform for civil society organizations local crop communities and receive user-generated content, such as  
in the human rights, governance and health sectors. The IVR platform is seed offers, harvest offers, and get advice through peer questions and 
connected to all mobile network operators in Cambodia and is accessible answers. The application generates revenue through advertising, by  
to most callers in the country. An example of their services is the Election providing market analytics to the private sector, and through a “freemium” 
Hotline that contains information on how, when and where to vote; over model in which farmers receive basic functions but can opt to pay for 
600,000 calls were made to the platform in one election cycle. With the additional features. 8villages currently has 4,000 users in Indonesia with 
award received from the contest, they are planning to record 50 articles of a weekly SMS traffic of 300,000. They plan to use the award funds to 
Cambodian Land Law into Phnong, one of the country’s minority languages. strengthen their telecommunication servers in order to expand into  
Phnong speakers will be able to call into the IVR platform to listen to those the Philippines and elsewhere. 
articles upon demand, thus helping them to understand their legal rights 
related to land ownership.  
USAID
FUNDED
26 Integrating Mobiles into Development Projects
INTRODUCTION COMPONENT 1 COMPONENT 2 COMPONENT 3 COMPONENT 4 COMPONENT 5 CONCLUSION RESOURCES
USAID
FUNDED
Individual 
Access Custom Open source Proprietary
USAID 
Funded Off-the-shelf Intermediary
NOTE: Grayed out items apply to some elements of the service.
CommCare (Finalist)  Fansipan Challenge (Finalist)  A-Eye (Finalist) 
Website: http://www.commcarehq.org/home/ Website: N/A Website: https://www.facebook.com/
VanaThailand 
CommCare is an open source mobile  Fansipan Challenge is an SMS-based service  
application that was designed as a job aid  developed by USAID’s Sustainable Management A-Eye is a smartphone app developed  
for frontline health workers. Designed to  of the HIV/AIDS Response and Transition to by King Mongkut’s University of Technology  
be used on both Java-enabled phones and Technical Assistance (SMART TA) project. It uses Thonburi in Thailand. It is currently being  
smartphones, it can be used to collect data  gaming concepts to encourage people who piloted at Doi Suthep national park in northern 
and share multimedia content. All of this is inject drugs and their partners to get tested Thailand. It is both a tourist guide and a park 
linked to a cloud-based database, enabling for HIV. Peer volunteers sign up people to their management tool. It is loaded with information 
supervisors to monitor the progress of their expedition team with the goal of accumulating on sites and attractions geo-tagged on a GPS-
team in near real-time. To date it has been used 3,143 points—the height of Fansipan mountain, enabled map that tourists can use to navigate  
by 50 organizations in more than 30 countries. the tallest mountain in Vietnam—over a discrete the park. Additionally, tourists can use the app  
In Thailand, the firm that created CommCare, programming period. Teams receive points for to take photos and report incidents, such as  
Dimagi, is planning on using it with community each person reached, each person who tests for fires, damaged facilities, or other issues, which  
health workers for early detection of dengue HIV, and each HIV positive person registered can be monitored and responded to in real-time 
fever and to increase knowledge about  in HIV care. The data is also made accessible in by park staff.  
the disease.  real-time to provincial AIDS committees. During 
the trial period 68% of people participating in 
the challenge got tested, compared to 18% in 
  conventional outreach. 
 USAIDFUNDED
27 Integrating Mobiles into Development Projects
INTRODUCTION COMPONENT 1 COMPONENT 2 COMPONENT 3 COMPONENT 4 COMPONENT 5 CONCLUSION RESOURCES
2COMPONENT Understanding the Mobile  
Ecosystem
By	the	time	you	have	finished	this	component	you	will:
•	 Understand the basics of the mobile ecosystem
•	 Understand some of the roles USAID can play in the mobile ecosystem
28 Integrating Mobiles into Development Projects
© 2013 Sarah V. Harlan/JHU•CCP, Courtesy of Photoshare
INTRODUCTION COMPONENT 1 COMPONENT 2 COMPONENT 3 COMPONENT 4 COMPONENT 5 CONCLUSION RESOURCES
The mobile ecosystem is complex and multi-faceted, including different 
structural elements and building blocks. This component is designed to 
provide you with an overview of each of those different elements and their 
interrelations, so that you can better understand the broader environment 
that M4D operates within, as well identify roles that USAID can potentially 
play in supporting the mobile ecosystem.
What are the different elements  
of the mobile ecosystem? Mobile Ecosystem
For many people, mobile phones have become so commonplace that they never Policy and regulatory environment
even stop to think about all of the elements that need to be in place before the 
device in hand functions in the way they have come to expect. This is a sign of Infrastructure
success, as often people only realize the specific elements if they do not function 
effectively. In the case of the mobile ecosystem, the critical elements are the policy Hardware
and regulatory environment, infrastructure, hardware, and software. Understanding 
Software
each of these elements, how they interact with each other, and how they enable 
access to mobile services, will help you identify the weaknesses within the 
ecosystem and may present opportunities to strengthen the mobile ecosystem Content and awareness
through development activities.
Affordability
At the highest level, there is the policy and regulatory environment. Without  
an enabling policy and regulatory environment in place, mobile growth can be Ability
stifled, impacting affordability, network coverage and speed, competition, and 
freedom of expression. Myanmar is a good example of the issues that can arise Acceptability
29 Integrating Mobiles into Development Projects
INTRODUCTION COMPONENT 1 COMPONENT 2 COMPONENT 3 COMPONENT 4 COMPONENT 5 CONCLUSION RESOURCES
A NOTE ON DATA SECURITY AND PRIVACY
In many countries, the regulations related to mobile data security and privacy Operational processes must also support proper information security  
were not written with development services in mind. Mobile services for health to make sure staff are aware of how to safeguard data and that only those  
and governance, in particular, may be used to collect sensitive personal data. If who need information have access to it. The method of sending and receiving 
this is the case, it is important to ask how the service provider or implementing information should also be taken into account. It is possible for information  
partner is protecting that data. Do the government or other third party actors that is sent by the internet or over mobile networks to be intercepted. Internet 
haveaccess to the data without receiving prior and explicit approval from the or telecommunication companies may also keep records of text messages or 
individual? Who owns the data? Where is the data stored? While organizations other data sent over their networks. Mobile services should therefore take  
may already have privacy policies for their data, it is important that they are into account potential vulnerabilities and employ security measures appropriate 
updated to include the specific sensitivities that may arise from transmitting  for the sensitivity of the data being collected.
that data via mobile phone.
without a strong enabling environment. Over the past couple of years, regulators countries over the past ten years have resulted in the rapid expansion of voice, 
in Myanmar have sought to liberalize the telecommunications industry, which was messaging, internet, and mobile payments, and transformed the lives of a large 
historically controlled entirely by a government-owned provider.  This has resulted portion of African citizens.27 
in an extremely low mobile penetration rate, exceeding only that of North 
Korea. In June 2013, the Government of Myanmar announced that they would be However, even countries with a more developed mobile policy and regulatory 
providing mobile network licenses to two foreign operators, Telenor and Ooredoo, environment are not immune from challenges. In Thailand, the issuance of 3G 
and one other local operator.26  The government’s aggressive goals of expanding licenses, which allow MNOs to provide high-speed internet to mobile devices, was 
access to 50% of the population by 2015 will only be accomplished if regulations delayed for 7 years due to a legal dispute in which the state telecommunications 
are put in place that encourage private companies to make the large infrastructure firm challenged the authority of the National Telecommunications Commission 
investments that are necessary, including the need for at least 15,000 network to sell licenses. The issue was only resolved with the creation of a new regulatory 
towers, which will cost an estimated US$4 million. For Myanmar’s population to body. As a result, mobile users in Thailand started receiving 3G access in 2013, 
realize the same benefits that the mobile revolution has brought to Africa, for making the country the second to last in the region (behind Myanmar) to open  
example, the government will have to create a transparent and flexible enabling up 3G.28
environment for the telecommunications sector. Similar reforms in most African 
26.  Unfortunately, the issuance of these licenses was put on hold until a new Telecommunications Law could be passed to clarify the regulatory environment. While this law 
was passed on October 12th, 2013 it apparently provides only a framework, and may not be sufficient to release the licenses.  
27.  “Myanmar: The next Asian telecommunication greenfield?” Deloitte, 2013. Access: http://www.deloitte.com/assets/Dcom-Guam/Local%20Assets/Documents/
Technology,%20Media%20and%20Telecommunications/TMT%20Myanmar.pdf 
28. http://siliconangle.com/blog/2012/10/18/thailand-sells-off-3g-licenses-at-last-but-implementation-could-still-be-years-off/
30 Integrating Mobiles into Development Projects
INTRODUCTION COMPONENT 1 COMPONENT 2 COMPONENT 3 COMPONENT 4 COMPONENT 5 CONCLUSION RESOURCES
A good example of how USAID has supported infrastructure 
development in this space is the Global Broadband and Innovations 
(GBI) program, which is helping to extend the reach of enhanced  
mobile networks into remote rural areas. 
access to electricity, people tend to use their phones less or even keep them off 
except when they want to place an outgoing call to conserve battery life.
Another somewhat more recent development related to infrastructure 
development is the movement in some countries to repurpose unused television 
spectrum, known as TV white space (TVWS), for other communications purposes. 
The availability of TVWS tends to be higher in countries that have already made 
After policy and regulatory environment, the next piece of the mobile ecosystem the switch from analog television signals to digital television. This white space can 
is infrastructure. Mobile network operators (MNOs) need to build cell towers be repurposed into WiFi networks that can provide mobile broadband access 
in the areas they want to provide service, along with all of the back-end systems without the need for 3G or 4G networks. In countries where mobile data demand 
needed to support the network of cell towers. In addition, they need to build out is already quite high, such as the US, MNOs are using TVWS to offload some of 
their agent and distribution networks so that people are able to buy their SIM their mobile data traffic onto the TVWS spectrum at a significantly lower cost than 
cards and airtime top up. This is particularly important in developing countries, it would be to further build out their 3G/4G mobile networks. One example of 
including in Southeast Asia, where more than 90% of mobile phone users are pre- how this is being used is in the Philippines, where USAID’s Ecosystems Improved 
paid customers, who purchase airtime in small amounts from an airtime distributor for Sustainable Fisheries (ECOFISH) Project is using TVWS to connect remote 
(the alternative is post-paid, through which customers sign a contract and then pay fishing communities to the internet (see more on this project in the USAID 
a pre-determined fee each month for a set amount of time available for voice and Projects table towards the end of of the handbook).
internet at no extra cost).
After infrastructure, hardware (or mobile devices) is the next element of the 
There is also infrastructure that MNOs are not responsible for, but rely on to mobile ecosystem. Without access to mobile devices, it does not matter if the 
provide mobile services. For example, no one can use a mobile phone without policy and regulatory environment is strong and infrastructure is well developed. 
access to electricity. Although off-the-grid charging services exist, they generally Thankfully, due to a global glut of mobile devices, the number of people with 
have low penetration (in the case of solar) and/or are expensive to the end user access to mobile devices is growing at a rapid pace—although disparities continue 
(in the case of diesel-powered generators). Without convenient and affordable to exist in terms of device type. There is a significant difference between the cost 
31 Integrating Mobiles into Development Projects
INTRODUCTION COMPONENT 1 COMPONENT 2 COMPONENT 3 COMPONENT 4 COMPONENT 5 CONCLUSION RESOURCES
operating system of the phone, the overarching 
software environment within which other software 
operates. Frameworks are software tools that 
are built with the intention of enabling multiple 
uses and customization. An example is the Mobile 
Technology for Community Health (MOTECH) 
system, which brings together a suite of mHealth 
applications. Finally, applications (apps) are the 
smallest unit and are individual programs that are 
designed for a specific purpose. These can either be 
built off of an existing framework or designed from 
scratch (see M4D Inventory for a list of mobile 
apps used for development in Southeast Asia). 
In addition to these elements, there are additional 
factors that impact an individual’s access to and 
ability to benefit from mobiles. These include things 
such as content and awareness, affordability, ability, 
© 2011 Hansa Tangmanpoowadol, Courtesy of Photoshare and acceptability. Content and awareness includes 
factors such as whether the individual knows what 
and functionality of a 10-year old basic phone that has been resold many times, and a brand new smartphone. mobile phones can do, what content or services 
The $20 smartphone is just around the corner, though, and smartphone sales should continue to eclipse sales of exists, and what value those content or services can 
feature phones moving forward.29  SIM card access has also been a constraint in some places in the past, although have on their lives. Affordability includes both the 
this is becoming much less of an issue in most countries, including in SE Asia. This is particularly the case after cost of the device and access to a specific mobile 
Myanmar, the most restrictive market, recently reduced SIM card prices to a more consumer friendly amount; service, which may require standard usage fees, 
although, at around US$2 each they are still expensive for many locals. service fees, and costs associated with charging the 
device. The issue of ability captures an individual’s 
The final element of the mobile ecosystem is the software used on the device itself. In their recent report on skills and capacity to use a mobile phone and 
Scaling Mobile for Development, the GSMA Mobile for Development Intelligence unit suggested further sub- specific mobile service, due to a wide range of 
dividing this element into three different parts for clarity: platform, framework, and application. The platform is the factors including language literacy, numeracy, and 
29. http://qz.com/163621/in-2014-the-next-billion-will-access-the-mobile-internet-at-20-a-handset/
32 Integrating Mobiles into Development Projects
INTRODUCTION COMPONENT 1 COMPONENT 2 COMPONENT 3 COMPONENT 4 COMPONENT 5 CONCLUSION RESOURCES
digital literacy, as well as the capability to physically use the device (i.e. adequate What are the building blocks of mobile services?
eyesight). Finally, acceptability deals with the social or cultural norms that may 
impact access to mobile devices or services (for example, some cultures may not The design and successful deployment of any mobile service requires a number 
find it acceptable for a woman to own her own mobile phone), and whether or of building blocks, including mobile service quality, sustainability of the business 
not individuals have trust and confidence in the data security and privacy of the model, partnerships, and promotion. As we expect that the primary readers of 
mobile networks or services. this handbook will be funding, rather than directly developing, mobile services, we 
will not go into too much technical detail on each building block. Rather, we intend 
for this section to provide you with a high-level overview so that you are able to 
recognize whether implementing partners are using mobile services built on a  
solid foundation. The degree to which each of these building blocks exist will play  
Building Blocks for Mobile Services a direct role in the long-term sustainability of the mobile service beyond USAID  
or other donor funding.
Mobile Service One of the foundational building blocks is the quality of the technology  
Quality
(Functionality and usability) behind the mobile service, which can be further broken down into functionality 
and usability. By functionality we are referring to how well the mobile service 
functions within the context for which it was developed (i.e. that it functions in a 
rural environment on basic mobile phones, if that is the objective of the service). 
As such, a mobile service should always be tested in the type of environment(s) 
and context(s) in which it is intended to be used. This is particularly important 
Business since sometimes the technology is working exactly how it was designed, but the 
Model Partnerships organization, field staff, or clients are using it in a way inconsistent with its design. 
Sustainability
Here are a couple of examples to illustrate the point; the first related to software, 
the second to hardware. Let’s say that an organization needs a data collection 
application that can work both when it is connected to the mobile network 
Promotion and when it is offline. Testing it from their office in a city, it might appear to work 
perfectly. It is only when they deploy it to an area with relatively low mobile phone 
coverage that they realize the application sometimes fails to transmit data once it 
is back on the network. This leads to data not being aggregated on the time frame 
they expected, or worse, being lost when staff clear out their record history before 
the data has been transmitted. 
33 Integrating Mobiles into Development Projects
INTRODUCTION COMPONENT 1 COMPONENT 2 COMPONENT 3 COMPONENT 4 COMPONENT 5 CONCLUSION RESOURCES
In the second example, an organization purchases phones for their staff to use functional in English. The list goes on. The next component talks more about  
for mobile data collection, but because of limited local availability they decide to user-centered design, why this is important, and how it can be done to help 
buy them in the US. They end up purchasing CDMA phones (see text box) and mitigate these usability issues.
shipping them to the country where the project is being implemented. When the 
phones arrived in country, no one can understand why they would not work until A common mistake that is made in assessing mobile services is to stop at the 
someone finally figures out that it is because in that country there are no MNOs technology. If the technology functions and is usable, then surely that is all one 
that use CDMA. In this case, the phones work completely fine, functionally. The needs to know, right? Unfortunately, that misses an extremely important set of 
issue is that the user did not pick the correct technology for the context. building blocks: those built around the business model of the provider. Quality 
technology is a necessary but insufficient element of success. Without a clear and 
Along with functionality, the other major aspect of technology quality is its usability. relevant business model, the chances of long-term success go down significantly. 
If functionality is how the technology operates, then usability is what the user’s History is littered with examples of superior technologies that failed because of 
experience is with that technology. It is not uncommon to think that once a poorly designed business models. 
technology has been fully tested and functions as it is intended to operate that it 
is then ready for deployment. What if the intended audience is not equipped to Business models refer to how the mobile service is sustained, which 
use the technology, though? Maybe they are mostly illiterate, but they are being includes factors such as: 
sent information by SMS. Or they mostly own basic phones, and the implementer 
is pushing their service via a Java app for feature phones. Or maybe they need •	 Who pays for the service? Donor/sponsor, institutions, individuals, combination
to navigate an IVR menu system, and it is structured in a way that is not intuitive 
to most users. Or the service is in English, and the target audience is not fully •	 How is the pricing strategy structured? Fee per use/session, subscription, 
embedded value added service, freemium model with tiered packages/pricing
CDMA vs. GSM
 •	 What forms of payment can be used? Airtime, cash, purchase other forms  
 of credits
CDMA and GSM are two different radio systems used in mobile phones. GSM 
is by far the most common type of radio system used by MNOs in Southeast •	 How do users pay for access/use? Direct from phone, online, through  
Asia, accounting for over 97% of connections in the region and about 80%  retailer/agent network
globally. Phones are not interoperable, so GSM phones will not work on CDMA 
networks and vice versa.
34 Integrating Mobiles into Development Projects
INTRODUCTION COMPONENT 1 COMPONENT 2 COMPONENT 3 COMPONENT 4 COMPONENT 5 CONCLUSION RESOURCES
Additionally, if payment for end users is initially Type of partner Potential roles
subsidized through a development activity, there 
must also be a transition plan—which includes Mobile service provider •	 Design and maintain the mobile service
attention to each of the above factors—for Mobile network operator •	 Provide reduced price access to mobile short code numbers and airtime 
(MNO)
when subsidization ends.  •	  Responsible for building out mobile networks, and in some cases maintain  
the mobile service themselves
A strong business model is important not only Implementing partners •	 H ire a technology company to design a mobile service, or pay for access  
for helping to determine whether the provider to a service already developed
is able to cover its costs in delivering a quality 
•	  Provide technical assistance, training, and promotional support to the  
product, but also to generate additional revenue mobile service provider to improve user access and usage 
that can be invested into future research and 
development of new or improved products. •	 H elp to create high quality and relevant content utilized within the  
mobile service
However, it is important to keep in mind that 
fully operationalizing a sustainable business Local government  O ften responsible for setting policy or providing guidance that impacts the 
model may take longer than the typical ministries or agencies environment in which the mobile service can operate. Some examples and their  
relevant responsibilities include:
development project period of performance.  
•	 I CT strategy, infrastructure investments, Universal Service Funds, telco regulations, 
Partnerships are another building block for  data security [Ministry of Communication]
the successful development and deployment •	  Health information systems, patient data, health monitoring systems  
of a mobile service and in some cases can be [Ministry of Health]
very important in helping to operationalize a •	  Electronic and mobile payments, Anti-Money Laundering and Combating  
business model. The table provides an example the Financing of Terrorism (AML/CFT) [Ministry of Finance]
of some of likely partners and their typical roles 
•	 M arket information systems, agricultural extension, weather monitoring, inventory 
in the implementation of a mobile service, such management [Ministry of Agriculture]
as high quality content creation, building mobile 
networks, or addressing telecommunications Donors and US  •	 Provide funding for development projects and their use of mobile services
interagency partners
regulations. •	 Share lessons from their experiences in M4D
•	  Coordinate with each other to reduce duplication of services and facilitate scale
Check out the GSMA mWomen’s •	 Facilitate conversations with regulators and MNOs
Mutual Value, Mutual Gain report  
for best practices in partnering  Other stakeholders  Their role can vary depending on the mobile service and its focus.
with mobile network operators. (industry associations,  financial institutions, etc.)
35 Integrating Mobiles into Development Projects
INTRODUCTION COMPONENT 1 COMPONENT 2 COMPONENT 3 COMPONENT 4 COMPONENT 5 CONCLUSION RESOURCES
SMS messaging and training (below-the-line or 
BTL marketing). Promotional partnerships in the 
development space are often particularly important 
for this BTL marketing. For example, a firm that has 
developed a mobile service for reporting government 
service outages may want to partner with civil society 
organizations to help build awareness among citizens 
because the firm itself lacks those direct linkages or 
credibility. Training is also an important element of 
promotion, particularly with any products that are 
completely new to the market, as target users may 
not understand fully how it works even if they are 
interested in using the service.
What role can USAID play to 
help strengthen the ecosystem?
USAID has a long history of playing a positive  
© 2008 Louie Anthony E. Tampus, Courtesy of Photoshare role in helping to strengthen ecosystems relevant to 
specific development sectors in the countries where 
The forthcoming ICT4D guidance being developed by USAID includes more detail on each of these potential it works. Examples of how USAID has helped to 
stakeholders, as well as suggested questions that you can ask each of them during initial consultation and strengthen the mobile ecosystem include the Scaling 
development of the results framework. These questions are included in the Resources section of the handbook. Innovations in Mobile Money (SIMM) Project in 
the Philippines and the Mobile Money Accelerator 
Promotion, which consists of outreach and engagement, is the final building block. The chances of a mobile Program (MMAP) in Malawi. Both of these projects 
service going viral by word of mouth promotion cannot be assumed, and should never be the backbone of an focused on strengthening the mobile ecosystem as 
effective promotional strategy. The mobile service provider, often times in partnership with the implementing they relate to digital finance, which helped to lay the 
partner, needs to develop a well thought out approach to promotion, which may include traditional advertising, foundation upon which development actors, including 
grassroots awareness raising, trainings, and promotional partnerships. While providers, especially MNOs, are other USAID projects, could take advantage of  
often great at mass marketing such as television ads and billboards (often referred to as above-the-line or (see USAID Projects table for more information  
ATL marketing), many mobile services benefit greatly from marketing such as more personalized and direct on these projects).
36 Integrating Mobiles into Development Projects
INTRODUCTION COMPONENT 1 COMPONENT 2 COMPONENT 3 COMPONENT 4 COMPONENT 5 CONCLUSION RESOURCES
Examples of the facilitative role that USAID and 
partners can play at the macro-level to strengthen 
the mobile ecosystem include:
•	 Supporting and encouraging interoperability between 
existing mobile services, such as the adoption of APIs 
(Application Program Interfaces) that allow services  
to communicate with each other.
•	 Interfacing with regulators to advocate on behalf  There are also existing initiatives supported by USAID that you may be able to tap into  
of regulatory change where appropriate. for support in improving the mobile ecosystem, such as:
•	 Supporting the adoption of open standards between •	 USAID’s partnership with Australian Aid, GSMA and Visa on the GSMA mWomen Program, 
USAID and local government agencies. which has the goal of enabling 150 million underserved women to own and effectively use mobile 
phones in order to increase their access to vital information, networks, and services to improve their 
•	 Negotiating with MNOs on issues such as short  families’ quality of life. The alliance helps to build the business case for mobile products and services 
code access and pricing. In India, for example, the Gates that meet the needs of women. Stakeholders can use the research and tools created by the mWomen 
Foundation was able to coordinate with three of the program, join the mWomen working group, and/or apply for one of the program’s innovation grants 
main MNOs to get them to agree to use the same that provide seed funding for the design and launch of economically sustainable products/services that 
short code and price structure for a maternal and child increase women’s access to and use of mobile phones and value-added services.
health IVR service operated by BBC Media Action.
•	 USAID’s partnership with Google.org, Omidyar Network, DFID, and 30+ other 
•	 Supporting MNOs to translate mobile phone menus governments, technology providers, civil society groups, and academia is empowering policy 
into local languages. makers with the tools and resources to facilitate more open, competitive markets. This partnership, 
the Alliance for Affordable Internet, aims to bring broadband prices down to no more than 5% of 
What is possible will vary between countries and regions monthly income, enabling the next two billion users to come online. A4AI has produced an outline of 
and will depend on USAID’s existing role and relationships, policy and regulatory best practices, including allowing innovative allocation of spectrum, promoting 
among other things. infrastructure sharing, and increasing transparency and public participation in regulatory decisions. 
Additionally, the Alliance will be developing in-country networks to serve as learning and advocacy 
networks on policies to bring prices within reach—providing a source of potential partners for USAID. 
If you want to go a bit more in the weeds  This Global Development Alliance (GDA) is structured to allow Missions to buy-in to commission 
on APIs watch this webinar on HowTo.gov. research or access technical assistance regarding affordable mobile access.
37 Integrating Mobiles into Development Projects
INTRODUCTION COMPONENT 1 COMPONENT 2 COMPONENT 3 COMPONENT 4 COMPONENT 5 CONCLUSION RESOURCES
IMPLEMENT
38 Integrating Mobiles into Development Projects
INTRODUCTION COMPONENT 1 COMPONENT 2 COMPONENT 3 COMPONENT 4 COMPONENT 5 CONCLUSION RESOURCES
3COMPONENT Project  Design
By	the	time	you	have	finished	this	component	you	will:
•	 Be able to determine if mobiles are appropriate to help advance  
the development objective you are trying to achieve
•	 Be able to integrate mobiles into your project design using  
a six-step process
39 Integrating Mobiles into Development Projects
INTRODUCTION COMPONENT 1 COMPONENT 2 COMPONENT 3 COMPONENT 4 COMPONENT 5 CONCLUSION RESOURCES
You may have an intuitive sense of whether mobiles would be useful to integrate into a project. If 
people are already using mobile devices in their everyday lives, then there may be opportunities to 
leverage those same mobile devices as a tool to help achieve development objectives. Of course, 
it is not quite that simple, as intuitions are not based on complete information. This component 
will help you understand what information to gather to make informed decisions about the role 
that mobiles could play within a project. This will inform how you shape the project design and 
solicitation to which prospective implementing partners respond. 
Critical groundwork for assessing whether mobiles  
may facilitate achieving the program goal should 
include consideration of the elements described  
in Component 2, and mapping the technology 
landscape of the country or region the project is 
working in. You should pay particular attention to 
sector and context-specific considerations, as well  
as consideration of the potential costs and benefits  
of using mobile services instead of other means. 
Based on this information, you can begin to think  
about what an integrated approach that includes 
mobile devices and services might conceivably look 
like. This assessment is not meant to pre-determine 
the final approach that the selected implementing 
partner will use, but will help you to more accurately 
evaluate the integration of technology into any 
proposals you received during the procurement 
phase, and if you are developing a contract, may lead 
to inclusion of particular tasks in a scope of work.
40 Integrating Mobiles into Development Projects
INTRODUCTION COMPONENT 1 COMPONENT 2 COMPONENT 3 COMPONENT 4 COMPONENT 5 CONCLUSION RESOURCES
Where do you begin with Project Element Mobile Element
incorporating mobiles into  
your project design?
Market Research –  •	 M arket research team used tablets to conduct the 
These days, many people are talking about integrated Determine farmer needs survey. Survey results were submitted in real time.
approaches, and for good reason, given the complexity 
of most development issues. Integration is also explicitly 
mentioned as one of USAID’s Operational Principles in 
the Project Design Guidance. The value of integration also Farm Calendar –  •	 E xtension workers used the Farm Force application 
extends to mobiles. Rather than seeing mobiles as capable Track individual farmer crop life cycle to collect data on individual farmers to create a 
of solving complex development issues on its own or as calendar and high level business model.
a project add-on, it is worth thinking about how mobile 
services can be incorporated at a foundational level into 
a development program, so that they integrate with and 
reinforce other implementation activities. Seed Voucher –  •	 M NO used mobile money platform to issue mobile 
Provide rice grower seed/fertilizer  vouchers to farmers. Farm stores used mobile 
voucher  money platform to redeem vouchers.
The table to the right provides some illustrative  (subsidy, not free)
examples of how mobiles can be used in a variety  
of different ways to reinforce a development activity,  
in this case an agriculture project. 
Extension Services –  •	 E xtension workers are supported by SMS messages 
As with any other project design, you should start by Ensure that proper protocols  to specific farmers at specific points in their crop life are being followed cycle.
determining the project goal and project requirements. 
USAID already has very thorough Project Design Guidance, 
which divides this process into three stages: the conceptual 
stage (resulting in a concept paper), the analytical stage Payment –  •	  Rice buyer pays lead farmer/collector using bank 
(resulting in a Project Appraisal Document), and the approval Farmers are paid net proceeds  transfer or mobile money. Lead farmer/collector pays in a timely manner farmers via mobile money.
stage (resulting in a Project Authorization). This component 
includes suggestions and tools that will help you collect all of 
the relevant information and complete the requisite analysis 
related to incorporating mobiles into the project.
41 Integrating Mobiles into Development Projects
INTRODUCTION COMPONENT 1 COMPONENT 2 COMPONENT 3 COMPONENT 4 COMPONENT 5 CONCLUSION RESOURCES
THE SIX-STEP PROCESS: 
Incorporating Mobiles
Step 1: Identify potential roles for mobiles
Step 2: Determine Step 3: Collect 
What process should you use requirements landscape data
for incorporating mobiles into 
project design? 
Step 4: Decide if use of 
mobiles in the project is 
Although this handbook calls them steps and places feasible and appropriate  
them in numeric order, it is not a fully linear process. 
Further, they are not always required. If mobiles are 
going to play a large role in the project, then you 
might want to go through each step in more detail. 
If, on the other hand, you want to get a sense of Step 5:  Validate assumptions 
whether mobiles could play a very discrete role,  & preliminary findings 
this can be done much more quickly.  The handbook 
notes which steps (and sub-steps) are encouraged 
and optional, as well as estimated timeframes for  
how long each step will take as a guide. Step 6: Integrate 
into Concept Paper
We encourage you to use the Mobiles for
Development Checklist in the Resources section 
to guide you through this process. 
42 Integrating Mobiles into Development Projects
INTRODUCTION COMPONENT 1 COMPONENT 2 COMPONENT 3 COMPONENT 4 COMPONENT 5 CONCLUSION RESOURCES
THE SIX-STEP PROCESS INCORPORATING MOBILES 
STEP 1: Identify potential roles for mobiles to reinforce project goals [Highly Encouraged]
Estimated time to complete: 45-60 minutes
You should begin by identifying project goals and brainstorming if and how mobile technology might reinforce them. Where possible, engage your Science & Technology 
Advisor (if you have one) or colleagues that are already using mobile technology in this brainstorming session, regardless of whether their experience is in a different 
sector. Do not try to force mobiles into the project. Rather, work backwards from what you are trying to achieve to determine if mobiles might have a role in helping 
to achieve those outcomes. 
43 Integrating Mobiles into Development Projects
INTRODUCTION COMPONENT 1 COMPONENT 2 COMPONENT 3 COMPONENT 4 COMPONENT 5 CONCLUSION RESOURCES
STEP 2: Determine requirements for using 
mobiles [Encouraged] How are you  Requisite functions Minimum delivery Minimum device  
thinking about  model requirements requirements
Estimated time to complete: 20-45 minutes using mobile?
Information sharing Push (for one-way)  BASIC: SMS, voice BASIC: Basic phone
Once you have some ideas about how mobiles Pull (for two-way) INTERMEDIATE: IVR INTERMEDIATE: basic phone
might be able to enhance the project you are Data collection Push, Pull, Storage BASIC: SMS, voice BASIC: basic phone
designing, you should determine the requirements, ADVANCED: App ADVANCED: feature phone, 
smartphone, tablet
for instance regarding delivery mechanism and 
device type, to use mobiles in the way you are Payments Transaction BASIC: USSD, SMS BASIC: Basic phone
thinking. The table lists a number of different Facilitating networks Push and Pull BASIC: SMS, voice BASIC: basic phone 
potential uses of mobiles within development (i.e. trade) INTERMEDIATE: IVR INTERMEDIATE: basic phone
ADVANCED: App ADVANCED: feature phone, 
projects, along with the requisite functions smartphone, tablet
and minimum delivery model and device 
requirements, as well as some additional features Community building Push and Pull, and/or BASIC: SMS, voice BASIC: basic phoneInteractive INTERMEDIATE: IVR INTERMEDIATE: basic phone
you may need. It is meant to serve as a starting ADVANCED: App, web,  ADVANCED: smartphone, 
point, and should not be taken as the entirety and/or messaging tablet
of how mobiles can be used. Together with the Supply chain Push, Pull, Storage BASIC: SMS BASIC: basic phone
landscape data that you collect (Step 3), this management (health, INTERMEDIATE: IVR INTERMEDIATE: basic phone
information will help you to determine whether agriculture, etc.) ADVANCED: App, web ADVANCED: feature phone, 
the possible uses of mobile technology that you smartphone, tablet
identified in Step 1 could be effectively deployed Other
in your current context. What other additional features do you need? Minimum delivery Minimum device  
model requirements requirements
Geo-location GPS Some feature phones, all 
smartphones and tablets
Photo sharing MMS, web Some feature phones, all 
smartphones and tablets
Video sharing App, web Smartphone, tablet
44 Integrating Mobiles into Development Projects
INTRODUCTION COMPONENT 1 COMPONENT 2 COMPONENT 3 COMPONENT 4 COMPONENT 5 CONCLUSION RESOURCES
STEP 3: Collect data to understand the landscape [Encouraged] MACRO-LEVEL
Estimated time to complete: See sub-steps for specific times 1. Technology Access [Highly Encouraged] 
Estimated time to complete: 1-2 hours
As previously stated, technology—including mobile phones—has the potential to enable development Determining what mobile access looks like on 
projects to reduce costs, improve efficiencies, and/or accelerate outcomes. Realization of this potential, aggregate in the country that you are working 
however, depends on a number of factors, and should be informed by a high-level mapping of the in can be a helpful place to start with your 
technology landscape in the area where you are planning to work. This does not need to be extremely technology landscape. There are many public 
detailed, but should include enough information to help you to determine how technology may help you  sources of information that can help you, such 
achieve your project goals within your specific development context. It should also be used to help you  as those listed in the table on the following 
to understand the limits of the existing mobile infrastructure, and what, if any, macro-level action USAID page. While this information will not tell you 
can encourage or facilitate. exactly how mobile phones are being used in 
the communities you are targeting, it will give 
Ideally, you should be asking the following questions: you a sense of what access is like on a whole. 
You will also likely find some of this information 
MACRO-LEVEL MICRO-LEVEL helpful for inclusion in your project description. 
Wherever possible, this data should be 
•	 What does access to technology currently look  4. What access do your targeted beneficiaries  disaggregated by gender and age. 
like in the targeted area? have to mobile phones and other ICTs, and 
 how are they currently using them?
•	 What policies or regulations exist that may  While not all of the macro-level data is 
affect the use of mobile phones by your targeted available in the same place, the following table 
beneficiaries? includes a list of many of the types of data sets 
and where you can find them.
•	 How are mobile services already being used in 
 development projects in the area, country, and/or 
region? What local technical capacity for developing and You will notice that the last section of the table 
deploying mobile services already exists in the country? lists other types of ICTs. It is important to think 
about access to these other technologies as 
More details related to how you answer each of these four questions are outlined in the following pages. well, since they can often be complementary 
45 Integrating Mobiles into Development Projects
INTRODUCTION COMPONENT 1 COMPONENT 2 COMPONENT 3 COMPONENT 4 COMPONENT 5 CONCLUSION RESOURCES
STEP 3: Collect data to understand the landscape [Encouraged] (Continued)
MACRO-LEVEL (Continued)
Type Source to mobiles or even more effective, depending on find out which government agency is responsible  
General your context and what you are trying to achieve.  for developing and implementing policies and 
Population World Bank You can use the ICT Option Selection Worksheet regulations related to telecommunications and 
Adult literacy World Bank in the Resources section to help you compare the broadband (and financial services in the case  
Mobile phone access
pros and cons of different services. This worksheet of mobile money). For some countries, this may 
SIM penetration GSMA Intelligence30 
Growth (past year) GSMA Intelligence includes a number of different ICT options by be more than one agency, which can further 
Percentage of 3G access GSMA Intelligence default, although you can modify it to suit your confuse matters. A list of most of the world’s 
Growth (past year) GSMA Intelligence needs. In many cases you may find that more than telecommunications regulators with links  
Number of MNOs GSMA Intelligence one option is potentially appropriate. It is fine if that to their websites can be found on Wikipedia.32 
Network coverage GSMA Mobile for is the case, because, to reiterate, the purpose of 
Development Intelligence31 this exercise is simply to give you a rough sense  Next, you can begin to look into some of the 
Mobile services GSMA Mobile for of what is possible. contextual issues that may impact the feasibility  
inventory Development Intelligence
Mobile financial service access (if applicable) of using mobiles in your target area for your  
% of all adults using World Bank Global Findex 2. Policy and Regulatory Environment purpose of interest. The questions below are  
mobile money to pay [Optional] meant to serve as a guide which you should  
bills in the past year tailor according to your own needs and context. 
% of adults using mobile World Bank Global Findex Estimated time to complete: 1-2 days
phones to receive 
money in the past year Understanding the relevant policy and regulatory 
•	 Regulatory permissiveness: What regulations  
exist that may encourage or inhibit the use of mobile 
% of adults using mobile World Bank Global Findex environment of the country you are targeting can devices within your project? For example, if you are 
phones to send money be extremely important, particularly for mobile 
in the past year interested in using mobile payments, does the country’s 
financial services. Finding all of this information, 
Access to other ICTs Central Bank allow the use of mobile payments? If so, what 
Radio ITU Core Indicators however, can sometimes take a bit more research restrictions or limitations exist (i.e. daily transaction limits)? 
ITU Core Indicators than the information you compiled in the table What regulations exist for the protection of personally Television
Fixed line telephone ITU Core Indicators above. In some countries this information is more 
identifiable information? Are there policies that require 
technologies to be accessible by persons with disabilities? 
Computer ITU Core Indicators readily available or has been more frequently 
Broadband access  ITU Core Indicators written about than elsewhere. The first step is to 
(fixed line and mobile)
30.  While most of the data available on this site requires a fairly expensive subscription, these data points are all available publicly through the site. USAID has an arrangement with GSMA to provide full access to USAID staff, so if you sign up for an account using your 
USAID.gov email address, you will be able to receive full access to even more granular data sets.
31. G SMA’s Mobile for Development Intelligence site has 2G, 3G, and 4G network coverage maps for dozens of mobile network operators from across the globe. While not completely exhaustive, it is a great place to start to get a sense of network coverage in a 
country. Unfortunately, you can only view one operator’s map at a time.
32. http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/List_of_telecommunications_regulatory_bodies
46 Integrating Mobiles into Development Projects
INTRODUCTION COMPONENT 1 COMPONENT 2 COMPONENT 3 COMPONENT 4 COMPONENT 5 CONCLUSION RESOURCES
STEP 3: Collect data to understand the landscape [Encouraged] (Continued)
MACRO-LEVEL (Continued)
•	 Competition: What is the competitive landscape 3. Relevant Mobile Services  Additionally, this survey information can  
like among MNOs? Is there a state-owned monopoly, and Local Technical Capacity  help you identify potential areas of integration 
one very clear market leader, or intense competition [Encouraged, but Optional] 
between several operators? These can all impact the with other projects or other communication 
degree to which it is possible—or the amount of Estimated time to complete: 2-6 hours technologies, such as integrating SMS feedback  
facilitative work necessary—to incorporate mobiles into an educational radio show.
in an inclusive manner. For example, if there are four Once you have pulled together the high-level 
operators with significant market share, can you get information mentioned above, you can then begin There are a number of different  
each of them to agree to provide access to services  digging deeper into issues of what types of mobile ways to figure out how mobile services 
at the same rate?
services already exist in your country, region, or are currently being used in development 
•	 Mobile network capacity: Are there regulations neighboring countries with similar requirements.  projects in the country you are working 
in place that are inhibiting or supporting the  or in countries with similar contexts. 
development of mobile network capacity? How broadly you conduct this exercise  Unfortunately, there is no one place  
depends on your time and the relevance of  to find all of this information for any  
•	 Standards and Systems: Does the country  
or region you are targeting have any standards related other countries to your context. At a minimum, given country. As complicated as that  
to mobile data formats? Are there any existing data you should look at what is happening in your may sound, there are some places that 
systems (such as central health databases) that any country, and if you do not find anything relevant, providean understanding of what is  
mobile service would need to be able to integrate with? cast a deeper net to neighboring countries.  already being done:
This survey will help you understand how well 
Interpreting what impact the policy and regulatory mobile services have worked in similar sectors  •	 Ask others: Mission colleagues, implementing 
environment will have or how mobiles have the and with similar beneficiary profiles, and can  partners, and other donors can tell you  
potential to accelerate development outcomes for help you to determine if using mobiles in that what mobile services they are using. The Digital 
a particular development objective is not always way is appropriate for your project. That said, Development team in USAID’s Global Development 
Lab can also provide technical support to Missions 
apparent. Given the complexity of these issues, you you should consider whether something may on the use of mobile technology in support of 
may need to consult with colleagues at USAID have failed because of the technology potential development goals and in many cases will be able  
with a better understanding of the intricacies or because of an implementation issue, such as to provide information on how USAID is currently  
associated with policies and regulations in the irrelevant content or poor design. using mobile technology. 
context of mobiles.
47 Integrating Mobiles into Development Projects
INTRODUCTION COMPONENT 1 COMPONENT 2 COMPONENT 3 COMPONENT 4 COMPONENT 5 CONCLUSION RESOURCES
STEP 3: Collect data to understand the landscape [Encouraged] (Continued)
MACRO-LEVEL (Continued)
•	 Search the Mobile for Development Intelligence to develop or adapt a mobile service you should 
product & services page to explore what mobile also collect information on the local technical 
services have been reported to the site. capacity in the country you are working in. This 
•	 Refer to the end of this handbook for an inventory can play a role in the feasibility of replicating or 
of mobile services being used in development within adapting mobile services from elsewhere (either 
Southeast Asia. within your country or elsewhere) and on the 
•	 Find out specifically what mobile financial services  ultimate cost, particularly if the implementing 
exist in the country you are working with by visiting partner will need to recruit from outside of  
GSMA’s Mobile Money for the Unbanked Deployment the country. 
Tracker. (Note, however, that these figures are self-
reported and not always independently verified so it As you talk to colleagues about the local 
should serve as a preliminary benchmark only, and will mobile technology landscape, you should  
still need to be validated through in-country sources, 
such as the country’s Central Bank.) also consider questions along the lines of  
the following:
•	 Learn about which mobile data collection services 
might be appropriate to your context through •	 How developed is the local  
NOMAD’s helpful Online Selection Tool, which  developer/programmer community? 
includes 24 different mobile data services.
•	 Are there formal innovation hubs (iHubs)  
As you start to compile this information, we or technology incubators? 
recommend you put it in the Current Mobile •	 What is the availability and quality of  
Services Template found in the Resources section technical courses at local universities? 
to help you keep track of everything. As you talk 
to other people about existing mobile services, •	 Are there local technology service providers  
be sure to also ask questions about what impacts and consultancies?
those mobile services actually are having. 
In addition to gathering data on what mobile 
services exist, if you think it may be necessary  
48 Integrating Mobiles into Development Projects
INTRODUCTION COMPONENT 1 COMPONENT 2 COMPONENT 3 COMPONENT 4 COMPONENT 5 CONCLUSION RESOURCES
STEP 3: Collect data to understand the landscape [Encouraged] (Continued)
MICRO-LEVEL
4. Micro-level data  Question Rationale
[Optional, but Encouraged] Do you own a mobile phone?  This will enable you to observe whether they have a basic phone, feature 
Estimated time to complete: 2-10 days Can you show it to me? phone, or a smartphone. Pay attention to the state of the phone as well. 
Is the key pad worn off? Is the screen damaged? These can be indicators 
of how someone is able to interact with their phone. For example, if the 
If you have sufficient time and resources, we encourage keypad is worn off and they do not know where each letter is, they will 
you to speak with some of your target users to likely have trouble sending SMS. Pay particular attention to ownership 
determine what access they have and how they are (and access) trends by gender, age, and socioeconomic status.
currently using technology. This is particularly important If you do not own a mobile phone, do Even though someone does not own a mobile phone, they may have 
if you are planning to have a component of your project you have access to one? Through who? access to one. Knowing whose phone it is and what level of access they 
that is focused specifically on mobiles, as this information have to it is helpful. 
will guide how you frame the solicitation language  How much airtime balance do  Owning a phone but keeping a minimal balance is a sign that pull services 
(more on that in Component 4). In some cases, you  you currently have on your phone? that require the individual to pay to send a message or make a call may (Ask them to show you) not be appropriate.
may already know this information from prior 
experience or work with those same individuals—or How do you use your phone?  See if they know how to send an SMS, place a call, access the internet  
(Ask them to demonstrate, if possible) (if they have a mobile data plan), and use common mobile services.
research done by others may already exist. If you do not 
know this information, we recommend that you try to How often do you keep your  Through experience, we know that individuals who own mobile phones phone turned on? Where do you sometimes keep them turned off except when they need to place a call 
hold focus groups or speak individually with a sample charge your phone and how much because it is difficult and/or expensive for them to charge the battery. 
(including men and women) of your target users. If your does it cost? How reliable is your 
access to electricity?
focus group includes people resistant to or on the fence 
about new technology try to understand the reasons for What other information and Do they own or have access to a radio, TV, computer (either at home or 
their perspectives and what barriers exist to their using communications technologies  via a communal space), etc? If they have access to any of these but do not 
a mobile service so that you can better design your do you commonly use? commonly use them, that information can also be telling. 
intervention. 
How do you typically share information Since many of the functional usages of mobile phones involve some 
or learn about new things? 
As with any qualitative research, it is useful to have level of information sharing, it is helpful to know how people are already sharing information. In some cases this may include mobile phones already, 
guiding questions for interviews. The table to the  which is helpful to be aware of as well.
right has eight questions that can help to guide 
observational field research to find out how people  Can you tell me what you did today? Again, open–ended questions can help you to understand behavior and 
are already interfacing with technology. potential challenges in that person’s life that may be addressed through 
mobile or through another type of service. 
49 Integrating Mobiles into Development Projects
INTRODUCTION COMPONENT 1 COMPONENT 2 COMPONENT 3 COMPONENT 4 COMPONENT 5 CONCLUSION RESOURCES
STEP 4: Decide if use of mobiles in a project is feasible and appropriate [Optional, but Encouraged]
MICRO-LEVEL (Continued)
Estimated time to complete: See sub-steps for specific times
Once you have finished pulling together all 
of this information, you should have a much Analyze data from Steps 2 and 3 to  might be used and the context that you are 
better sense of what might be possible. You identify potential usages of mobiles that  working in. If mobile networks are not secure, 
will then use this information together with the are feasible and appropriate  for example, that can impact the type of mobile 
other information you have collected in the services that can be safely supported if sensitive 
other parts of this Step to determine if and Estimated time to complete: 2-4 days information is being handled—or impact the price 
how to incorporate mobiles into your project of implementation of those services if additional 
design and solicitation in Step 4. As with Step 2, you may decide not to  security systems need to be put in place. 
explore this step, particularly if you do not  
want to pre-confine what your implementing You also need to consider the different ways in 
IDEO’s Human-Centered Design partners may propose. However, if you have  which different segments of your target population 
Toolkit is a great resource for helping a clear sense of what you want to achieve and  have access to and are interacting with mobile 
you to consider approaches for want to provide some starting parameters,  phones. You should have already uncovered this 
collecting micro-level data to feed then it is worth completing. during the landscape mapping process, but this is 
into design. This does not need to be a massive your opportunity to frame how you will apply that 
undertaking. The HCD Toolkit website includes For example, you may have requirements  information in a way that ensures more equitable 
suggested techniques for how to hear, create, and for certain features or functions that you access to any services that may be provided by 
deliver, the first two which are extremely relevant want to make sure are addressed, such as: mobile. Remember that factors such as gender, 
during the project design phase. age, and socio-economic status may impact the 
•	 GPS functionality degree to which access is available.
•	 Data privacy and security Based on your response to the questions listed 
•	 Photo or video functionality in Step 3 of the checklist, you should be able to 
•	 Sustainable business model for service
A lthough aimed primarily at  
•	 Rural accessibility MNOs, GSMA’s mWomen Marketing 
Whether any of these features/functions are Handbook provides insight into how  
to effectively market mobile services 
necessary will depend on how you think mobiles to low-income women.
50 Integrating Mobiles into Development Projects
INTRODUCTION COMPONENT 1 COMPONENT 2 COMPONENT 3 COMPONENT 4 COMPONENT 5 CONCLUSION RESOURCES
STEP 4: Decide if use of mobiles in a project is feasible and appropriate [Optional, but Encouraged] (Continued)
determine what types of mobile services, if any,  Do a majority of target farmers own/have access to a mobile phone?
may be appropriate for playing a role in helping  
to achieve your program goal. The example to  Do a majority of target farmers own/have access to a mobile phone?YES NO
the right of a decision tree illustrates how you Are there intermediaries YES (i.e. lead farmers extension 
might go about this thought process. In this case, What is the most common device type? agents) who have phones?
the program goal is to increase the food security 
of smallholder farmers by creating increased direct BASIC FEATURE PHONE SMARTPHONE NO
linkages with the formal agricultural value chain.
Do they have data plans?
Are farmers functionally literate?
Consider potential costs and benefits YES Not yet ready for mobile
NO
YES NO Is anyone in their household literate?
Estimated time to complete: 2-4 days
Next, you should determine how the potential  Text-based may be an option YES NO
Do farmers know 
how to use mobile 
costs and benefits of a mobile service compare to or web apps?
manual processes. While in many cases it may be YESVoice-based service may be an option NO
more cost effective in the long term to use mobile 
services instead of manual processes, there are  Do you plan on Web or app-based 
training them how? service may be an 
often significant upfront costs associated with option
procurement or training. NO
YES
Using Mobiles to Improve Project Monitoring 
Consider how you can encourage the use of mobile phones for real-time data  data collection, however, comes risks related to data privacy and security. Do some  
collection to monitor and inform management decisions. In many cases, this information initial analysis on what personally identifiable information is necessary for program 
can be collected as a by-product of the primary usage of mobile phones. For example, monitoring and what data risks might be present so that you can begin to think about 
mobile service providers can sometimes provide information about how and when  mitigation strategies. This will make it easier for you to incorporate appropriate measures 
people are using a mobile information service without polling them directly. In these  into the award during the procurement phase. To learn more about the use of data, refer 
cases, it is advisable to make these data needs explicit to the mobile service provider from to the mobile data factsheet—and also keep your eye out for the forthcoming USAID 
the offset to ensure that they are able to provide the required data. With any  toolkit on mobile data. 
51 Integrating Mobiles into Development Projects
INTRODUCTION COMPONENT 1 COMPONENT 2 COMPONENT 3 COMPONENT 4 COMPONENT 5 CONCLUSION RESOURCES
STEP 4: Decide if use of mobiles in a project is feasible and appropriate [Optional, but Encouraged] (Continued)
We have included below some of the main cost Data collection, dissemination,  •	 Long term: Once trained on how to use the mobile 
elements associated with mobile services, as well  storage, and management service, there is the possibility for broader dissemination 
on how to use the service if program participants 
as the short term and longer term implications  promote it more broadly within their communities 
on the costs of using a mobile service instead of  •	 Short term:  There may be some initial setup  (“network effect”).There are also positive externalities 
a manual process. required for the implementer to properly access  from teaching participants  
the information generated by the service but these to be more comfortable with modern technology,  
costs will likely be quite small in comparison with 
Procurement of necessary materials  since these skills will likely be applicable in many other 
manual processes. Electronic data can also be collected 
and equipment aspects of their life. and disseminated more easily and quickly than data 
collected via paper or manual processes. Monitoring 
•	 Short term:  While mobiles can eliminate  
the time and material costs associated with  •	 Long term: Compared to maintaining a  •	 Short term: Depending on the configuration of  
manual processes for data tool development  manual filing system, electronic data storage and the mobile service, monitoring activities can occur on 
and implementation, if mobile device and SIM management with mobiles is much cheaper, more a real-time basis from any location with an internet 
provisioning is proposed, these will have to be procured, efficient, and more easily accessed. It does, however, connection. This allows more people to track program 
inventoried, and distributed. As a general rule, procuring usually require internet connectivity—although there activities and progress more quickly and with greater 
mobile devices for beneficiaries  are also many services now that allow for offline use, precision than manual processes.
should be avoided, as it can end up distorting which can sync with the online database once the 
expectations and future personal investment in mobile device is connected again. Electronic databases also •	 Long term: Most services have reporting features 
devices. Mobile device procurement for  usually require a login/password, which can help to track that allow implementers and other interested parties to 
staff, data enumerators, and other intermediaries  who is accessing the data and when for monitoring track specific trends and activities over time, which offer 
may, however, be necessary. purposes. a variety of benefits from increased transparency, better 
allocation of program or other resources, and enhanced 
•	 Long term:  Most mobile-related procurements Training requirements impact assessment.
balance an initial one-off cost with lower recurring 
costs in order to create long term savings. And, if •	 Short term: It is essential to train end users on how Think about these and other potential costs 
the implementer has a strong relationship with a to use a particular mobile service, and this may require to estimate the total cost of using mobiles from 
local MNO, there are opportunities to negotiate a more time and resources than training end users on 
bulk, subsidized price for mobile devices, SIMs, and initial investment to operation and maintenance, manual processes. These training costs can be defrayed 
airtime. Keep in mind that mobile phone access also accounting for both human and technology by adopting a train-the-trainers (TOT) approach if 
brings additional positive externalities (i.e. access to working, for example, through agriculture or health resource requirements. Using these estimates, 
a convenient communication channel) that manual extension workers. the Project Design team should consider if using 
processes cannot generate. mobiles would be a measurable improvement over 
52 Integrating Mobiles into Development Projects
INTRODUCTION COMPONENT 1 COMPONENT 2 COMPONENT 3 COMPONENT 4 COMPONENT 5 CONCLUSION RESOURCES
STEP 4: Decide if use of mobiles in a project is feasible and appropriate STEP 5: Validate assumptions and 
[Optional, but Encouraged] (Continued) preliminary findings [Highly Encouraged]
manual alternatives. In some cases, you may find Consider whether a broader M4D  Estimated time to complete: 1-4 hours
that given the uneven levels of accessibility and initiative is necessary 
capacity that it may be necessary to use both After completing the checklist, you should  
mobile and manual processes in parallel  Estimated time to complete: 1-2 hours consider sharing it with colleagues (particularly 
to one another, at least to start. those with prior experience working with M4D 
The last question on the checklist relates  initiatives) and other stakeholders for their 
We will go into more details on estimating  to whether it may be necessary to consider input on the soundness of your determinations 
costs in Component 4, but some initial initiatives or activities to facilitate the uptake and for any recommendations on how to 
questions you should be considering at  of the types of mobile services more broadly, improve upon your responses. While this is 
this stage include: in order to also facilitate uptake of the mobile not a requirement, you will likely find it helpful 
service of interest to your project. This  as they may think of things that you missed or 
•	 Can the same, or better, outcomes be  should be based on the extent to which the challenge your conclusions, ultimately leading  
achieved using manual approaches? If so,  mobile access environment may enable or to a more robust analysis and project.
what would be required? While there will  constrain a mobile-enabled project. While 
be lower upfront hardware and software  there is no magic number for the scoring in As you are going through this process,  
costs associated with manual processes,  
Step 3 on the checklist, a significant number of ask yourself the following questions:
how does the overall cost compare? 
‘low’ scores might be a sign that it is necessary 
•	 Are the underlying assumptions hopeful  
•	 How many additional staff will be required  to address mobile access before deploying a or realistic?
to complete manual processes? Are there  particular mobile service within the context of 
training and material costs? What is the impact  a development activity. If you do identify any •	 Have challenges and opportunities been accurately 
on operational efficiency, data timeliness and  
accuracy, and project reach? significant gaps in the macro-level or micro-
identified & addressed?
 level context that would inhibit the ability of 
 implementing partners to deploy mobiles in a In addition to those two overarching questions, 
 way that you believe would help achieve your we’ve summarized some of the mobile-specific 
 project goals, it may be worth considering questions you may want to ask yourself as part 
 whether it makes sense to address these gaps of this process, along with considerations in 
 
 directly through project activities. For some response to each one. During the procurement 
 examples of how this has been done elsewhere, phase, these questions may also be valuable for 
refer to the Digital Inclusion Factsheet in the assessing whether a mobile service suggested 
Resources section of the handbook. by an implementing partner is feasible. It 
53 Integrating Mobiles into Development Projects
INTRODUCTION COMPONENT 1 COMPONENT 2 COMPONENT 3 COMPONENT 4 COMPONENT 5 CONCLUSION RESOURCES
STEP 5: Validate assumptions and preliminary findings [Highly Encouraged] (Continued)
is important to note here, though, that the 2. Is mobile handset ownership widespread? 4. Is there a clear utility/purpose in using  
requirements listed below are not black/white. this mobile service for target users?
There is an interplay between each of them and Consideration: Individual handset ownership  
other considerations that will impact the potential or handset accessibility “as needed”. Individual ownership Consideration: Extent to which service fills  
feasibility of using mobile. You should consider  is preferable if privacy and frequent access to the an existing gap or meets a need within the target group. 
each of these questions when you are completing service are envisioned or desired. If the intended use While many mobile services appear to be quite of the service involves the dissemination or collection 
the final section of the checklist, but use them as  compelling on paper or in a demonstration, you want  of “generic” info (i.e. pricing, weather alerts, agricultural to avoid “promoting a solution in search of a problem.” 
a guide, not as a prescription. extension services, or health alerts), shared handsets Mobiles make many things possible but the key question 
are less problematic. is whether users will find it useful and relevant. If not, 
1. Is there mobile network coverage in the adoption and impact will likely be low.
areas targeted for this program and is the 3. Are mobile services used regularly  
signal strong enough to ensure access to the (voice and SMS text) and do the target user 5. How do users physically access  
service when program participants need it? groups have a broad understanding of the the mobile service? 
types of functions or operations available?
Consideration: Reliability of signal coverage  Consideration: Extent to which users  
& strength. This is an oft-cited requirement but  Consideration: Extent to which consumers  can access the service in a simple, familiar  
there are some nuances worth mentioning here. have a basic understanding of voice and text functionality. manner. If the target user group is found to  
Coverage and strength are typically less strong/reliable The targeted users should at a minimum be capable  be much more accustomed to making/receiving  
in rural areas, which might make mobiles less appealing. of making and receiving voice calls. If possible, they voice calls, a mobile service that requires them  
However, the better question is when and where the should also know how to send/receive SMS as well as to navigate a series of text heavy SMS menus  
user will need access. If he/she needs access at home at load and transfer airtime, but this will be contingent  or remember specific USSD codes to access 
multiple points during the day, mobile in rural areas with on how the user is expected to interface with the information or expertise may not be as appropriate  
limited coverage is less attractive/feasible. If the user can service. In rural areas or among the elderly, it’s not as one that relies more on voice (IVR, message 
access the service periodically or at a pre-determined uncommon to find people who own handsets but  recording with an automated or live call back  
time without having to be at home (i.e. trading center, who rely on younger family members to buy and feature) or that requires less navigation and/or  
health clinic, post office, climbing on top a nearby hill), transfer airtime to them due to a lack of funds, is more pictogram based. 
network coverage and signal strength are generally awareness, or ability.  
more reliable the closer one gets to major roads or 
areas with greater population density. 
54 Integrating Mobiles into Development Projects
INTRODUCTION COMPONENT 1 COMPONENT 2 COMPONENT 3 COMPONENT 4 COMPONENT 5 CONCLUSION RESOURCES
STEP 5: Validate assumptions and preliminary STEP 6:  Integrate conclusions into Concept Paper [Strongly Encouraged if positive determination]
findings [Highly Encouraged] (Continued)
Estimated time to complete: 1-2 hours
6. How much will it cost to access this mobile 
service and how are the payments made? Now that you’ve finished your analysis, you can integrate your conclusion into the Concept 
Paper that you are developing. Keep in mind the following principles, which  
Consideration: Extent to which pricing is both affordable are consistent with USAID’s Operational Principles: 
and commercially viable and, if individual users pay, the 
•	 Design with the user: This was already touched •	 Use open standards, open data, open 
convenience of making payments. Some mobile services 
may not have a clear commercial pricing strategy and rely on earlier, but to reiterate, it is important to understand source, and open innovation: USAID, the USG, 
entirely on donor subsidies. Others may look to price their the needs, access, and capacity of all potential target and host-countries may have standards or regulations 
service for an institution (i.e. agrodealer) because of the users, and where possible design with them—or at least that govern a mobile application or the information it 
direct and indirect benefits they receive (i.e. users who with their differences in mind. collects. It is important that the project design team 
receive weather alerts, crop advice, and market pricing info and, ultimately, the implementer be aware of relevant 
•	 Design for scale: Avoid designing in a vacuum. 
may be more likely to be repeat customers and agrodealers requirements and consider how those requirements 
Look at what else is being done by USAID projects 
can source higher quality crops). With respect to payments, may inform mobile tool selection and overall project 
and other development projects in the country and the 
if the business model is designed to charge the individual design. 
region to determine if there might be opportunities for 
user directly, there are a number of ways to do this that 
collaboration. 
require different levels of effort or awareness on the part •	 Address privacy and security: As increasing  
of the individual. Users can pay on a subscription basis that amounts of information is electronically collected,  •	 Build for sustainability: Think about the end  
can be deducted from their existing airtime balance or USAID must take steps to safeguard the data that  game. How will mobile be used to continue benefiting 
they can pay on a per use basis (either by being charged it and its partners collect. Individuals’ HIV status,  users after the project ends? Understand the 
standard voice rates or standard or premium data rates). political views, sexual orientation, income levels, religion underlying costs of any potential use of mobile you are 
While subscription-based models are often preferred by or ethnicity could be motivation for reprisals within  encouraging, as well as how that service will sustain 
the service provider, users may not make full use of it and the communities we work. Mobile services should  itself beyond USAID’s investment. If the implementing 
therefore not perceive the cost worthwhile. Pay-per-use be designed to protect the information they collect  partner is going to play a significant role in the 
models give users greater control but may end up costing and store. implementation of this service (i.e. through subsidizing 
them more (especially if they are being charged premium the cost of the service or providing technical support), 
voice or data rates). think about what a continuity plan would look like CRITICAL SUCCESS FACTORS 
beyond the life of project. Who is going to operate and 
If, after going through this process, you notice any pay for the service after the project ends? How does it 
gaps in your concept design, you can refine it before fit into local government strategies and initiatives? •	 T ake time to identify your potential requirements, 
moving onto the final step. In some cases, this may the contextual data, and what that means for your •	 Be data driven: Think about how you will be able 
include revisiting the work that you did in Steps 2 concept design.to measure the effectiveness of the mobile services 
through 4 for additional detail. being deployed. •	  Think broader than your concept—examine how 
mobile fits into what else is already being done 
across portfolios and donors.
55 Integrating Mobiles into Development Projects
INTRODUCTION COMPONENT 1 COMPONENT 2 COMPONENT 3 COMPONENT 4 COMPONENT 5 CONCLUSION RESOURCES
4COMPONENT Procurement
By	the	time	you	have	finished	this	component	you	will:
•	 Understand how to use an iterative internal process designed  
to assist you in drafting effective M4D procurement language
•	 Understand the key components of an M4D integrated solicitation
•	 Understand M4D-oriented evaluation criteria and how to score  
M4D elements of proposals based on best practices
56 Integrating Mobiles into Development Projects
INTRODUCTION COMPONENT 1 COMPONENT 2 COMPONENT 3 COMPONENT 4 COMPONENT 5 CONCLUSION RESOURCES
Once preliminary approval for the project has been obtained, the next step is to design and issue 
a solicitation that captures the core elements of the desired project and solicits solutions that take 
full advantage of available mobile services and the attributes of mobile technology. The proposed 
project for which the solicitation is being issued could have mobiles as a core element (i.e. promoting 
financial	inclusion	among	rural	farmers	using	mobile	financial	services)	or	mobiles	could	be	a	desired	
ancillary element that enhances the impact of core program elements (i.e. providing farmers with 
more up to date pricing and logistical information). In either case, developing a strong solicitation  
that properly incorporates mobiles will greatly increase the likelihood of program success.
What core elements specific •	 Strategic Vision: Does your procurement 
to M4D should be included in language proactively frame the role and purpose 
solicitations? of mobiles and situate it within a broader 
development objective?
When incorporating M4D-specific language  
into your solicitation, it is important to define your •	 Knowledgeable of Specific Landscape: Does 
requirements and not specify specific solutions additional information and data provided in the 
or approaches (i.e. we require a service that can solicitation help identify important factors or 
efficiently pay 10,000 families $15.00 per month trends at a macro, sector, or end-user level?
rather than we require mobile wallets for 10,000 
families). By stating requirements rather than defining •	 Operationally Descriptive: What activities or 
solutions, you maintain flexibility and allow for outcomes have been articulated that would help 
greater creativity and innovation. This is particularly inform a technical approach, management plan, 
important as what can be accomplished through staffing, or budget proposal without prescribing  
mobile technology is advancing rapidly. Consider the a specific service, vendor, etc.?
following questions, which should help you to develop 
good M4D-related procurement language: © 2008 Louie Anthony E. Tampus, Courtesy of Photoshare
57 Integrating Mobiles into Development Projects
INTRODUCTION COMPONENT 1 COMPONENT 2 COMPONENT 3 COMPONENT 4 COMPONENT 5 CONCLUSION RESOURCES
Below, we identify several sections within a solicitation where specific The following is an example of how some of these elements can be 
M4D language should be integrated and recommendations regarding what integrated into a solicitation: Knowledge of 
type of content you might include: general landscape
BACKGROUND
Examples 
•	 Present high-level information on mobile trends and specific examples of similar of possible 
mobile service deployments in other markets solutions
•	 Provide summary information in the solicitation that highlights specific elements 
of the mobiles market in the target country or region (i.e. number of mobile 
subscribers, number of MNOs)  
•	 Request that the bidder’s present their understanding of the mobiles landscape 
and the impact its current status could have on the project
PROJECT DESCRIPTION/STATEMENT OF  WORK PROPOSED TASKS/ILLUSTRATIVE ACTIVITIES
•	 Provide an overview of the entire project highlighting objectives, target There are a number of different proposed tasks or illustrative activities 
segments, and geography, if applicable that you may want to include that are related to the effective deployment 
and integration of mobiles into your project, such as market research, 
•	 Where mobile is a tool to be used within a component of a larger project, you usage of specific mobile services and features, associated training, and 
may decide to include a dedicated section highlighting how its use will enhance development of sustainable business models. Each of these is described  
broader project objectives in more detail below.
•	 If mobiles represent a core component of the project, such as deploying a •	 Market research: Identifying relevant behavior, needs, and perceptions of  
mobile health information system, include a dedicated section that articulates a particular target user segment (i.e. how and where they transact, when and 
the role mobiles will play and the Mission’s underlying assumptions as to why  from whom they collect information) will allow the implementer to make a 
its use will help achieve specific project objectives more informed decision vis-à-vis which mobile services are most appropriate. 
Both qualitative and quantitative data should be collected during the market 
•	 Provide an overview of the target user segment for the mobile service (i.e. rice research phase as the data may impact project strategy and execution (i.e. how 
farmers, expectant mothers, loan recipients), its size, geographic location, and to configure the service, how to present it to program participants, whether  
any other relevant demographic information to subsidize its access or charge fees). 
58 Integrating Mobiles into Development Projects
INTRODUCTION COMPONENT 1 COMPONENT 2 COMPONENT 3 COMPONENT 4 COMPONENT 5 CONCLUSION RESOURCES
•	 Mobile services and features: This section presents any product and  Typical Requirements for Mobile Services & Features
service requirements that you have decided in advance must be present  Mobile Money
in any proposed use of mobiles by the implementing partner, including end Able to deliver a mobile wallet with a $100 or greater balance limit
user features or reporting requirements. This would also be the section  Able to initiate peer to peer transfers
where you should mention any open data or open source requirements. Able to make bulk payments
Mobile Data
•	 Training: M4D interventions typically require training in four broad areas, 
Able to deliver application to basic mobile handsets
which can often be combined into one training.  
Able to report on the number of users using the application per week
 
Able to geocode end user inputs
Each of those focus areas are described in more detail below:
Mobile Access
 Basic instruction on the overall program objectives and general Able to provide end user subsidies via vouchers for mobile data plans»  Concept:
information on how mobiles will support program activities should be Able to provide and distribute devices
conveyed through training to key stakeholders. This type of training provides Sustainability of initiative and plan to encourage both ownership and use of newly provided access
context for stakeholders and sets the stage for more products and service 
oriented training activities.
»  Financial Literacy/Business Concepts: In some cases, mobile services  
» D evice: Delivery of mobile services is ultimately dependent on a specific are linked to financial inclusion and business management objectives. In these 
device in the hands of a specific user. The solicitation should include a cases, it is often cost effective to include financial literacy and or business 
requirement for device training if device use is not already prevalent. The concepts training in the requirements outlined in the solicitation.
training should cover the basics in operating and maintaining the core 
functionality of the device. This could include things such as turning the 
mobile on and off, accessing a service, basic device functions, and charging. 
Since large numbers of people in Southeast Asia are already using mobile 
E XAMPLE 
phones, this is likely only relevant for certain segments of the population  
with limited prior exposure to mobiles. Service providers and device manufacturers typically have pre-
packaged training materials that can be quickly adapted to the 
specific training requirement. Additional service providers and device 
» S ervice:  The bulk of the training activities should focus on providing manufacturers will often provide trainers.
audience appropriate training to users of the mobile service. It should 
include the presentation of use cases, sequencing of menus, and basic  
trouble shooting.
59 Integrating Mobiles into Development Projects
INTRODUCTION COMPONENT 1 COMPONENT 2 COMPONENT 3 COMPONENT 4 COMPONENT 5 CONCLUSION RESOURCES
Training techniques used to address M4D training needs are similar to training Although training techniques for M4D are similar to other disciplines, mobile  
techniques used in other disciplines, including classroom training, train the trainer, is a rapidly developing field and trainings often becomes outdated quicker than 
and one-on-one sessions. The use of pictograms and demonstrations has also been trainings for more well-established sectors.  Therefore, solicitations should stress 
found to be effective. The key objective of the training is for the end user to be the need for training programs that can adapt quickly and remain flexible. This may 
comfortable with the device and the associated application. Having the end user include things such as online training, content delivered through tablets or mobile 
hold a device and initiate the desired actions is critical. phones, or short videos that can be replaced when content needs to be updated.
•	 Sustainability: Request information on the proposed business model for  
the mobile service and require a discussion on post-project sustainability.  
Most mobile services are a fee for service proposition operated by a 
commercial entity. Fees may be based on a published commercial service 
tariff or may be tailored and priced specifically for a particular program. 
Implementing partners may choose to subsidize some or all of the required 
end user fees. See the text box below for an examination of the pros and  
cons of mobile services subsidies. 
Pros and Cons: M4D Subsidies
Pros
Encourages users to try the service
 Does not place an initial financial burden on vulnerable segments
 Eases initial resistance from beneficiaries to try a new service
Cons
Can undervalue the service
 Can negatively impact sustainability once subsidy is eliminated
 Hinders consumer education and understanding that mobile services are services 
that have a cost associated with them
© 2009 Rebecca Lawton, Courtesy of Photoshare
60 Integrating Mobiles into Development Projects
INTRODUCTION COMPONENT 1 COMPONENT 2 COMPONENT 3 COMPONENT 4 COMPONENT 5 CONCLUSION RESOURCES
DELIVERABLES
While there is a great deal of variety in the type of deliverables required for 
a specific program, there is a core set of M4D-related deliverables that you  
may want to include in your procurement. Some of the typical deliverables  
for M4D elements of projects include:
•	 Participant Enrollment Plans •	 Liquidity Management Plans
•	 End User Training Plans •	 Periodic Transaction/Usage Reports
It is important to note that mobile wallets, a common feature of mobile financial services, 
are typically treated by regulators as bank accounts. Transactions that occur are viewed by 
the provider and regulator as private and, therefore, there should not be an expectation 
of seeing a customer’s mobile wallet transactions (i.e. items that they have purchased).  
If it is necessary to be certain that beneficiaries are spending disbursed funds on certain Typical Procurement Language Requesting Past Performance
items (i.e. food, hardware for building houses, etc.) then the project should use a mobile 
voucher or coupon instead of a mobile wallet. For activities for which mobiles are a major program component (such 
as a mobile money or mobile access project), bidders should provide at 
PAST PERFORMANCE least three recent examples of projects of similar size and complexity. 
Project descriptions should include a summary of the overall objectives 
You should require that bidders address their experience in any relevant core of the program, highlighting the role of mobiles. 
areas of an M4D project, such as:
The past performance summary should also include the specific 
•	 Target segment understanding and registration activities performed by their organization. Other areas to  
highlight include:  
•	 Negotiating and working with mobile service providers
•	 Experience in the target geography
•	 Developing and delivering M4D training to a range of participants and stakeholders
•	 Experience with the target participant segment
•	 Designing and managing M4D pilots •	 Experience in designing, executing, and scaling M4D pilots
•	 Developing impact assessments and M4D specific monitoring  •	 Experience in developing partnerships with service providers
and evaluation programs
61 Integrating Mobiles into Development Projects
INTRODUCTION COMPONENT 1 COMPONENT 2 COMPONENT 3 COMPONENT 4 COMPONENT 5 CONCLUSION RESOURCES
DIGITAL FINANCIAL SERVICE SPECIFIC LANGUAGE
USAID is including language in solicitations to encourage implementing partners to incorporate digital financial 
services (DFS)—such as mobile money payments to staff—into their operations and programming where 
feasible. USAID first began encouraging such incorporation when it issued Procurement Executive Bulletin No. 
2012-05. In 2013, on the first anniversary of the Better Than Cash Alliance, Administrator Rajiv Shah strengthened 
USAID’s commitment to using its significant financial footprint to increase the use of DFS in developing countries. 
USAID expects to issue an Acquisition & Assistance Policy Directive by September 2014 requiring all 
implementing partners (IPs) to use DFS to the extent that their market and program footprints allow 
(IPs will be permitted to request a waiver under certain circumstances). Until then, the following  text is illustrative 
of how to foster the use of DFS in solicitations:
SECTION C  
(Description/Specification s/Statement of Objectives)
USAID, through its commitment to the Better Than Cash Alliance, encourages the use of inclusive 
electronic payment and collection methods (including mobile money) to extend affordable and accessible 
payments to low-income populations, create cost-savings, promote economic development, increase 
transparency, strengthen security, and broaden financial inclusion. The implementing partner and its 
sub-awardees must utilize these services to the greatest extent feasible. Program operations, including 
personnel salary payments, must also be paid through electronic and/or mobile channels when viable.
SECTION L  
(Instructions for the Preparation of the Technical Proposal)
Program Design sub-factor: USAID encourages overall creative and innovative approaches  
that harness technology (like digital financial services) to improve progress toward achieving  
program objectives.
© 2012 Emily Carter/PSI, Courtesy of Photoshare
62 Integrating Mobiles into Development Projects
INTRODUCTION COMPONENT 1 COMPONENT 2 COMPONENT 3 COMPONENT 4 COMPONENT 5 CONCLUSION RESOURCES
What are some techniques for developing cost estimates  
for integrating mobiles into projects?
FIGURE 1  
While every project is different and local conditions can greatly impact project costs, there are specific guidelines Illustrative Cost Breakdown for 
and benchmark information that can assist USAID staff in developing budget estimates for the cost of integrating Integrating Mobiles into a Project
mobiles into projects. The first step in developing a budget estimate is to deconstruct the M4D portion of the 
project into primary components. This is particularly important because it is easy to underestimate the potential 
costs of using mobiles. This can lead to situations where the amount of funding needed to use mobiles effectively 
within the project is actually significantly higher than what the implementer expected and can realistically allocate 
towards it within the total project budget. 5%
15%
10%
 Typical components include: 5%
15%
•	 Requirements development and presentation •	 Device provisioning and dissemination 10% 10%
•	 Market research •	 Transaction/service fees 25% 10%
•	 Program design •	 Monitoring and evaluation 25%
25%
•	 Participant identification and training 10%
 25%
Once the project components have been identified, 10%
the next step is to develop a top down estimate 
Requirements development Device dissemination
assigning a percentage of total costs to the M4D and presentation and provisioning
portion of the project. Figure 1 presents a typical MaRrekqeuti rreemseanrtcs hdevelopment DTervaincsea dcitsisoenm/Linicaetinocnes
breakdown. and presentation and provisioningProgram design Monitoring and 
Market research Tervanalsuaactiion/Licences
Participant identification
The next step is to develop a bottom up cost  anPdr otrgarianmin gdesign Monitoring and evaluation
analysis for each component.  The following table Participant identificationand training
provides a basis for estimate and cost ranges for 
key variables. In most cases these costs are the 
responsibility of the implementing partner.  However, 
in some cases costs may be the responsibility of the 
© 2009 Nikki Sandino M. Victoriano, Courtesy of Photoshare end user or the service provider.
63 Integrating Mobiles into Development Projects
INTRODUCTION COMPONENT 1 COMPONENT 2 COMPONENT 3 COMPONENT 4 COMPONENT 5 CONCLUSION RESOURCES
BOTTOM UP COST ESTIMATES
Component Basis for Estimate Benchmark Data
Requirements •	 Primarily project labor hours •	  This activity is typically conducted by senior staff and requires a relatively high 
development •	 R equires interaction with stakeholders labor rate
•	 R equires development of a concise requirements document •	  A typical time frame to develop M4D technical requirements is 2-3 weeks
Market research •	  Typically outsourced to a local market research firm with local language  •	  Costs for a mobile device based survey range from $5 to $25 per participant33 
enumeration capabilities •	 C osts for a paper based survey range from $5 to $20 per participant
•	 T he market research firm, as part of their survey design, will provide the number  •	 A  typical time frame to develop M4D technical requirements is 2-3 weeks
of participants needed to produce statistically valid results •	  Costs for focus groups can range from $1,500 to $2,500 per session
•	 S urveys are typically priced on a per participant basis
•	 C osts vary based on the data collection method (paper versus electronic)
•	 F ocus groups are typically priced on a per session basis
Program design •	 Primarily project labor hours •	 T his activity is typically conducted by a mix of senior and junior staff and 
•	  Requires interaction with stakeholders requires a mid-level composite labor rate 
•	 R equires development of a concise project plan •	 A  typical time frame to develop a program plan is 6-12 weeks
Participant •	  This function can be done in house by the implementing partner or outsourced  •	  Costs per participant for classroom based instruction range from $25 to $100 
identification and (i.e. service provider) per participant for a one-day session34
training •	 C ontent development is labor hour based.  A good rule of thumb for new content  
is 4 hours of content development for every hour of content
•	  Training costs can be calculated by number of sessions and number of participants 
Device •	  If required, distribution of devices is typically done by the service provider from  •	  Device dissemination is often done as part of training.  Typical dissemination 
provisioning and a central location costs range between $0.50 and $2 per device
dissemination35 •	  Certain mobile services require that each device be pre-installed with specific software
Transaction/ •	  Typically includes an airtime cost (i.e. voice minutes, data minutes, SMS) •	 A irtime charges vary by country and service provider, but are typically published 
service fees •	 S pecific mobile services, particularly mobile money include a per transaction cost and readily available
•	 O ther services may include a license fee per user •	  Mobile money transaction costs are also readily available. Here is an example  
of what the fees per use case could look like:
» Cash in = $0
» C ash out = $0.50 or a percentage of the value
»  Salary payment (charged to the employer) = $1.00 per employee
•	  Licensing fees for mobile services vary by service
Monitoring  •	  Typically includes labor hours, survey activities and fees from service providers  •	  Subscriptions to mobile data collection services can range in price from  
and evaluation for reports and data $1,000 to $10,000 per year depending on the features and required scale
•	 S ervice provider data is often bundled with other items •	  Impact evaluations can cost anywhere between $80,000 and $400,000 
•	 C ost of data from service providers may be minimal depending on the degree  depending on the scale and level of detail
of customization
33. Based on cost information from market research projects in Indonesia, Haiti, and Malawi 
34. Note: train the trainer models lower the cost per participant
35  This component does not include an estimate for the cost of the device which may or may not be provided as part of the project and will vary greatly by device type
64 Integrating Mobiles into Development Projects
INTRODUCTION COMPONENT 1 COMPONENT 2 COMPONENT 3 COMPONENT 4 COMPONENT 5 CONCLUSION RESOURCES
You should also consider at this point whether graphic shows the estimated costs of  
the estimated costs align with your overall project mobiles within the overall project budget  
objectives. If mobiles are going to play a significant for a conditional cash transfer project where  
role in achieving the project objectives, the costs mobiles are the main mechanism for disbursing  
associated with the M4D elements may be a large CCTs, and an agricultural value chain project  
part of the overall project budget. The following where mobiles plays a smaller role.
FIGURE 2 
Estimated Costs of Mobiles within the Overall Project Budget
Conditional Cash Agriculture Value Chain 
Transfer Program Improvement Program
(Mobiles as a Percentage of Total Project Costs) (Mobiles as a Percentage of Total Project Costs)
15%
45%
55% 85%
M4D Component
Non M4D Component
65 Integrating Mobiles into Development Projects
INTRODUCTION COMPONENT 1 COMPONENT 2 COMPONENT 3 COMPONENT 4 COMPONENT 5 CONCLUSION RESOURCES
Cost of Customizing an Existing Service CUSTOMIZATION COSTS
In some program contexts, mobile services may 
Customization costs depend on many factors, the most important of which is whether the existing 
service is free and open source or if it is proprietary. If it is proprietary, an implementer must negotiate already exist locally but certain modifications may  
specific terms with the provider that detail what modifications are required. Depending on the potential be required to meet target user segments needs  
commercial value of the program to the provider (i.e. number of new users, new transactions, frequency, or program priorities and objectives.
and duration of use), the provider may offer to customize at a discounted cost. If it is free and open source,  
the cost of customization is the cost of hiring a software developer to create your customization.  If so, the implementer must be able to 
undertake one of the following activities: 
Free/Open source Customization Example: A project would like to use the Ushahidi platform, a 
mapping platform, to create a map of water shortages using data collected by 100 trained data collectors in 
one region of Country X. The project would like to have additional analysis functions built into the Ushahidi 1. Engage the service provider to determine the 
map—graphs and charts—that can be sent automatically to dispersed program managers. An experienced timing and costs associated with making these 
software developer could create this customization (called a plugin) for a fee of approximately $800 USD modifications
per day for 10 days, for a total cost of $8,000 USD. This fee will increase if training or project management 
is required. If the project also wants to provide the data collectors with a short code to make reporting 2. Source the technical expertise in-house to 
into the Ushahidi platform easier (i.e. Text 12345 to Report a Water Shortage) this will add an additional 
cost, depending the country. Short codes need to be purchased, and in some countries are issued by customize a service that is free/open source
MNOs, while in others they are issued by the regulator. In Uganda, for example, it is necessary to pay the 
regulator to obtain the short code, and then the customer pays a fee to the MNO every time they use  3. Contract out open source customization 
the short code. capability to a 3rd party
   A ny additional customizations will cost extra, and, therefore, properly defining needs in 
KEEP  
IN MIND the beginning is critical to developing an accurate budget estimate. Propriety software, 
such as any service offered through Microsoft, or services that require satellite imagery, 
will require significantly more funding, but may offer more sophisticated technology 
and features.
While USAID technically has “unlimited” licensing for software and applications developed in whole  
or in part by USAID funds, this is not the same as open source, as it is not available to the broader 
technical community. When encouraging partners to use an open source software, it is important to  
clearly state requirements not only for an open source licensing (i.e. GPL), but also the expectation  
that the implementing partner will develop the software in a manner that is easily accessible, thoroughly 
documented, and fully functional. The standard should be such that any user with sufficient technical 
background would be able to immediately build from the platform once made available.
66 Integrating Mobiles into Development Projects
INTRODUCTION COMPONENT 1 COMPONENT 2 COMPONENT 3 COMPONENT 4 COMPONENT 5 CONCLUSION RESOURCES
How do you critically evaluate 
solicitation responses with an 
M4D component?
A key component of the solicitation is the 
presentation and use of proposal evaluation criteria. 
While evaluating an initiative that includes an M4D 
component is similar to other types of evaluations, 
there are some unique criteria and characteristics 
that should be evaluated. A particularly important 
element is the experience of the bidding organization 
(or its relevant sub-partners) and the key staff. 
Evaluators should look for hands-on experience  
with implementing a project with an M4D 
component in the field—this is one of the best 
indicators of likely future success. A Sample M4D 
Evaluation Template can be found in the Resources In reviewing proposals with an M4D component, the following items represent potential red flags  
section at the end of the handbook. and bear further investigation:
In general, strong responses present an experienced •	 Inadequate understanding of the local market. To be successful, bidders must fully understand the local 
staff and a corporate history of executing M4D operating environment for mobiles and the true living conditions of the target segment. While this knowledge 
projects either alone or through partnerships. can be enhanced after award, bidders should present a coherent proposal that recognizes the uniqueness of 
Proposals should clearly identify the problem, and the specific market.
articulate how mobiles will fit into the larger project 
and support the broad theory of change, rather •	 Selection of an under resourced mobile service provider or partner. Delivering mobile services  
than viewing the mobile component as a stand- to a large population requires a partner with sufficient resources to address issues in a timely manner.  
alone service. Of course, proposals that present a Small firms with a limited pool of skilled resources often cannot meet the demands of a large program.
realistic timetable and identify key risk areas are also 
advantageous. Finally, teams that include skilled local •	 Contingencies in the regulatory environment. Example: We can only implement this if the Central  
staff and local knowledge of the operational and Bank raises the mobile wallet limit. While this does not have to necessarily render a project impossible, it will 
regulatory environment for mobiles should also be make timelines unpredictable and should mean that regulatory engagement is a significant component of 
highly regarded. the work plan—and therefore that the implementing partner will need sufficient experience in facilitating 
regulatory changes.
67 Integrating Mobiles into Development Projects
INTRODUCTION COMPONENT 1 COMPONENT 2 COMPONENT 3 COMPONENT 4 COMPONENT 5 CONCLUSION RESOURCES
Additional areas of potential risk that you may be able to identify during the evaluation process  
based on the submitted proposals include:
•	 Inadequate mobile coverage in the target area
•	 Insufficient resources devoted to training
•	 Inexperienced service provider partners
•	 Stringent requirements that force over customization of commercial services
•	 Complex approval processes from multiple organizations needed to execute program. In Malawi,  
for example, approval from three Ministries is required in order to deliver a teacher salary payment pilot
•	 Lack of leadership and/or project champion committed to mobile
•	 Poor alignment between mobile component and overall program objectives
As well as being important for consideration during the evaluation phase, each of these red flags and risks  
are issues that you should continue to look out for during project implementation. We’ll discuss this in more  
detail in the following component.
CRITICAL SUCCESS FACTORS 
•	  Be clear and specific, without being overly restrictive, •	  Establish clear evaluation criteria in relation  
in how you describe mobiles in the solicitation. to M4D interventions.
•	 C onsider all of the potential costs associated with 
using mobiles and build those estimates into the 
overall project budget ceiling.
68 Integrating Mobiles into Development Projects
INTRODUCTION COMPONENT 1 COMPONENT 2 COMPONENT 3 COMPONENT 4 COMPONENT 5 CONCLUSION RESOURCES
5COMPONENT Monitoring  Implementation 
and Program 
Evaluation
By	the	time	you	have	finished	this	component	you	will:
•	 Understand how to quantitatively and qualitatively evaluate impacts  
of a mobile intervention
•	 Understand how to use frameworks that will help USAID and  
implementing partners target, collect, and analyze the most appropriate 
indicators based on geography, demographics, and market realities
•	 Understand key M4D project milestones and have access to question 
sets that can help determine if the program is on track
69 Integrating Mobiles into Development Projects
INTRODUCTION COMPONENT 1 COMPONENT 2 COMPONENT 3 COMPONENT 4 COMPONENT 5 CONCLUSION RESOURCES
This	component	covers	two	aspects	of	project	monitoring	and	evaluation.	The	first	
aspect focuses on how to effectively monitor and evaluate an M4D activity or activity 
component,	including	the	identification	of	key	performance	metrics	and	methods	for	
data capture. The second aspect addresses techniques for managing the performance 
of M4D implementers. This element includes program management techniques tailored 
to	specific	M4D-related	project	milestones.	This	component	also	includes	a	discussion	
of impact evaluation and techniques used to determine how well mobiles have 
enhanced project outcomes.
What are the key  
attributes of mobile  
that influence monitoring  
and evaluation?
Before you determine what should be measured 
and how you should manage and support the 
implementing partner, it is important to review 
the key attributes of mobile technology and their 
expected utility for development. 
70 Integrating Mobiles into Development Projects
INTRODUCTION COMPONENT 1 COMPONENT 2 COMPONENT 3 COMPONENT 4 COMPONENT 5 CONCLUSION RESOURCES
As previously noted, mobile technology provides the following benefits:
•	 Speed: Mobile technology can render interactions with program beneficiaries instantaneous, and can 
automate the collection of data that is vital to real-time monitoring of project or supply-chain activities.
•	 Scale: Once the technology base is established, a program can reach thousands or even millions of 
participants with costs per user declining as numbers increase.
•	 Geographic reach: Mobile technologies have helped usher in an era where distance no longer matters. 
Digital information can be generated and transmitted next door or across the globe.
•	 Transparency: By providing information directly from source to participant and vice versa, mobiles facilitate 
greater openness and transparency. 
•	 Convenience: Mobiles are often described as available anytime, anywhere. Whether it is access to an account 
or access to information, mobiles bring an unprecedented level of convenience.
•	 Privacy/Discretion: Mobile devices are typically personal devices. They all have some degree of security and 
can be used in private. Whether accessing an account or responding to a survey, mobile technology supports 
the exchange of sensitive information. In Haiti, for example, beneficiaries appreciated receiving payments to a 
mobile money account because it was discrete. Using the old method, the whole village knew when payments 
were disbursed. Although as mentioned earlier in the handbook, there are unique privacy considerations to 
keep in mind when using mobile devices. 
•	 Empowerment: Since mobile devices rapidly improve the collection and dissemination of information, they 
are able to provide citizens with the ability to voice their opinions and to be heard by those more powerful, 
often for the first time. This is often the goal of mobile services designed to impact governance, such as citizen 
monitoring of election campaigns via SMS, but ideally should be a long-term goal of any mobile service—
since mobile technology used correctly puts the power of information, communication, finance, and social 
networking directly into the one device that increasingly large numbers of people use every single day. 
© 2011 Johns Hopkins University Global mHealth Initiative, Courtesy of Photoshare
71 Integrating Mobiles into Development Projects
INTRODUCTION COMPONENT 1 COMPONENT 2 COMPONENT 3 COMPONENT 4 COMPONENT 5 CONCLUSION RESOURCES
technology to all schools and the number of students 
using the device constitute an output, improved 
reading comprehension constitute the purpose, 
and strengthened basic education opportunities as 
the goal. This is a drastically simplified example but 
it is intended to show that the technology itself is 
classified as an input, its distribution and use is often 
an output, and what it contributes to is the project’s 
specific purpose.
One key difference with mobile-enabled projects 
is that the mobile industry is relatively new and 
rapidly developing. Private sector partners are 
often start-ups who are constantly learning and 
adapting their business plans. USAID should work 
with implementing partners and any mobile service 
subpartners to develop appropriate and realistic 
quarterly projections. Regular reviews of the PMP 
with all partners can be used to ensure that planned 
activities are still relevant, or to make any needed 
adjustments to keep the project on track.
EXAMPLE
Monitoring of mobile-enabled projects is similar to to distinguish between the technology itself and For example, an NGO in Zambia wanted to 
help a mobile payments provider to develop 
monitoring of any development project. As outlined the intended inputs, outputs, purposes, and project educational materials. By the time the materials 
in ADS 203, the monitoring plan should first identify goals. For example, in a project that uses ICT-enabled were complete, the payments provider had 
indicators that track the project goal, purpose,  educational software resources to improve secondary changed their product features so significantly 
sub-purpose, outputs, and inputs built into the logical school reading comprehension, the hardware and that the materials could no longer be used. 
framework. It is important to remember at this stage software constitute an input, the distribution of the 
72 Integrating Mobiles into Development Projects
INTRODUCTION COMPONENT 1 COMPONENT 2 COMPONENT 3 COMPONENT 4 COMPONENT 5 CONCLUSION RESOURCES
What information do service  The automated and real-time collection of this data The following table provides examples of 
providers commonly capture? also facilitates the open sharing of data, in line with illustrative indicators at the output, outcome, 
the US government’s Open Government Initiative and impact level: 
One of the many advantages of relying on a and the forthcoming USAID open data policy for 
commercial service provider for a portion of the datasets generated through USAID-funded initiatives. Output Indicators
project implementation is that mobile service However, not all service providers will immediately be N umber of mobile devices provisioned and distributed
providers typically generate large amounts of useful willing to provide this information to all partners, and Number of individuals trained on the mobile service
data. This information combined with more traditional therefore it is important to agree upon information Number of mobile money transactions
development metrics can provide an important sharing (both with partners and with the public) in 
Number of individuals with mobile access.
perspective on the success and impact of a program. the initial planning stages of a project.
Outcome Indicators
Mobile service providers typically capture  What are some commonly  P ercentage increase in crop yields due to use of mobile 
the following information: used M4D indicators? farm extension applications
I ncrease in the availability of credit due to individuals 
developing a financial history through mobile money 
•	 Unique ID for each program participant USAID is in the process of developing a standard set transactions
of performance indicators for M4D projects that can  Increase in the value of crops due to an ability to 
•	 Number of users of the application be tailored for specific programs. As the ease with conduct transactions higher up the value chain
which this data can be collected varies by country, Impact Indicators
•	 Time of use you should consider whether any indicator you  Increase in the number of small businesses  
require implementing partners to collect data on a) due to availability and affordability of mobile 
•	 Location of use can be easily collected and b) is relevant to measuring communications services
the achievement of the project’s development I ncrease in broad-based economic growth
•	 Frequency of use objective or intermediate results.  As you balance the Positive improvement in corruption perception  
ease of data collection with their perceived relevance, index score
•	 Specific type of transaction remember that data collection is expensive. Choose 
a number and range of indicators appropriate to the On the following pages we include a more detailed 
size, scope, and objectives of your activity. preliminary set of indicators for both mobile money 
and mobile access projects.
73 Integrating Mobiles into Development Projects
INTRODUCTION COMPONENT 1 COMPONENT 2 COMPONENT 3 COMPONENT 4 COMPONENT 5 CONCLUSION RESOURCES
Mobile Money: Core mobile money indicator data are generated through the mobile money service provider’s 
platform and focus on adoption and usage. This information, combined with more traditional development 
metrics, can provide an important perspective on the success and impact of a program, specifically by helping to 
understand access, uptake, and usage of a particular service. The following list of indicators are generally used to 
evaluate a mobile money service overall. However, some or all may be applicable to a project’s use of mobile 
money, especially if that project is designed to promote the mobile money industry in a country or region. 
Indicator Definition Significance Further Disaggregation  
(where possible)36
Total number of all Total number of all registered accounts Indicates access to and availability of services Gender, Geographic distribution, Age
registered accounts
Active mobile money Typically defined as subscribers making at least  Indicates actual uptake of the service, which is often significantly Gender, Geographic distribution, Age
subscribers 1 transaction in the past 30 days lower than access 
Transaction frequency Number of transactions in a given period Indicates the level of usage of the product  Transaction type (P2P, deposit, withdrawal, etc.), 
Gender, Geographic distribution, Age
Transaction location Number of agent-assisted transactions, often Indicates whether users are using their mobile wallet to store Agent type (kiosk, retail store, etc.), Agent 
referred to as over-the-counter or OTC transaction money on and to make multiple transactions, an indication of the Gender, Gender, Geographic Location, Age
versus non-agent assisted transactions, which are level of ecosystem development.   
those that the user conducts directly through their 
own mobile phone May also indicate level of customer education of product benefits. 
Transaction volume The average amount of funds involved per Indicates the type of usage to whether customers are using Transaction type (P2P, deposit, withdrawal, etc.),  
transaction the product for small transactions or large transactions, which Length of time a customer has been active 
combined with other indicators can suggest if the service is priced (are behaviors changing over time?), Gender, 
appropriately for the targeted transactions types Geographic distribution, Age
Number of active The number of mobile money agents that  Indicates access.  Transaction type (P2P, deposit, withdrawal, etc.), 
agents have completed at least one transaction in the   Gender, Geographic distribution 
past 30 days The total number of agents is mostly irrelevant since inactive agents 
are unable to provides services.
Agent liquidity The amount of cash vs. electronic value that agents Indicates access, since agents cannot provide service if they do not Geographic distribution
have on average per day have cash and e-value37  
36.  A ge and gender are rarely collected by service providers and will likely require additional data collection by the IP or M&E team.
37. M any service providers do not collect this information systematically. However, it is increasingly available and often a mobile money provider is willing to provide it for a certain targeted area within a project (rating their high, medium, and low volume agents in a 
certain town or neighborhood). 
74 Integrating Mobiles into Development Projects
INTRODUCTION COMPONENT 1 COMPONENT 2 COMPONENT 3 COMPONENT 4 COMPONENT 5 CONCLUSION RESOURCES
To reiterate, access to this data in the aggregate depends on the service country through the country’s Central Bank or through the GSMA Mobiles  
providers’ policies and interests. If, for example, your project has a financial for Development Index (MDI).
inclusion component you may want to know what types of mobile transactions 
are occurring across the country. While providers will almost always provide Mobile Access: Metrics capturing improvement in mobile access are  
data specific to your own organization’s transactions on their platform, they are also primarily service provider driven.  The variables by which you disaggregate  
sometimes hesitant to share aggregate data on subscribers, volumes, and agents, will again be dependent on the specific goals of your project. 
as this data can be seen as proprietary—and not something that they want their 
competitors to know. Therefore, it may not always be possible to receive this  Some examples of indicators used to measure changes in mobile  
data from the providers directly. If this is the case, you may be able to find  access include:
out combined aggregate data from all mobile money service providers in the 
Indicator Definition Significance Further Disaggregation  
(where possible)36
SIM penetration Total number of all SIM cards issued – this Indicates access to and availability of basic services Gender, Geographic distribution, Age 
should not be equated with mobile access, 
since many people have more than one SIM
Unique  Total number of unique mobile phone Indicates access to and availability of basic services Gender, Geographic distribution, Age 
subscriber rates subscribers in a market
Mobile network The availability of network required for voice Indicates access to and availability of  basic services Geographic distribution, 2G, 3G, 4G
coverage calls and SMS messages
Smartphone Total number of smartphones among target Indicates access to sophisticated services, which impacts Gender, Geographic distribution, Age, 
penetration population project design, business model, and sustainability of a service Operating system (iOS, Android, etc.)
Available  The price of basic data Indicates affordability, which impacts the business model and Pricing plans available (pre-paid vs.  
data rates sustainability of a service post-paid)38 and types of data (3G, 4G)
3G/4G coverage The availability of high-speed mobile internet Indicates access to and availability of  more sophisticated Geographic distribution 
services
Number of users The number of target clients accessing mobile Indicates uptake of more sophisticated services Gender, Geographic distribution, Age
subscribing to data internet
plans
Trends in data  The change in the average price of data to Indicates whether data is becoming more or less accessible Pricing plans available (pre-paid vs.  
plan pricing mobile subscribers over time post-paid) and types of data (3G, 4G)
38.  It may be relevant to consider that some data services are offered for free by the MNO in order to encourage usage, such as Facebook Zero.
75 Integrating Mobiles into Development Projects
INTRODUCTION COMPONENT 1 COMPONENT 2 COMPONENT 3 COMPONENT 4 COMPONENT 5 CONCLUSION RESOURCES
© 2009 Min Zaw, Courtesy of Photoshare
The data can then be uploaded directly to an online user interface, which allows 
One helpful mnemonic device related to establishing performance 
for real-time, instant analysis of data. Other mobile data collection allows for the 
metrics is SMART. You should strive for indicators that are:
collection of data directly from beneficiaries, rather going through an enumerator 
S M A R T or other intermediary. These tools can significantly increase the efficiency of 
monitoring the implementation of M4D interventions themselves or any other 
Specific Measurable Attainable Relevant Time-bound aspect of a project. Unlike mobile money or mobile access, projects using mobile 
 data can address a wide variety of objectives and goals. Consequently, there  
Other metrics may include those that capture the availability of local content. This are no standard indicators, and tailored indicators will need to be developed 
could include number of sites, publications, or pages available based on language accordingly.
and delivery model.
How should you determine which  
As mentioned earlier, you can collect data on many of these indicators through  performance metrics are most appropriate?
an agreement with your service provider. However, many of these indicators may 
not be accessible, especially information on demographics such as age or gender.  An important question to answer when establishing performance metrics  
As a result, it may also be necessary or beneficial for implementing partners to is whether the metrics actually support the overall objectives of the project. 
collect data systematically on their own—this is where mobile data collection tools Establishing the performance metrics and developing the projects performance 
can be extremely useful. Mobile data usually involves equipping enumerators or management plan (PMP) should be a collaborative process between USAID  
field staff with mobile devices to fill in survey questions as research is conducted. and the selected implementing partner. In most cases, performance metrics that  
76 Integrating Mobiles into Development Projects
INTRODUCTION COMPONENT 1 COMPONENT 2 COMPONENT 3 COMPONENT 4 COMPONENT 5 CONCLUSION RESOURCES
are specific to mobiles will be used when the project has a core component that is focused on some element 
of the mobile ecosystem. In cases where mobiles are integrated into a project, then mobiles are more likely to 
contribute to attaining standard project indicators (such as improved access to sanitation), rather than being 
specific to mobiles.  
The following criteria should be used when determining the specific project performance metrics:
•	 Does the metric contribute to an understanding of overall program success? This is the  
fundamental question and requires analysis and establishing linkages between quantitative factors and  
broad program objectives.
•	 Is the data accurate and available at a reasonable cost to the project? Monitoring and evaluation  
costs can consume a significant percentage of a project budget. USAID and implementing partners must 
evaluate the cost of obtaining accurate data against the benefits derived from that data. As previously 
discussed, M4D platforms can facilitate the collection of accurate information. Customizing the data to  
meet specific project needs, however, can often be difficult and expensive. Advance work with the service 
provider can reduce costs and deliver better results.
•	 Does the data focus on your target segment? Collecting information, for example, on overall mobile money 
usage may not be relevant to a rural agricultural loan program.
© 2014 Johns Hopkins University Global mHealth Initiative, 
Courtesy of Photoshare
•	 Do these metrics encourage a holistic approach to program design, execution, and evaluation? Implementers 
know that these metrics comprise the “bottom line” by which you will evaluate their performance, the impact One approach for linking performance metrics to 
of their activities, and the viability of additional similar mobile-related programs  project impact is to use a results framework. A results 
or activities. While there is an obvious need and impulse to “check the box” in any program, in projects framework identifies results areas which are further 
involving mobiles there is a considerable behavioral change component involved that is not always easily aligned with overall project objectives. Specific metrics 
captured in program metrics. Understanding, adoption, and habitual usage is as much about intangibles  are linked to results areas and provide the supporting 
such as trust, confidence, and a willingness to experiment as it is about device ownership, network information necessary to evaluate project impact. 
coverage, and market appropriate content/services. As a result, any approved metrics should demonstrate The following example presents a sample results 
an understanding of the need to build toward both the tangible and intangible results that will lead to the framework for a mobile money project along with 
greatest likelihood for broad, sustained usage of the proposed use of mobiles. the specific supporting metrics.
77 Integrating Mobiles into Development Projects
INTRODUCTION COMPONENT 1 COMPONENT 2 COMPONENT 3 COMPONENT 4 COMPONENT 5 CONCLUSION RESOURCES
MALAWI MOBILE MONEY ACCELERATOR PROGRAM (MMAP) RESULTS FRAMEWORK
USAID Development Objective: 
Increased Financial Inclusion in Malawi
MMAP Project Objective: 
Increased access to and usage of mobile money
IR1: Demand for Mobile Money Increased IR2: Mobile Money Infrastructure IR3: Legal and Regulatory Framework 
and Systems Strengthened to Enable Mobile Money Strengthened
Project Key Result Area’s (KRA)
KRA 1. Public Awareness of KRA 4. Interconnectivity between KRA 7. Capacity of public sector to regulate 
mobile money increased financial institutions and mobile and supervise mobile money strengthened
network operators increased
KRA 8. Consumer protection relevant 
KRA 2. Financial Literacy of Malawians KRA 5. Private and public sector to mobile money strengthened
with regards to mobile money increased investment in mobile money 
ecosystem increased
KRA 3. Public, Private Sector, and KRA 6. Capacity of mobile service 
Citizen use of mobile money Increased providers and financial institutions to 
deliver mobile money strengthened
Indicator 3: Number of active mobile wallets Indicator 2: Number of registered mobile wallets Indicator 2: Number of registered mobile wallets
Indicator 4:  Number of mobile wallet transactions  Indicator 3: Number of active mobile wallets Indicator 3: Number of active mobile wallets
per quarter Indicator 4: Number of mobile wallet transactions per quarter Indicator 4: Number of mobile wallet transactions per quarter
Indicator 7: N umber of employers using mobile money  
to make salary payments Indicator 5: Number of mobile money agents Indicator 10: N umber of trainings, conferences, meetings 
Indicator 8:  Number of salary payment recipients made  Indicator 6: Number of districts with mobile m oney agents
provided to regulators on best practices  
relevant to mobile money
with mobile money Indicator 11: N umber of MOUs and agreements facilitated 
to establish interconnectivity between MSPs, Indicator 16:  Number of Bills relevant for mobile money Indicator 9: N umber of G2P payment recipients made  
with mobile money financial institutions, and credit card companies 
growth developed/reviewed and enacted  
i.e. the Payment Systems Bill, Communications 
Indicator 12: N umber of public awareness and financial literacy Indicator 14:  Number of public private partnerships formed  B ill, the electronic payment Bill
events and trainings held as a result of FTF assistance
Indicator 14:  Number of public private partnerships formed  Indicator 15: N umber of private enterprises, etc., that  
as a result of FTF assistance applied new technologies or management As shown, specific metrics support specific results  practices as a result of USG assistance
Indicator 15: N umber of private enterprises, etc., that  and form the basis for evaluating project impact  
applied new technologies or management and success. 
practices as a result of USG assistance   
78 Integrating Mobiles into Development Projects
INTRODUCTION COMPONENT 1 COMPONENT 2 COMPONENT 3 COMPONENT 4 COMPONENT 5 CONCLUSION RESOURCES
How should the  mobile devices are faster, cheaper, and more 
implementing partner  accurate (see the Mobile Data Factsheet for some Even lack of mobile network 
capture and validate data? examples). There are a range of survey applications coverage is no longer a compelling 
specifically designed for smartphones and tablets. reason to not use mobile devices. In 
A key element of a PMP is a discussion of how an These applications enable the user to easily create Myanmar, Pact used mobile devices 
to collect data offline and then upload it using 
implementing partner will capture and validate data. project specific instruments and include collection office WiFi instead of the mobile networks.
USAID should carefully review the draft PMP and and tabulation features. Unless there is a compelling 
hold multiple discussions with the implementing reason, USAID should encourage the use of mobile-
partner on how data will be collected and validated. based data collection tools.
Where practical, USAID should also hold meetings 
with the mobile service provider and develop 
an understanding of their standard reporting 
capabilities and the ease to which reports can be 
customized. This is a particularly important role for 
USAID Missions to play in countries where multiple 
implementing partners might be using mobile 
services from the same provider. Whereas individual 
projects might not have the influence to convince the 
service provider to share some types of data, USAID 
can use its convening power to represent all of its 
implementing partners in these discussions. For your 
reference, a Sample M4D-oriented Performance 
Indicator Reference Sheet can be found in the 
Resources section.
Certain performance metrics dealing with 
the attitudes of beneficiaries typically requires 
field-based data collection and surveys. Mobile 
technology is ideally suited to support these types 
of data collection efforts either through the use 
of enumerators or through self-reporting. Recent 
experience indicate that surveys conducted using 
79 Integrating Mobiles into Development Projects
INTRODUCTION COMPONENT 1 COMPONENT 2 COMPONENT 3 COMPONENT 4 COMPONENT 5 CONCLUSION RESOURCES
How should you critically  Some critical milestone activities for M4D projects include:
assess project milestones  
at key junctures along the •	 Partnering strategy: These strategies typically involve a direct relationship with an MNO but sometimes 
project life cycle? the partner is an ICT service provider who has relationships with one or more MNOs. The strategy should 
demonstrate an accurate understanding of which entity is directly responsible for managing the mobile service. 
In addition to developing strong performance You will also want to validate whether the implementer’s strategy is to engage mobile service providers 
indicators, USAID staff also need to take an active simply as a consumer of a service, in which case interaction can be limited and restricted to specified 
role in monitoring the implementation of M4D topics. Alternatively, if the strategy is to partner with a given provider(s) to expand or deepen their service, 
projects. Depending on how central the use of expectations for engagement and interaction will much higher.
mobiles will be, project milestones may need to 
incorporate some systems development lifecycle •	 Service provider MOU and contract: After a partnering strategy is developed, the next step is to enter 
milestones including device testing and end-to-end into the formal partnerships. The MOU should clearly articulate the objectives for this particular partnership 
system testing into the overall project work plan. as well as the anticipated roles for the service provider. You will want to verify that these roles are both 
Activities such as device provisioning and deployment necessary and realistic given the market/operating environment. The contract should focus on service delivery 
take time and sufficient resources must be devoted to elements (i.e. required functionality, system availability, and geographic coverage), pricing, and data collection/
these types of activities. Training elements also must management (i.e. what kind of data, in what format, accessible how, and at what frequency).
be thoughtfully scheduled and allow for contingencies 
such as repeat training as required. The best way •	 Pilot plan: You will want to ensure that the implementer has sufficiently focused on pre-pilot launch 
to accomplish this is to critically review work plan activities such as: network availability assessment and service testing, hardware/equipment procurement and 
submissions and to hold frequent interim project distribution, participant mobilization and training (live simulations and pictogram-based content built around 
reviews (IPRs). a localized narrative can be particularly effective), as well as verification of data collection/management and 
reporting capabilities (content, format, and access type). Programs with a mandate to reach scale also need to 
demonstrate a phased approach to reach established projections post-pilot launch (i.e. begin with core group 
of “high performers” from trainings, staged roll-out based on geography and signal strength/reliability)
80 Integrating Mobiles into Development Projects
INTRODUCTION COMPONENT 1 COMPONENT 2 COMPONENT 3 COMPONENT 4 COMPONENT 5 CONCLUSION RESOURCES
How can you evaluate  
the impact that mobiles  
are having on a project?
USAID differentiates between impact evaluations 
and performance evaluations in its Evaluation 
Policy. Impact evaluations measure the change 
in a development outcome that is attributable 
to a specific intervention, whereas performance 
evaluations focus on what a particular project has 
USAID staff can use the following questions to help manage projects against these critical milestones: achieved. For purposes of this handbook, we have 
focused primarily on impact evaluations. There is not 
•	 Does the implementing partner have a backup plan if the service provider cannot deliver? one methodology that is best suited to evaluate the 
impact that mobiles are having on a project. However, 
•	 Does the pilot plan provide sufficient time to correct deficiencies if issues are identified? it is important to consider the following two factors:
•	 Is there sufficient time and resources to deploy and test devices?  1. Whether you want to determine the impact  
Primarily related to staff devices or if the project is supporting device purchases of the mobile service itself, and how it compares 
to manual processes; and
•	 Are there mechanisms in place to repair and/or replace devices?  
Primarily related to staff devices or if the project is supporting device purchases 2. Whether you want to capture spillover effects  
of the project created by the dissemination and 
•	 Does the system test plan accurately reflect actual conditions? use of a particular mobile service. 
•	 Is the training program properly timed and properly resourced? With regard to the first consideration, it is not 
uncommon to want to tease out the impact of the 
•	 Does the launch strategy align with target segment behavior? technology itself—this may include both improving 
operational efficiencies as well as other benefits. For 
•	 Do the reports provide useful and accurate data? example, let’s consider a project that is providing 
information to farmers via mobile phones instead 
By actively managing the implementing partner and critically evaluating project progress, USAID can help ensure of through extension workers. In this case, the 
the program stays on track and meets the desired objectives. mobile phone is simply a channel for disseminating 
81 Integrating Mobiles into Development Projects
INTRODUCTION COMPONENT 1 COMPONENT 2 COMPONENT 3 COMPONENT 4 COMPONENT 5 CONCLUSION RESOURCES
considerable spillover effects in another sector; the 
adoption and dissemination of devices may help 
develop a more skilled workforce; exposure to 
new technology may spur a local entrepreneurial 
movement; or increased internet access may have 
a variety of impacts on education, transparency, and 
human rights issues. It is important to be especially 
mindful of spillover effects in the context of projects 
that integrate mobiles, and, if interested in capturing 
the spillover, make sure that the implementer is 
planning their evaluation accordingly.
Impact can also result from the service itself, or  
from a particular application of this service. For 
example, using mobile money to help smallholder 
farmers link to new suppliers can have a specific 
impact beyond the impact of mobile money on its 
own. However, impact is often difficult to ascertain, 
both because of limited funding to conduct thorough 
impact evaluations and a hesitance on the part of 
information. Therefore you should include output design. The strategic use of a control group might many development practitioners to talk frankly about 
indicators related to operational efficiency gains  also make sense if one wants to test the impact  shortcomings. This information is important, though, 
from using mobile phones, such as the speed, cost of different technologies or delivery models  and can help you to determine why something did 
and accuracy of information flow.  (i.e. SMS vs. IVR). or did not work according to plans. 
If you want to identify the impact of the technology Keep in mind that projects that integrate mobiles  
in comparison to the manual process, rather than are likely to produce indirect spillover effects in 
simply assess performance, your implementing terms of how they contribute to project objectives 
partner must build in a control group that does not and goal. For example, an application meant to 
benefit from the technology early in the project drive a specific outcome in one sector may have 
82 Integrating Mobiles into Development Projects
INTRODUCTION COMPONENT 1 COMPONENT 2 COMPONENT 3 COMPONENT 4 COMPONENT 5 CONCLUSION RESOURCES
Here are some questions you can use to try to assess impact:
•	 How many registered and active users does the service have (and how do you define active users)? Knowing 
this will give you a sense of the value that target users place on the quality of the service. If the service has 
10,000 registered users, but only 200 active users that is generally a bad sign.
•	 Who pays for the service and how do they pay for it? While donor-subsidized mobile services are not 
necessarily a bad thing, knowing who pays for the service can help you to determine the likelihood of 
sustainability of the service beyond the end of the project. If individuals are paying directly for use of the 
service, that is generally also a sign that they value the service. You will also want to know how users actually 
pay for the service—with airtime (cost of a call or SMS), by purchasing a dedicated SIM, etc.—and whether 
they pay on a “per-use” basis or through a subscription. Understanding how providers charge for the service 
will give you a sense as to whether they properly understand the users they expect to serve in terms of 
disposable income and transaction preferences. Often, if individuals are unable to pay, then an institution that 
values the service and works with them may cover the cost—such as a large civil society organization that 
covers the costs of SMS messages sent to a citizen-reporting platform. 
•	 How do users sign up for the service? Someone may have developed a great service with real impact 
potential but the process for signing up becomes a barrier to adoption. Some services are embedded on a 
specific SIM card that needs to be purchased before it can be used, and it is then required to navigate a new 
menu to access it. Other services can be activated by sending an SMS text or calling a dedicated call center. 
The easier it is to sign up and access the service, the more likely someone will be to use it.
CRITICAL SUCCESS 
•	 How do you define success and what impact have you demonstrated to date? This can be a  FACTORS
somewhat subjective response, but it can help to give you a sense of how serious the implementing partner •	  Work with implementing partners to  
is about considering impact. For example,  the number of people reached is a fairly poor indicator of actual use SMART indicators when measuring  
impact. Success that is defined by changes in knowledge or behavior as a result of being reached or using the the impact of mobiles on their work
service is a much stronger measurement. An even more robust measurement would be the ability to show •	 E ngage with implementing partners  
that this behavior change has actually improved livelihoods (i.e. an increase in income or an increased ability  on monitoring and evaluation early  
to voice opinions to create political change), which might require conducting a full impact evaluation with  and continuously.
a control group.
83 Integrating Mobiles into Development Projects
INTRODUCTION COMPONENT 1 COMPONENT 2 COMPONENT 3 COMPONENT 4 COMPONENT 5 CONCLUSION RESOURCES
Conclusion
Congratulations on making it to the end of the handbook! We hope that this handbook serves as a helpful  
resource to you when integrating mobiles into development projects. We encourage you to use and adapt the 
templates provided in the Resources section, and to refer back to the handbook at various points throughout the 
project life cycle. And of course, do not limit yourself just to what was included in the handbook. As mentioned  
in the introduction, this handbook is meant to serve as a foundational basis from which to broaden your 
understanding of how mobiles can be more effectively and appropriately integrated into development projects. 
As mobiles gain traction within General/Cross-Cutting: 
development projects, there is a S caling Mobile for Development: A Developing World Opportunity – GSMA
growing repository of expertise and 
resources that are available to USAID Mobile Access:
Mission staff. In addition to those Access Issues in Scaling Mobile for Development – GSMA 
resources mentioned throughout  Impact of Mobile Telephony on Economic Growth – GSMA, Deloitte, and Cisco 
the handbook, here is a list of some Mobile Data: 
other resources for further reading Mobile Data Collection Systems: A review of the Current State of the Field – NOMAD
and consideration. Given how Mobile Data Solutions Group on Learning Lab (access key resources when you join) 
quickly this space is developing, it is 
Mobile Money:
important to reiterate that this list  
is by no means exhaustive. Digital Finance for Development: A Handbook for USAID Staff – USAID/FHI 360
Making the Journey from Cash to Electronic Payments: A Toolkit of Guidance and Resources – USAID/NetHope
The Journey Toward ‘Cash Lite’: Addressing Poverty, Saving Money and Increasing Transparency by Accelerating the Shift  
to Electronic Payments – BTCA
Enabling Mobile Money Interventions: Primer, Diagnostic Checklist, and Model Scopes of Work – USAID
Innovations in Financial Services Delivery – Branchless Banking: Primer, Diagnostic Checklist, and Model Scopes of Work – USAID
Mobile Money Toolkit – IFC 
Emerging Lessons of Public Funders in Branchless Banking – CGAP 
84 Integrating Mobiles into Development Projects
INTRODUCTION COMPONENT 1 COMPONENT 2 COMPONENT 3 COMPONENT 4 COMPONENT 5 CONCLUSION RESOURCES
RESOURCES
85 Integrating Mobiles into Development Projects
INTRODUCTION COMPONENT 1 COMPONENT 2 COMPONENT 3 COMPONENT 4 COMPONENT 5 CONCLUSION RESOURCES
Resources
Digital Development Factsheets 88 
  
These factsheets from USAID’s Digital Development team provide additional details on some of the areas mentioned in the handbook 
   
 Digital Inclusion Factsheet: An overview of the key elements for improving mobile technology access  88
 Digital Finance Factsheet: An overview of digital financial services, such as mobile money 90
 Mobile Data Factsheet: An overview of using mobile for data collection 92
Guiding Questions for Meetings with Key Partners  94
 These guiding questions, developed by USAID’s Digital Development team, are a useful starting point to prepare for meetings with potential partners 
 Greentree Consensus: Principles for Technology in Development  97
Developed and endorsed by multiple donors, including USAID, these nine guidelines are important to keep in mind when developing any M4D initiative 
Mobiles for Development Checklist  99
Our six-step process to determining if and how mobiles can help you achieve your broader development objectives 
ICT Option Selection Worksheet            103
Use this worksheet to help figure out what types of information and communications technologies might be useful in your project
Current Mobile Services Template  104
Use this template to keep track of all of the mobile services that already exist in your country that might be relevant to your project design
Sample M4D Evaluation Template  105
A handy template for evaluating M4D-related elements of proposals
Sample Performance Indicator Reference Sheet (PIRS) 108
This is a sample of a PIRS from a USAID project in Malawi focused on mobile money
86 Integrating Mobiles into Development Projects
INTRODUCTION COMPONENT 1 COMPONENT 2 COMPONENT 3 COMPONENT 4 COMPONENT 5 CONCLUSION RESOURCES
Resources
M4D Inventory  110
A selection of mobile services being used in development in Southeast Asia to give you an idea of what is possible
USAID Projects in Southeast Asia Using Mobiles  127
A selection of USAID projects in Southeast Asia that are already using mobiles in their work
Glossary of Terms  133
Your guide to all of those words you have heard related to mobiles in one convenient place
          
87 Integrating Mobiles into Development Projects
INTRODUCTION COMPONENT 1 COMPONENT 2 COMPONENT 3 COMPONENT 4 COMPONENT 5 CONCLUSION RESOURCES
DIGITAL INCLUSION
Access to mobile technology DID YOU KNOW?
is the foundation upon which While the number of mobile handheld devices around  
the world surpassed the global population in 2013, the  
transformational mobile story of access is much more complicated.
products and services are built
CONSUMER AWARENESS
•	Despite	the	tremendous	value	of	agricultural	 
Digital inclusion means more than an available mobile  information, only 5 percent of base of  
connection. It also means an individual’s ability to afford the  the pyramid users in Kenya are aware of  
 commodity pricing services and applications3 
services provided, value them, and have the ability to use 
them. Only then will mobile applications and platforms, like AFFORDABILITY
mobile money and mobile data, reach their full potential. •	 In	the	least	developed	countries,	basic	 
Ensuring universal access is going to take a combined effort  mobile services can cost nearly 16  
 percent of average monthly income4
of companies, governments, NGOs, and the international 
•	 In	some	African	countries,	broadband	 
development community to create an enabling policy and  costs are 1,000+ percent of average  
regulatory environment, build new business models, and  monthly income5
cultivate relevant local content.
LOCALLY RELEVANT CONTENT
•	78	percent	of	all	available	Internet	sites	 
MAXIMIZING THE  originate in the U.S. or EU6
MOBILE OPPORTUNITY •	There	are	more	Wikipedia	articles	written	 
 about Antarctica than any country in Africa  
While the reach and rate of adoption of mobile technologies has been 
 or South America7 
unprecedented,	there	is	still	a	massive	growth	opportunity	in	most	markets,	
particularly among underserved populations.
ATTAINABILITY
39% •	548	million	mobile	users	do	not	have	  access to the power grid8
number of unique mobile 
subscribers worldwide1
CONNECTIVITY
•	90+	percent	of	the	people	in	the	 
45% 	 world’s	49	least	developed	countries	 	 lack	internet	access9
of the world’s population 
is currently covered by a 
3G or 4G signal2
1 https://gsmaintelligence.com/analysis/2012/10/global- 3	 http://www.infodev.org/infodev-files/final_kenya_bop_ 5 http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=ex4OsiBptOc  8	 http://www.gsma.com/mobilefordevelopment/wp-content/
mobile-penetration-subscribers-versus-connections/354/ study_web_jan_02_2013_0.pdf uploads/2012/04/chargingchoices2011.pdf
6	 http://www.nsn.com/system/files/document/Information_
2 http://www.itu.int/ITU-D/ict/facts/2011/material/ 4 http://www.undpegov.org/mgov-primer.html changes_lives.pdf 9	 http://www.itu.int/net/pressoffice/press_releases/2013/36.
ICTFactsFigures2011.pdf aspx
7	 http://www.oii.ox.ac.uk/vis/?id=4e3c02dd
INTRODUCTION COMPONENT 1 COMPONENT 2 COMPONENT 3 COMPONENT 4 COMPONENT 5 CONCLUSION RESOURCES
PARTNERING TO ACHIEVE IMPACT
CLOSING THE GENDER GAP REACHING TWO MILLION 
IRAQI WOMEN
A	woman	is	21	percent	less	likely	than	a	
man to own a phone in low and middle- In 2011, only 20 percent of Iraqi mobile 
income countries. Globally, this equates operator Asiacell’s subscribers were women. 
to a mobile phone gender gap of roughly Research produced that year through the 
300 million women. USAID’s partnership GSMA mWomen Program sparked	
with GSMA, AusAID, and Visa, the GSMA Asiacell	to	design	a	new	product	
mWomen Program, aims to enable catering to women called the Almas Line, 
150 million underserved women to own which	includes	features	like	rate	reductions	
and effectively use mobile phones to access during	off-peak	hours	and	a	“bye-bye”	
vital	information,	networks,	and	services.		 option	to	block	potential	harassers.	In	
two years, more than two million women 
300 MILLION have enrolled, doubling the proportion of Asiacell’s female customers.
the mobile phone gender gap
STEP CHARGING
discounts after 3rd minute of usage 
address women’s purchasing power 
BRINGING INTERNET PRICES WITHIN REACH constraints and cater to women’s longer average call time 
Today, in many developing countries, 
more than half of Internet users access CHOOSING OFF-PEAK HOURS
it exclusively through mobile devices. flexible	accounts	for	different	
daily call patterns than men
This is set to grow as smartphones and “The	Alliance’s	
innovative efforts 
tablets become more available. Access to to bring Internet 
the Internet drives economic growth, but prices within reach 
mobile broadband costs are prohibitively will not only expand DISCOUNTED OFF-NETWORK CALLS
high for most people in developing opportunities lower rates maintain brand loyalty as 
for students and women	are	less	likely	to	have	SIMs	from	
countries. USAID’s partnership with various operatorsentrepreneurs around 
Google.org,	Omidyar	Network,	DFID,	 the world, but spur 
and a host of other governments, economic growth and 
FREE:	“BYE-BYE”	SERVICE
technology providers, civil society groups, development.”	 ability	to	block	numbers	helps	
and academia is empowering policy DR. RAJIV SHAH prevent harassment
USAID Administrator
makers	with	the	tools	and	resources	to	
facilitate	more	open,	competitive	markets.	
This partnership, the Alliance for 
Affordable Internet, aims to bring VALUE ADDED SERVICES
broadband prices down to no more than discounts on female-focused content 
increase utility and personalization
5 percent of monthly income, enabling 
the next two billion users to come online.
USAID’s Digital Development team fosters FIND OUT MORE 
CONTACT US WATCH OUR VIDEO 
transformative	and	market-driven	solutions	to	
empower	individuals	through	financial	inclusion,	data- www.usaid.gov/digital-development
driven evidence, and access to mobile technology.  We 
offer	knowledge	tools	and	support	to	dramatically	 digitaldevelopment@usaid.gov
increase the adoption of mobile technology 
throughout USAID’s programs, and we partner with @USAID_Digital
other donors, governments, companies, and NGOs to 
accelerate proven solutions that impact millions.
INTRODUCTION COMPONENT 1 COMPONENT 2 COMPONENT 3 COMPONENT 4 COMPONENT 5 CONCLUSION RESOURCES
DIGITAL FINANCE
Inclusive electronic payments BENEFITS
such as mobile money not only SPEED & SECURITY  Following the 2010 Haiti earthquake, replacing cash  
have the potential to lift millions with mobile transfers halved theft and slashed the time it took to get aid to victims.1 
out of poverty, but can also FINANCIAL INCLUSION & RESILIENCE  
improve governance by reducing Research suggests Kenyan families who do not use M-Pesa—the largest mobile money system in the 
world—suffer a 7 percent drop in consumption when 
costs and increasing transparency hit with a negative income shock, while consumption of 
families who use M-Pesa remains unaffected.2
With the push of a button, and often through a basic TRANSPARENCY & ACCOUNTABILITY  
mobile phone, inclusive electronic payments can eliminate $ Afghan police officers saw a 30 percent increase in take-
home pay when mobile payments replaced cash—simply 
the corruption, inefficiencies, and security risks of cash by reducing opportunities for skimming and eliminating 
payments. New “branchless” banking models, enabled the cost of handling cash.3
by the broad reach of mobile phone infrastructure, are 
reinventing financial services—once the exclusive domain COST SAVINGS  Research estimates connecting every Indian household 
of the rich—and offer the 2.5 billion unbanked people to a digital payment system and automating government 
worldwide the opportunity to take control of their flows could save the government $22 billion per year.
4
finances. Mobile phones can supply families with access PLATFORMS FOR INNOVATION  
to products like savings accounts, insurance, and credit— New businesses are emerging across the developing 
indispensable tools for lifting families out of poverty and world that use mobile payments to provide solutions to the poor in energy, water, sanitation, health, agriculture, 
connecting them to the formal economy. and other sectors. 
DEVELOPING A ROBUST ECOSYSTEM
REGULATORS  INTEGRATED Crafting regulations and business models that 
balance inclusion against SYSTEMS  
risk; safeguard consumers’ align these interests is complex, yet offers a facilitate efficient 
interests transactions historic opportunity to enable broad-based 
economic growth. USAID is accelerating 
CUSTOMERS the growth of inclusive electronic payments 
SERVICE PROVIDERS find electronic money through high-level advocacy, action-oriented 
design relevant products a compelling and 
and manage new affordable alternative research, demand aggregation, and targeted 
distribution networks to cash supply-side investments.
1 http://betterthancash.org/wp-content/uploads/2012/09 2 http://www.mit.edu/~tavneet/Jack_Suri.pdf 3 http://blog.usaid.gov/2012/02/we-must-do-better-than- 4 http://mckinseyonsociety.com/inclusive-growth-and-
/HMMI_-_Plugging_Into_Mobile_Money_Platforms_ cash/ financial-security/
FINAL.pdf
INTRODUCTION COMPONENT 1 COMPONENT 2 COMPONENT 3 COMPONENT 4 COMPONENT 5 CONCLUSION RESOURCES
RESULTS FROM THE FIELD
BUILDING TRANSPARENCY  
IN AFGHANISTAN
30% Corruption weakens institutions, disempowers 
perceived increase in citizens, and undermines stability. To instill 
income by police by transparency in public sector spending, 
cutting out graft
governments can use mobile money to 
automate payment delivery and produce 
a complete transaction record. In 2010, “Tools like the mobile phone or the debit 
Afghanistan’s government began paying police card—and new partnerships like Better Than 
Cash—represent very real opportunities to 
officers through mobile money. Officers generate results on a dramatic scale.”
thought they had received a 30 percent raise, 
DR. RAJIV SHAH, USAID Administrator
when in fact they were finally receiving their 
full salary. The government is now in the 
process of adopting mobile technology to BETTER THAN CASH 
replace cash payments and collections for  ALLIANCE (BTCA)
civil servant salaries and electricity bills.
USAID and the diverse set of BTCA 
members—including governments, 
TRANSFORMING GOVERNMENT AND EXPANDING companies, and NGOs—are 
developing and sharing tools to 
F INANCIAL INCLUSION IN THE PHILIPPINES promote the shift from cash to 
The Philippines has more than 7,100 islands, electronic payments. Achievements 
making it challenging to access a brick and mortar by BTCA members include:
bank or government office in certain parts 10+ u Colombia’s Familias en Accion  
of the country. USAID works with banks, the MILLION  disperse bimonthly benefits  
government, and mobile network operators to Filipinos have gained   to 2.4 million households. Within  
expand mobile financial services to these hard-to- access to more efficient  two years, 91 percent of  
reach areas. To date, more than 10 million Filipinos financial services  recipients had a card-linked  
have gained access to more efficient financial  bank account.
services. The Government of the Philippines is 
also encouraging agencies to adopt electronic u Mercy Corps cut theft of social  
payment systems as a way to increase efficiency  transfers by 50 percent in Haiti  
and introduce greater transparency in government “I save almost $17 each  using e-payments.
payday since I do not need 
financial transactions. With the support of USAID/ to go through that long u
Philippines’ Scaling Innovations in Mobile Money  In response to a devastating  and tiring trip to get my 
Project, one municipality has already adopted money from the bank.”  drought, the World Food  
electronic payments for its payroll disbursements,  Programme quickly sent money  LOLITA SINGAHAN 
and three other cities are poised to launch A 52-year-old school teacher   via mobile phones to 100,000+  
on Olutanga Island
mobile-enabled payment and collection systems  hungry farmers in Malawi.
for taxes, utilities, and social transfers.
USAID’s Digital Development team fosters FIND OUT MORE 
CONTACT US WATCH OUR VIDEO  
transformative and market-driven solutions to 
empower individuals through financial inclusion, data- www.usaid.gov/digital-development
driven evidence, and access to mobile technology.  We 
offer knowledge tools and support to dramatically digitaldevelopment@usaid.gov
increase the adoption of mobile technology 
throughout USAID’s programs, and we partner with @USAID_Digital
other donors, governments, companies, and NGOs to 
accelerate proven solutions that impact millions.
INTRODUCTION COMPONENT 1 COMPONENT 2 COMPONENT 3 COMPONENT 4 COMPONENT 5 CONCLUSION RESOURCES
MOBILE DATA
Mobile data flips traditional THE TECHNOLOGIES
models of development  BASIC AND FEATURE PHONE
on their head Even the simplest phone can gather data via SMS messaging and interactive voice response (IVR),  
while older-model feature phones can collect 
data via electronic forms.
Mobile data enables an adaptive, iterative approach to 
program delivery that is sensitive to real-time performance SMART PHONE AND TABLET
metrics and citizen feedback.  It empowers decision makers These more sophisticated devices enable greater 
functionality like capturing GPS locations and 
to constantly adjust their programs based on what is and better usability with large touch screens, while 
isn’t working, turning donor beneficiaries into clients and still serving as portable tools for conducting 
surveys, taking photos and videos, and playing and 
turning recipients of goods and services into producers recording audio. 
and co-collaborators. Not only can programs see results 
in real-time, mobile tools can rapidly clean, aggregate, SENSORS
and share information, eliminate errors associated with Commercially available sensors can record environmental conditions and performance 
collecting and transcribing paper forms, and perform of applications like water pumps, latrines, and 
powerful analysis and visualization. This empowers donors, cook stoves. This data can be relayed over cell phone networks and analyzed online to remotely 
governments, and civil society to make decisions based on monitor applications and adjust programs. 
real-time information and gives voice to citizens who for 
years have been cut from the conversation that shapes 
their future. 
DATA AROUND THE WORLD
DRAMATICALLY SIMPLIFIES AND 
IMPROVES COLLECTION STRENGTHENS MANAGEMENT
Mobile-enabled  SMS surveys saved a week 
surveys cut collection of work in Somalia2 
costs by 1
 71%
ENABLES REAL-TIME ANALYSIS 
TRANSFORMS FEEDBACK AND VISUALIZATION
In Kenya, the USAID Transition In Uganda, UNICEF and the World 
Initiative used SMS surveys to poll Bank helped track, map and prevent 
youth leaders in advance of recent the spread of banana bacterial 
elections and display the results in wilt in 24 HOURS by engaging 
real-time 220,000 U-REPORTERS in a 
series of simple SMS polls3
1 http://siteresources.worldbank.org/INTLAC/ 2 http://www.ssireview.org/blog/entry/mobile_measurement_lowering_costs_ 3 http://thenextweb.com/insider/2013/07/09/the-world-banks-chief-innovation-
Resources/257803-1269390034020/EnBreve_166_Web.pdf and_engaging_beneficiaries  officer-on-technology-open-development-and-reducing-world-poverty/
INTRODUCTION COMPONENT 1 COMPONENT 2 COMPONENT 3 COMPONENT 4 COMPONENT 5 CONCLUSION RESOURCES
RESULTS FROM THE FIELD
SAFETY AND REACH  
IN AFGHANISTAN maternal & newborn care
3000+ Across countries where USAID works, sending staff to the field is difficult, expensive, 
registered teachers are and can raise safety concerns. This challenge 
interested in being paid 
via mobile money requires USAID to deploy a variety of tools data gathering
including new uses of mobile devices. To reach 
Afghan teachers, USAID is working with 
the Afghan Ministry of Education to survey 
teachers using their mobile phones. In less data interpretation
than six months, the initiative has already 
registered 6,000+ teachers in five provinces. 
The data is helping to quickly assess the 
viability of mobile money salary payments. It is 
also creating an avenue by which USAID can up-to-date headquarters
monitor the success of the intervention and 
receive feedback from citizens directly.
INFORMING HEALTH 
“Poverty used to be a reflection of scarcity. Now it is  CARE IMPROVEMENTS
 a problem of identification, targeting and distribution.” Getting mothers and children better 
– The Economist, 2013 medical care requires adaptive 
programming that identifies problems 
at hospitals and reacts with targeted 
REAL-TIME RESULTS IN UGANDA solutions. The USAID Maternal and 
Child Health Integrated Program is using 
Uganda is a hotbed for innovation due in large part to UNICEF’s strong mobile data collection tools to observe 
partnership with the Government of Uganda. Together they launched the quality of maternal and newborn 
mTrac, which enables health facility workers to send government care in seven countries. Staff collect data 
reports via SMS and map important data like stocks of essential on tablets that automatically feed into 
medicines. Recently, the Ugandan Ministry of Health used mTrac to tables, charts, and maps on the quality 
survey 10,000 health workers to see if their health unit had a cold- of healthcare delivered. This means 
chain fridge to store vaccines before a national distribution campaign. staff at headquarters are always up-to-
At the cost of $1501, and over the course of two days, the Ministry date on conditions in the field and can 
of Health received information from 1,862 health facilities, learned make informed decisions about how to 
that only 73.1 percent of facilities had working cold chain fridges, and strategically invest in addressing the most 
identified which clinics had mechanical problems and which districts pressing issues. 
were experiencing consistent failure.
1 $150 represents the cost of the refrigeration survey only
JOIN OUR COMMUNITY OF 
USAID’s Digital Development team fosters FIND OUT MORE 
CONTACT US PRACTICE ON THE LEARNING LAB
transformative and market-driven solutions to 
empower individuals through financial inclusion, data- www.usaid.gov/digital-development
driven evidence, and access to digital technology.  We 
offer knowledge tools and support to dramatically digitaldevelopment@usaid.gov
increase the adoption of digital technology 
throughout USAID’s programs, and we partner with @USAID_Digital
other donors, governments, companies, and NGOs to 
accelerate proven solutions that impact billions. 
INTRODUCTION COMPONENT 1 COMPONENT 2 COMPONENT 3 COMPONENT 4 COMPONENT 5 CONCLUSION RESOURCES
GUIDING QUESTIONS FOR  
MEETINGS WITH KEY PARTNERS
When meeting with government How strong is the government’s overall  
representatives from various ICT skill base among senior government 
ministries, Missions should leaders and civil servants?  
consider drawing on the list  
of questions below:
• Do leaders know the basics of ICT?
Is there visible political leadership for the use Are they digitally literate?
of ICTs in programs and service delivery?
• Do any government officials receive training
• Is PM or president aware and supportive? on ICT, data standards or data analytics?
• Which Minister (if not the PM himself) would • Does government use any assessment
be able to lead an ICT initiative? (i.e. ICT competency framework) to determine • What Ministry should serve as the point
or track ICT skill levels among civil servants? for this initiative?
• Does this Ministry have the mandate, project
management experience and technical skills to • Does your government have formal criteria • What is the technical capacity of the point
manage this kind of a program? for deciding civil service grades and promotions? Ministry?
Are ICT skills used as criteria for this?
• Has this entity managed any ICT projects before? • What hardware and software are you 
Is there an established political structure most comfortable using?
• Is the government interested in integrating for policy and implementation of  
and scaling this ICT enabled program? What cross-government initiatives? Are there any existing activities or plans 
conditions internal to the government must relevant to ICT use?
be met for this program to be successful? • What is the model for cross-government • Has any socialization about ICTs been done
initiatives? Does the Ministry of ICT work with at a political level? Have there been any 
• Are there any identified champions for ICTs sector specific ministries to coordinate on ICT awareness-raising events/activities about ICTs 
at the political level? enabled initiatives? for agencies or the general public?
94 Integrating Mobiles into Development Projects
INTRODUCTION COMPONENT 1 COMPONENT 2 COMPONENT 3 COMPONENT 4 COMPONENT 5 CONCLUSION RESOURCES
GUIDING QUESTIONS CONT.
•	 Any ICT enabled activities at the city/regional What are the policies/laws governing  When meeting with the private 
level? How are the initiatives there, and  the use of ICT and data? sector and non-governmental 
the politicians leading them, perceived at  organizations in the ICT4D 
a national level? •	 Does government (or any agency or local community, Missions  
authority) use any license with respect to should consider drawing  
•	 What are the government’s current release/use of its data? on the questions below:
ICT initiatives?
•	 Is there any policy on Open Data or re(use)  How strong are the IT industry, developer 
Does the wider political context of the  or public sector information? community and overall digital literacy in  
country help or hinder ICT enabled initiatives? your country/locality?   
•	 How are concerns around privacy handled?  
•	 To what extent do current political priorities What privacy safeguards exist for data about •	 Any statistics on size of local ICT industry  
support the different potential drivers of ICTs: citizens? (i.e. in terms of employment, revenues or 
transparency and accountability; economic percentage of GDP)?
growth; inclusion and empowerment; improving •	 What is the policy (if any) on charging for 
public services; and government efficiency? government information? Who is responsible  •	 Does your government outsource any IT 
for setting this policy? Does this policy allow  functions or services to the private sector?
•	 Are there individual Parliamentarians or legislative for commercial use of data? Do any agencies  
committees who can provide supportive sell their data? •	 What does software development/web design 
leadership of ICT initiatives linked to one or industry look like in your country/locality? Are 
more of these drivers? •	 Is there a “right to data” or “open by default” there any organized communities of developers? 
legislation? If so, how is this enforced? Any estimate of its size?
•	 Where is the country in the political cycle? Is 
there scope for sustained momentum to pursue •	 Who has a role in setting policy on the  •	 What technology vendors can support projects 
ICT enabled initiatives before the next election? release of information? at scale?
 
•	 Are there political priorities whose  •	 What is the start-up scene in your country/
implementation could be significantly assisted   locality? Are there any incubators/accelerators  
by ICTs given experience elsewhere? for entrepreneurs or startups, any venture capital 
or early stage investment funds?
95 Integrating Mobiles into Development Projects
INTRODUCTION COMPONENT 1 COMPONENT 2 COMPONENT 3 COMPONENT 4 COMPONENT 5 CONCLUSION RESOURCES
GUIDING QUESTIONS CONT.
•	 Are there any industry associations or groups  When meeting with •	 What are your views on the government’s 
for IT companies? development partners and capacity to execute and oversee ICT projects?
donors, you should try to 
•	 What is the overall level of Internet use skills  understand the ICT market •	 What are your views on the key challenges  
in your country/locality? maturity, the potential for in ICT?
partnership, and leveraging 
•	 What is the overall level of data skills among existing systems. Missions •	 Are you interested in partnering on this  
non-government organizations? should consider drawing on  project or contributing funds?
the questions below:
In addition, questions specific to MNOs  
may include:  •	 What are your current ICT projects?
•	 Have you partnered with a donor organization •	 What are your priority sectors?
on an ICT enabled development program?
•	 What software and hardware do you use  
•	 Have you tried to rollout a product toward  in your ICT projects?
a CSR/development goal?
•	 In what districts are your ICT projects 
•	 Are you willing to work in partnership  operational?
with other MNOs on an ICT for development 
project? •	 What projects are in your pipeline?
•	 What factors influence your rollout? •	 Who is the point person on your ICT projects?
•	 What is your process for distributing  •	 How would you characterize the interest in 
short codes? pursuing ICT enabled programs from your 
leadership?
•	 Where do you have coverage?
96 Integrating Mobiles into Development Projects
INTRODUCTION COMPONENT 1 COMPONENT 2 COMPONENT 3 COMPONENT 4 COMPONENT 5 CONCLUSION RESOURCES
THE GREENTREE CONSENSUS:
Principles for Digital Development 2. Understand the Existing 
Ecosystem
•	 Participate in networks and communities  
In order to establish best practices in information and communications of like-minded practitioners.
technology for development (ICT4D), USAID has co-created a set of 
•	 Align to existing technological, legal,  
principles with other donors called the Greentree Consensus. To date, they and regulatory policies.
have been endorsed by USAID, the Bill and Melinda Gates Foundation, 
3. Design for Scale
UNICEF, SIDA, WFP, UNHCR, UNDP, and Global Pulse. This consensus 
has evolved from earlier sets of implementer principles that have been •	 Design for scale from the start, and assess  and mitigate dependencies that might limit ability 
endorsed by over 300 organizations. The principles are not intended as hard to scale.
and fast rules but meant as best-practice guidelines to inform the design of •	 Employ a “systems” approach to design, 
technology-enabled development programs. considering implications of design beyond  
an immediate project.
•	 Be replicable and customizable in other  
1. Design with the User countries and contexts.
•	 Develop context-appropriate solutions informed •	 Design solutions that learn from and enhance •	 Demonstrate impact before scaling a solution.
by user needs. existing workflows, and plan for organizational 
adaptation. •	 Analyze all technology choices through the lens  
•	 Include all user groups in planning, development, of national and regional scale.
implementation, and assessment. •	 Ensure solutions are sensitive to, and useful  
for, the most marginalized populations: women, •	 Factor in partnerships from the beginning,  
•	 Develop projects in an incremental and  children, those with disabilities, and those  and start early negotiations
iterative manner. affected by conflict and disaster.
97 Integrating Mobiles into Development Projects
INTRODUCTION COMPONENT 1 COMPONENT 2 COMPONENT 3 COMPONENT 4 COMPONENT 5 CONCLUSION RESOURCES
GREENTREE CONSENSUS CONT.
4. Build for Sustainability 6. Use Open Standards,  8. Address Privacy & Security
Open Data, Open Source, 
•	 Plan for sustainability from the start, including and Open Innovation •	 Assess and mitigate risks to the security of users 
planning for long-term financial health, e.g., and their data.
assessing total cost of ownership. •	 Adopt and expand existing open standards.
•	 Consider the context and needs for privacy of 
•	 Utilize and invest in local communities  •	 Open data and functionalities and expose  personally identifiable information when designing 
and developers by default, and help catalyze  them in documented APIs (Application solutions and mitigate accordingly.
their growth. Programming Interfaces) where use by a  
larger community is possible. •	 Ensure equity and fairness in co-creation, and 
•	 Engage with local governments to ensure protect the best interests of the end-users.
integration into national strategy, and identify  •	 Invest in software as a public good. Develop 
high-level government advocates. software to be open source by default with the 9. Be Collaborative
code made available in public repositories and 
5. Be Data Driven supported through developer communities. •	 Engage diverse expertise across disciplines  
and industries at all stages.
•	 Design projects so that impact can be measured 7. Reuse and Improve
at discreet milestones with a focus on outcomes •	 Work across sector silos to create coordinated 
rather than outputs. •	 Use, modify, and extend existing tools, platforms, and more holistic approaches.
and frameworks when possible.
•	 Evaluate innovative solutions and areas where •	 Document work, results, processes, and best 
there are gaps in data and evidence. •	 Develop in modular ways, favoring approaches practices and share them widely.
that are interoperable over those that are 
•	 Use real-time information to monitor and inform monolithic by design. •	 Publish materials under a Creative Commons 
management decisions at all levels. license by default, with strong rationale if another 
licensing approach is taken.
•	 When possible, leverage data as a by-product  
of user actions and transactions for assessments.
To learn more about the  
Greentree Consensus visit  
http://ict4dprinciples.org/
98 Integrating Mobiles into Development Projects
INTRODUCTION COMPONENT 1 COMPONENT 2 COMPONENT 3 COMPONENT 4 COMPONENT 5 CONCLUSION RESOURCES
MOBILES FOR DEVELOPMENT  
CHECKLIST
Step 1: Identify potential roles for mobiles to reinforce project goals (input your initial assumptions on how mobiles might fit within your project)
Step 2: Determine requirements for using mobiles (circle or highlight all that apply)
How are you thinking  Requisite functions Minimum delivery model requirements Minimum device requirements
about using mobile?
Information sharing Push (for one-way)  BASIC: SMS, voice BASIC: Basic phone
Pull (for two-way) INTERMEDIATE: IVR INTERMEDIATE: basic phone
Data collection Push, Pull, Storage BASIC: SMS, voice BASIC: basic phone
ADVANCED: App ADVANCED: feature phone, smartphone, tablet
Payments Transaction BASIC: USSD, SMS BASIC: Basic phone
Facilitating networks (i.e. trade) Push and Pull BASIC: SMS, voice BASIC: basic phone 
INTERMEDIATE: IVR INTERMEDIATE: basic phone
ADVANCED: App ADVANCED: feature phone, smartphone, tablet
Community building Push and Pull, and/or Interactive BASIC: SMS, voice BASIC: basic phone
INTERMEDIATE: IVR INTERMEDIATE: basic phone
ADVANCED: App, web,  ADVANCED: smartphone, tablet
and/or messaging
Supply chain management (health, Push, Pull, Storage BASIC: SMS BASIC: basic phone
agriculture, etc.) INTERMEDIATE: IVR INTERMEDIATE: basic phone
ADVANCED: App, web ADVANCED: feature phone, smartphone, tablet
Other
What other additional features do you need? Minimum delivery model requirements Minimum device requirements
Geo-location GPS Some feature phones, all smartphones and 
tablets
Photo sharing MMS, web Some feature phones, all smartphones and 
tablets
Video sharing App, web Smartphone, tablet
99 Integrating Mobiles into Development Projects
INTRODUCTION COMPONENT 1 COMPONENT 2 COMPONENT 3 COMPONENT 4 COMPONENT 5 CONCLUSION RESOURCES
MOBILE DEVELOPMENT CHECKLIST CONT.
Based on all of the above, what are your minimum requirements? (select all that apply)
Function  Push  Pull  Storage  Transaction  Interactive
Delivery model  SMS  Voice  IVR  Web  App  MMS  Embedded  Messaging  GPS
Device  Basic  Feature phone  Smartphone  Tablet
Network type  2G (good for only voice/IVR/SMS) 
 3G (good for all delivery models, slower data rates limit data rich content) 
 4G (good for all delivery models, faster data rates good for most purposes) 
 No network (offline data collection/storage)
Step 3: Collect data to understand the landscape
Macro-level data Data (insert your findings here) Assessment (High, Medium, Low)
SIM penetration  High (over 80%)
 Medium (50-80%)
 Low (less than 50%)
Network coverage (list by 2G, 3G, and/or 4G)  High (over 80%)
 Medium (50-80%)
 Low (less than 50%)
Teleco sector competition   High (over 5)
(list MNOs, launch date, market share)  Medium (3-5)
 Low (1-2)
Current mobile service availability  High (5 or more relevant services)
 Medium (2-4 relevant services)
 Low (0-1 relevant services)
Current local technical capacity  High (significant capacity)
 Medium (existent capacity)
 Low (extremely limited capacity)
Adult literacy  High (over 80%)
 Medium (50-80%)
 Low (less than 50%)
Policy and regulatory environment (i.e. mobile money  High (supportive)
regulations, data/voice price ceilings, SIM ownership, etc.)  Medium (permissive)
 Low (restrictive)
100 Integrating Mobiles into Development Projects
INTRODUCTION COMPONENT 1 COMPONENT 2 COMPONENT 3 COMPONENT 4 COMPONENT 5 CONCLUSION RESOURCES
MOBILE DEVELOPMENT CHECKLIST CONT.
Step 3: Collect data to understand the landscape
Macro-level data Data (insert your findings here) Assessment (High, Medium, Low)
Handset ownership (based on your minimum device  High (over 80%)
requirements)  Medium (50-80%)
 Low (less than 50%)
Access to mobile phones (includes those who do not own  High (over 80%)
but can use someone else’s)  Medium (50-80%)
 Low (less than 50%)
Target user literacy (including digital literacy)  High (over 80%)
 Medium (50-80%)
 Low (less than 50%)
Frequency of mobile usage (typical target user)  High (every day)
 Medium (a few times a week)
 Low (less than once a week)
Access to other ICTs (radio, TV, fixed line telephone,  High (over 80%)
computer)  Medium (50-80%)
 Low (less than 50%)
Disposable income  High (significant)
 Medium (modest)
 Low (none)
Mobile money usage (if applicable)  High (over 80%)
 Medium (50-80%)
 Low (less than 50%)
101 Integrating Mobiles into Development Projects
INTRODUCTION COMPONENT 1 COMPONENT 2 COMPONENT 3 COMPONENT 4 COMPONENT 5 CONCLUSION RESOURCES
MOBILE DEVELOPMENT CHECKLIST CONT.
Step 4: Decide if use of mobiles in the project is feasible and appropriate (based on the above)
Based on all of the information you have inputted above, which of the potential usages of mobiles do you think are possible within the proposed project? Why?
What cost impact would using mobiles potentially have if they were integrated into the proposed project?
What types of initiatives or activities might be necessary to further facilitate the uptake of the types of mobile services you are interested in?  
While there is no magic number for the scoring in Step 3, a significant number of ‘low’ scores might be a sign that more proactive measures are necessary.
102 Integrating Mobiles into Development Projects
INTRODUCTION COMPONENT 1 COMPONENT 2 COMPONENT 3 COMPONENT 4 COMPONENT 5 CONCLUSION RESOURCES
ICT OPTION SELECTION WORKSHEET
Assessment ICT OPTION
Criteria Mobile phones Television Fixed line phone Radio Low-cost video Web Other
Strengths of  
each option
Weaknesses  
of each option
Is this an 
appropriate 
option? Why? 
Can it be used 
together with 
another ICT 
option? If so, how?
Adapted from a table originally developed by Mark Bell and Judith Payne for the USAID-funded MEAS project (2011), which can be found online at: http://measict.weebly.com/extension-and-ict-options.html
103 Integrating Mobiles into Development Projects
INTRODUCTION COMPONENT 1 COMPONENT 2 COMPONENT 3 COMPONENT 4 COMPONENT 5 CONCLUSION RESOURCES
CURRENT MOBILE SERVICES TEMPLATE
Mobile service name Implementer (if different) Sector Brief description Delivery models used Compatible  Relevance to overall 
device types concept design
104 Integrating Mobiles into Development Projects
INTRODUCTION COMPONENT 1 COMPONENT 2 COMPONENT 3 COMPONENT 4 COMPONENT 5 CONCLUSION RESOURCES
SAMPLE M4D EVALUATION TEMPLATE
An evaluation form for technical proposals are found on the following pages. The obtainable number of points specified for each evaluation criterion indicates the relative 
significance or weight of the item in the overall evaluation process. The Technical Proposal Evaluation parts are:
PART 1:  Expertise of Firm / Organization  PART 2:  Methodology, approach and  PART 3: Personnel 
submitting Proposal understanding of the use of M4D
Technical Proposal Evaluation Company/Other entity
Points Obtainable
Part 1 A B C D
Expertise of Firm / Organization submitting Proposal
Overall reputation of organization (competence/reliability, 
resources, and experience in M4D [mobile money,  
mobile data, mobile access]) 
Organizational proven capacity of the Offeror  
to deliver a field-based mobile service program
Quality assurance procedures and mechanism,  
guarantee provided by the firm
Knowledge of M4D technologies  
(i.e. services, applications, devices)
Knowledge of agent networks and customer support
Experience on similar programs/projects
Understanding of mobile solution trends
Training development and delivery expertise
Experience working in the target region
Total Part I
105 Integrating Mobiles into Development Projects
INTRODUCTION COMPONENT 1 COMPONENT 2 COMPONENT 3 COMPONENT 4 COMPONENT 5 CONCLUSION RESOURCES
SAMPLE M4D EVALUATION TEMPLATE CONT.
Company/Other entity
Technical Proposal Evaluation
Points Obtainable
Part 2
A B C D
Methodology, approach and understanding of mandate
Does the proposal address the program needs as 
described in the TOR?
Has the bidder acknowledged and addressed the key 
challenges to deploying a mobile service?
Has the bidder proposed a viable training program?
Does the bidder propose a viable business model that 
addresses near-term and long-term service payment 
requirements?
Is the presentation clear and cohesive, and does it  
augur sufficiently well for the proper provision of  
support and advice?
Total Part 2
106 Integrating Mobiles into Development Projects
INTRODUCTION COMPONENT 1 COMPONENT 2 COMPONENT 3 COMPONENT 4 COMPONENT 5 CONCLUSION RESOURCES
SAMPLE M4D EVALUATION TEMPLATE CONT.
Company/Other entity
Technical Proposal Evaluation
Points Obtainable
Part 3
A B C D
Personnel
Qualifications of Senior Specialists
Professional experience in M4D  
(i.e. mobile money, mobile applications, mobile access)
Relevance of experience to TOR
Direct experience in implementation of M4D projects
Proven ability to engage with senior level stakeholders
Proven ability on strategy development and planning
Training experience
Knowledge of the region
Qualifications of Specialists  
Professional experience in the area of specialization
Relevance of experience to TOR
Direct experience in implementation of mobile 
services
Evidence of development of reports, tools,  
manuals, models  
Training experience
Knowledge of the region
Qualifications of Junior Specialists 
Professional experience in the area of specialization
Evidence of research capability
Evidence of development of reports, tools, manuals 
Diversity of relevant skills and expertise in the firm
Total Part 3
107 Integrating Mobiles into Development Projects
INTRODUCTION COMPONENT 1 COMPONENT 2 COMPONENT 3 COMPONENT 4 COMPONENT 5 CONCLUSION RESOURCES
SAMPLE PERFORMANCE INDICATOR 
REFERENCE SHEET (PIRS)
Strategic Objective: Increase the access and usage of mobile money in Malawi
Intermediate Result: IR.1 – Demand for Mobile Money Increased, IR.2 – Mobile Money Infrastructure and Systems Strengthening
Key Result Area: KRA-1 – Public Awareness of mobile money increased, KRA-5 – Private and Public Sector Investment in Mobile Money Ecosystem Increased,  
KRA-6 – Capacity of Mobile Service Provider and Financial Institution to Deliver Mobile Money Strengthened
Indicator: Indicator 13 – Number of farmers and others who have applied new technologies or management practices as a result of USG assistance
Description
Precise Definition(s): Number of farmers participating in mobile-enabled payment programs to include eVouchers, agricultural value chain payments, mobile enable loan 
programs, and training
Unit of Measure: Number of farmers impacted by mobile money initiatives
Disaggregated by: Geography and gender
Justification & Management Utility: Feed the Future metric designed to measure the beneficial impact of technology on farmers
Plan For Data Acquisition By The Project
Data Collection Method: MMAP will aggregate previous metrics and segment by farmer participant (i.e. G2P payments, ag value chain payments, total number of mobile 
wallets, public awareness events, and financial literacy training)
Data Source: MMAP sector scan, MNO platform data, NGO program data 
Frequency and Timing of Data Acquisition: Number of farmer participants will be provided quarterly
Estimated Cost of Data Acquisition: Approximately 40 hours of MMAP staff time per quarter will be required to collect and validate data
Responsible Individual at the Project: COP and Knowledge Management Officer
108 Integrating Mobiles into Development Projects
INTRODUCTION COMPONENT 1 COMPONENT 2 COMPONENT 3 COMPONENT 4 COMPONENT 5 CONCLUSION RESOURCES
SAMPLE PERFORMANCE INDICATOR REFERENCE SHEET
Data Quality Issues
Date of Initial Data Quality Assessment: April 30, 2013
Known Data Limitations and Significance (if any): Not all activities will segment totals by farmer
Actions Taken or Planned to Address Data Limitations: Incorporate farmer designation in all MMAP program activities 
Date of Future Data Quality Assessments: October 30, 2013
Procedures for Future Data Quality Assessments: MMAP team will aggregate a range of data elements and extract farmer participation content
Plan For Data Analysis, Review, & Reporting
Data Analysis: MMAP Knowledge Management Officer will analyze number of farmers impacted by mobile money technology
Presentation of Data: Data will be presented in tables and charts
Review of Data: Data will be reviewed and analyzed semi-annually within two weeks after submission
Reporting of Data: Results will be presented in MMAP semi-annual reports as well as periodic in process reviews conducted with USAID Mission Malawi and the USAID 
IDEA Lab
Other Notes
Notes on Baselines/Targets: Baselines are based on number of farmers impacted by mobile money at project inception (September 2012)
Other Notes: None
Performance Indicator Values
Year Target Actual Notes
2012 Enter target value Enter actual value Enter any explanation here
2013
To avoid version control problems, enter the date of most recent revision to the reference sheet.
109 Integrating Mobiles into Development Projects
INTRODUCTION COMPONENT 1 COMPONENT 2 COMPONENT 3 COMPONENT 4 COMPONENT 5 CONCLUSION RESOURCES
M4D INVENTORY
NOTE: This is not an exhaustive list of mobile applications or services currently deployed in Southeast Asia. This list was generated by desk research conducted in Washington 
DC in 2013-2014, and focuses only on mobile applications addressing food security, health, biodiversity, governance, and climate change in Southeast Asia. Inclusion in this 
inventory is not an endorsement, but rather meant to be illustrative of what is possible. Within Southeast Asia, there are also a number of firms and incubators that are 
developing customized mobile services for social good, including ChangeFusion, Opendream, mLab, Launchgarage, and others.
Food security Health Biodiversity Climate Change Governance
Sector Name Description How and Where it’s Being Used Technical Details
* 1677 Provides daily information to farmers on  The SMS service was introduced in Thailand in 2008 SMS for all  
Farmer rice, fruits & vegetables, or livestock & fishery.  and as of June 2012, there are more than 300,000 device types;  
Information A subscription-based service, *1677 Farmer Information active subscribers. In 2012, the service was extended mobile application 
Super- Superhighway sends farmers a daily SMS containing updated with a “Farmer Information” application available on for smartphone  
highway agricultural information on market trends, commercial crops,  iPhone and iPad. (iOS only)
new farming techniques, farming tips, important news, and 
warnings on weather conditions.
For more information, visit: http://www.telenor.com/corporate-
responsibility/initiatives-worldwide/using-mobile-to-improve-
farming-skills/
8villages Business social network for smallholder  8villages began in 2012 in Indonesia. In 2014, 8villages SMS for all 
farmers to exchange and receive inputs or harvest offers plans to expand into the Philippines and Myanmar. device types; web 
from local stakeholders. 8villages provides user-generated application for 
content that is contextually relevant to local farmers as they  Mercy Corps’ Agri-Fin Mobile program and 8villages feature phone and/
join their local crop communities via SMS, IVR or mobile web,  launched an information and knowledge subscription or smartphone with 
and exchange information among themselves, create groups  service for smallholder farmers in Indonesia called data plan
and receive daily information. LISA (Farmers Information Service) that allows 
farmers to interact with other corresponding 
For more information, visit: http://www.8villages.com/ and community groups based on their crops and location. 
 http://www.lisa.co.id/ Inside that group, users receive daily SMS tips from 
8villages and other local user-generated content. Users 
are also able to ask questions and receive answers 
either by other farmers or by agricultural experts from 
8villages’ partners.
110 Integrating Mobiles into Development Projects
INTRODUCTION COMPONENT 1 COMPONENT 2 COMPONENT 3 COMPONENT 4 COMPONENT 5 CONCLUSION RESOURCES
M4D INVENTORY
Sector Name Description How and Where it’s Being Used Technical Details
A-Eye Provides forest maps, tourist information, and history  King Mongkut’s University of Technology Thonburi Mobile application 
while enabling anonymous monitoring and reporting of (KMUTT) developed and deployed the app in Doi for smartphone (iOS 
forest incidents. A-Eye is a mobile application designed to Suthep in Thailand in 2012. As of 2013, there are a and Windows only)
support eco-tourism and encourage people to help protect the total of 1726 existing users. In 2014, KMUTT plans to 
environment by anonymous reporting of problems. A-Eye is  deploy A-Eye in the Amphawa district in Thailand as  
used for navigation, knowledge, and real-time reporting and a tool to support ecotourism of its waterways.
notifications of problems.
For more information, visit:  
http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=4FFn-n0I1Fw
Amputee Enables doctors to evaluate cases and give advice on  Launched in 2009 in the Philippines, ASCENT has Mobile application 
Screening via the use of prosthesis for amputees remotely. ASCENT is an had positive results: amputees who pass the medical for smartphone on 
Cellphone application that allows health workers to enter patient information screening receive their artificial limbs one month the Smart network
Networking into a cell phone and send the data to a centralized web-based later and average screening time decreased from 30 
(ASCENT) database via multimedia message, along with photos taken with minutes for manual to 2 minutes per patient. The 
the cell phone camera. This enables physicians to give real-time data is sent via Smart mobile broadband to a website 
evaluation and advice on prosthesis use via smartphones, even in that can be accessed by volunteer physicians from 
remote areas. Health professionals can also receive data, including Physicians for Peace (PfP-Philippines) to plan medical 
photos of the patient, via general packet radio service/third missions together with University of the Philippines-
generation (GPRS/3G). Philippine General Hospital (UP-PGH).
For more information, visit: http://healthmarketinnovations.org/
program/amputee-screening-cellphone-networking-ascent
Avaaj Otalo Provides relevant and timely agricultural information  This service was designed in 2008 in India as a IVR for all  
to farmers over the phone. Using IVR, farmers dial a phone collaboration between UC Berkeley School of device types
number to navigate through simple audio prompts in order Information, Stanford HCI Group, IBM India Research 
to record, browse, and respond to agricultural questions and Laboratory and Development Support Center 
answers. In addition to the Q&A forum, the service includes (DSC), an NGO in Gujarat, India. Avaaj Otalo led to 
an announcements board and a radio archive to listen to past the founding of Awaaz.De, a company in India that 
episodes. provides a hosted solution for deploying voice-based 
social media. Development Support Centre (DSC) in 
For more information, visit: http://hci.stanford.edu/research/ collaboration with Awaaz.De now provide the Avaaj 
voice4all/ and http://awaaz.de/how-it-works/ Otalo service. 
111 Integrating Mobiles into Development Projects
INTRODUCTION COMPONENT 1 COMPONENT 2 COMPONENT 3 COMPONENT 4 COMPONENT 5 CONCLUSION RESOURCES
M4D INVENTORY
Sector Name Description How and Where it’s Being Used Technical Details
Bee Connex A virtual bee community application that safely  Bee Connex is currently under development by Mobile application 
stores farm information, and provides up-to-date summary King Mongkut's University of Technology Thonburi for smartphone
and analysis, real-time message exchanging, alert calls, (KMUTT) in Thailand.
and daily announcements. Bee Connex connects beekeepers, 
technicians and scientists online. Members can monitor and access 
the latest information, exchange news, and make immediate 
inquiries or request help from their own community and globally. 
It also provides beekeepers with real-time, digitally-stored 
bookkeeping that can monitor and optimize beekeeping activities. 
For more information, visit: http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=iB
Wt20qtxeU&feature=youtube
Cellscope Low-cost, clinical-quality microscopes that perform mobile- First developed in 2007, UC Berkeley conducted Mobile application 
based diagnoses and send images of patient samples for a one-year study in 2013 in Vietnam to evaluate for smartphone 
remote evaluation by specialists. Cellscope is a mobile phone diagnosis efficacy of tuberculosis, as well as the (Android 2.1 and up)
attachment that turns the phone into a mobile microscope, broader context of technology readiness of clinics,  
effectively combining cell phones with standard optical equipment. at 15 point-of-care health clinics in Hanoi Province.
For more information, visit: http://cellscope.berkeley.edu/
ChitChat Platform for live chat between patients and general Launched in January 2014 by Waki, ChitChat  Mobile application 
Doctor practitioners. Available in Singapore, Malaysia, Philippines, Hong Doctor is available in Singapore, Malaysia, the for smartphone 
Kong, and Taiwan between 9 am to 11 pm GMT +8 in English, Philippines, and China. (Android 2.1 and up)
ChitChat Doctor is an online platform for live chat with doctors 
on topics related to general health, pregnancy, skin diseases, 
pediatrics, OBGYN, diabetes, sexual health, and other health 
concerns.
For more information, visit: https://play.google.com/store/apps/
details?id=com.waki.chitchatdoctor
112 Integrating Mobiles into Development Projects
INTRODUCTION COMPONENT 1 COMPONENT 2 COMPONENT 3 COMPONENT 4 COMPONENT 5 CONCLUSION RESOURCES
M4D INVENTORY
Sector Name Description How and Where it’s Being Used Technical Details
CommCare Mobile data collection tool. CommCare allows users to  Launched by Dimagi in 2008, CommCare is used Mobile and  
create surveys, collect data, and manage cases. CommCare in over 30 countries. CommCare was piloted in web application  
supports simple surveys to complex counseling forms, allows Thailand in 2012 with 10 community health workers for feature phone 
mobile workers to track and access client data over time, and (CHWs) in partnership with Sungaikolok Hospital  and/or smartphone 
supports audio, image, and video playback. to help CHWs follow up with pregnant women. with data plan 
(Android only)
For more information, visit: http://www.commcarehq.org/home/ In India, CommCare is used by Accredited Social 
Health Activists (ASHAs) for pregnancy checklists, 
training and home visit support, maternal and 
newborn health, and child malnutrion identification 
and counseling, with referral pathways.
In Indonesia, CommCare is used by midwives  
in Mercy Corps’ USAID-funded Hati Kami project.  
See USAID Project Table for more detail.
DoctorMe Teaches users how to behave in the event of illness Launched in 2011 in Thailand, DoctorMe is Mobile application 
emergency. DoctorMe teaches users about the main symptoms implemented by ChangeFusion. DoctorMe 3.0 for smartphone
of different illnesses and includes a database of over 1,000 was released in 2013 with new functions, including 
searchable hospitals to find nearby hospitals with directions in  connecting to the National Institute for Emergency 
case of emergency. Medicine (NIEM), sending an ambulance instantly 
when users freely call 1669, and sending push 
For more information, visit: http://www.doctorme.in.th/ and  notifications about health alerts.
http://www.changefusion.eu/projects/asia/845
Dokter A health chat app to chat instantly with a certified doctor  Dokter Gratis was released by Waki in Indonesia in Mobile application 
Gratis (or in Indonesia. Dokter Gratis is a free live chat with certified February 2014. for smartphone 
Doctor doctors online about general health, diabetes, women’s health, (Android 2.2 and up)
Gratis) baby and child care, pregnancy, and men’s health. It is available in 
English and Indonesian from Monday – Friday from 8 am-10 pm, 
and Saturday-Sunday from 6 pm-10 pm in GMT +7.
For more information, visit https://play.google.com/store/apps/
details?id=com.waki.doktergratis and http://waki.mobi/product.
html
113 Integrating Mobiles into Development Projects
INTRODUCTION COMPONENT 1 COMPONENT 2 COMPONENT 3 COMPONENT 4 COMPONENT 5 CONCLUSION RESOURCES
M4D INVENTORY
Sector Name Description How and Where it’s Being Used Technical Details
Fansipan Mobile game to reach people who inject drugs (PWID) Launched in 2013 under the USAID-funded SMART Mobile application 
Challenge population. Named after the highest mountain in Vietnam, TA program in Vietnam, FHI 360 is trialing the for SMS for all  
Fansipan mobilizes unpaid peer volunteers to recruit PWID and Fansipan Challenge in Ho Chi Minh City. Over 22 device types
partners to be part of expedition teams that receive points for weeks, twenty-nine peer volunteers and 559 PWID/
each person reached, each person who tests for HIV, and each partners (24% female) took part of the initiative; 29 
HIV positive person registered in HIV care, with the goal of peer leaders reached 559 peers and partners, 55% of 
accumulating 3143 points, the height of Fansipan mountain, over whom reported high risk behaviors, or had partners 
a discrete programming period. Client and service uptake data with high risk behaviors; of the individuals reached, 
is collected via mobile telephones, shared by SMS, and stored 67% tested for HIV after a single face-to-face contact, 
within the Fansipan Information Communication Technology (ICT) compared to just 18% in conventional outreach 
system, housed in the PAC server. HIV testing uptake and diagnosis approaches; the HIV positivity rate averaged 15%;  
is verified through linkages to the National HIV testing database. and all HIV positive individuals were linked to HIV  
care and treatment services. See USAID Project  
For more information, visit: http://www.fhi360.org/projects/ Table for more detail.
sustainable-management-hivaids-response-and-transition-technical-
assistance-smart-ta
Fasal Empowers rural farmers by providing current price Developed by Intuit in 2009 for farmers in India,  SMS for all  
information on agricultural products on demand through as of 2014 the service is used by 1,335,894 farmers device types
SMS text messages. The SMS software provides agricultural  in Gujarat, 506,913 farmers in Andhra Pradesh, and 
price information to farmers to help them determine price 86,554 farmers in Karnataka, reaching a total of 
fairness and effectively negotiate, and where and when to  1,929,361 farmers.
sell products.
For more information, visit: http://fasal.intuit.com/ 
114 Integrating Mobiles into Development Projects
INTRODUCTION COMPONENT 1 COMPONENT 2 COMPONENT 3 COMPONENT 4 COMPONENT 5 CONCLUSION RESOURCES
M4D INVENTORY
Sector Name Description How and Where it’s Being Used Technical Details
GeoChat A flexible open source group communications technology Created by Innovative Support to Emergencies, SMS for all 
that allows team members to maintain shared geospatial Diseases, and Disasters (InSTEDD) in 2009, GeoChat device types; web 
awareness of who is doing what where. GeoChat is designed can be used in any country globally. Examples of how application and email 
to enable group communications by allowing users to link the field, it is being used in SE Asia include: for feature phone 
headquarters, and the local community in a real-time, interactive and/or smartphone 
conversation visualized on the surface of a map based on SMS, In Cambodia, the Ministry of Health uses GeoChat with data plan
email, and/or a web browser. to simplify report diseases, send staff alerts and rapidly 
escalate response to potential outbreaks.
For more information, visit:  
http://instedd.org/technologies/geochat/ In Thailand, the Mukdahan province uses GeoChat 
to connect over 600 community health workers with 
each other and their managers to accelerate outbreak 
response and spread useful information to villages.
In Thailand, more than 900 hospital facilities exchange 
information and get alerts to detect influenza 
outbreaks in real time from facilities across the 
country.
In Laos, PSI uses GeoChat to promote HIV testing, 
STI screening & treatment, and TB case detection.
GeoDIVA A simple, robust data gathering tool for users with limited  Currently under development, the King Mongkut’s Mobile application 
(Geographic financial resources and/or technical knowledge. GeoDIVA  University of Technology Thonburi (KMUTT) for smartphone
Data is easy to use, available in local language, tailored for the specific Geospatial Engineering and Innovation Center in 
Input and problem the user is trying to address, useful without Internet, Thailand anticipates releasing GeoDIVA in 2014. An 
Validation and designed to save data in a simple format compatible with example of how GeoDIVA may be implemented is 
for All) many common desktop applications. The GeoDIVA app identifies in the health sector: the form for a disease incidence 
locations or paths, enters information into a form customized  map could include patient’s age, patient’s gender, 
for the user’s problem, shows the user’s current location on a map patient’s marital status, a list of possible symptoms,  
of the area of interest, and tracks the user’s position as she moves. and symptom onset date.
For more information, visit: http://www.kgeo.org/  
(under development)
115 Integrating Mobiles into Development Projects
INTRODUCTION COMPONENT 1 COMPONENT 2 COMPONENT 3 COMPONENT 4 COMPONENT 5 CONCLUSION RESOURCES
M4D INVENTORY
Sector Name Description How and Where it’s Being Used Technical Details
Hapi Fis Hapi Enables the government to capture, consolidate. and Hapi Fis Hapi Pipol was developed by the Solomon Mobile application 
Pipol analyze data on inshore fisheries to inform management Islands Ministry of Fisheries and Marine Resources for smartphone 
decisions. Hapi Fis Hapi Pipol (Happy Fish Happy People) is  (MFMR) through its Makem [Making] Strong Solomon (Android only)
a mobile platform for collecting, consolidating, and analyzing  Islands Fisheries (MSSF) program. The development 
data on inshore fisheries in the Solomon Islands to inform and initial testing of the system was fully supported by 
management decisions. USAID’s Coral Triangle Support Partnership (CTSP) 
through World Wildlife Fund and MFMR. The project 
For more information, visit: http://pointnineseven.com/projects/ began in 2013 to provide information to the Solomon 
full_story/hapi_fis_hapi_pipol Islands Ministry of Fisheries and Marine Resources to 
improve decision-making capacity, establish a baseline 
of information on near shore and coral reef fisheries 
for future comparison and identify where, if any, 
management measures were needed to maintain and 
prolong sustainable marine resource in the country. 
See USAID Project Table for more detail.
IVR Platform Use of IVR to reach out to target populations with Developed under the USAID-funded SPICE program IVR for all  
information-based services in Cambodia. The IVR platform in Cambodia in 2012, Open Institute works with device types
supports CSOs’ programs and is connected to all MNOs. The CSOs working in human rights, trafficking and health 
difficulty of reaching the 80% of Cambodians who live in rural sectors to help them identify and develop applications 
areas, and the high illiteracy among adults make voice the only of IVR to improve the impact of their programs. 
possible vehicle to reach them. Both a platform and a support During the first year of operation, 12 IVR services 
system that allows CSOs’ to reach their beneficiaries with were established or about to be deployed; examples 
information whenever they request or need it, SPICE’s IVR include: 
platform was established in partnership with an ISP, and helped  
the ISP to develop services on the platform for their own •	  an Election Hotline with information on how,  
customers, ensuring sustainability. when and where to vote received over 600,000 
calls (11% of the effective voters)
For more information, visit: http://www.open.org.kh/en/spice
•	  an IVR service that calls new mothers to  
deliver crucial health information about their  
babies during the first month
•	  an emergency response system calls farmers  
when there is an emergency in their area.
 During the next year the program expects to launch 
15 to 20 more services of partners or entrepreneurs. 
See USAID Project Table for more detail.
116 Integrating Mobiles into Development Projects
INTRODUCTION COMPONENT 1 COMPONENT 2 COMPONENT 3 COMPONENT 4 COMPONENT 5 CONCLUSION RESOURCES
M4D INVENTORY
Sector Name Description How and Where it’s Being Used Technical Details
Len-Din Connects to a sensor device to analyze soil quality. Developed in Thailand by university students,  Mobile application 
Len-Din allows farmers to use their smartphone and an Len-Din was a runner up in the 2014 Microsoft for smartphone
external measuring device to track soil moisture quality  Imagine Cup Thailand.
to determine optimal planting periods and fertilizer levels  
for their crops.
For more information, visit: http://www.usaid.gov/asia-regional/
press-releases/apr-24-2014-imagine-cup-thailand 
LifeLines- Provides advice and solutions for farmers in India related Launched in 2006 in India, LifeLines-Agriculture is IVR for all  
Agriculture to agriculture and allied activities. The LifeLines-Agriculture implemented on the ground in partnership with device types
service provides information on topics from production to Datamation’s network of field volunteers who are the 
consumption, including farm inputs, funding schemes, government point of contact for the service and who help rural 
schemes on loans and subsidies, banking and insurance, market users register their queries using a mobile phone. 
prices, region-specific market information, agricultural news, and Since 2006, it has answers to 460,000 frequently asked 
organic farming. Users dial the LifeLines number from a landline questions, reaches 1000 villages and over 150,000 
or mobile phone to reach an IVR system where they are assisted households in India, and receives 350 queries per day 
in registering their query, which is stored as a voice clip in the from farmers.
database. A knowledge worker reviews the query to determine 
whether the answer is available in the FAQ database. Available 
answers are attached to each query in the form of a voice clip 
that is played back to the user when he or she calls back for the 
answer. If an answer is not available, the knowledge worker sends 
the voice query on to an expert for an answer, which is then 
recorded and sent to the user. Users can also retrieve the answers 
in text format from village information centers and can send 
photographs with their voice queries to get an expert opinion.
For more information, visit: http://lifelines-india.net/
117 Integrating Mobiles into Development Projects
INTRODUCTION COMPONENT 1 COMPONENT 2 COMPONENT 3 COMPONENT 4 COMPONENT 5 CONCLUSION RESOURCES
M4D INVENTORY
Sector Name Description How and Where it’s Being Used Technical Details
Liga Inan Connecting pregnant women and their midwives. Liga Launched in 2011 in Timor Leste, USAID-funded SMS for all  
(Mobile Inan enables midwives to register expectant mothers, track their Liga Inan is implemented by Health Alliance device types
Moms) progress, know when they go into labor, and make arrangements International. Once registered, the Liga Inan SMS 
for attending the delivery through a mobile phone. Liga Inan system sends pregnant women twice weekly text 
sends automated health promotional information via SMS to all messages with important health information and 
registered pregnant mothers throughout their pregnancy to help reminders to attend regular prenatal care; enables 
them make better decisions about their pregnancy and link them midwives to broadcast useful health messages from 
with regular prenatal care. their mobile phones to women and communities in 
Timor-Leste; and allows pregnant women to contact 
For more information, visit: http://www.ligainan.org/ their midwife with questions or concerns. Six months 
into the program, 1234 women enrolled, 471 women 
received messages, 615 births took place, 109 women 
requested help from their midwife, and there was 
an increase in births with midwives in first of four 
program subdistricts. See USAID Project Table for 
more detail.
Little Seed Tree planting game to spread awareness of global warming. Little Seed is currently under development by Mobile and web 
Little Seed is a strategic game that involves planting a seed until King Mongkut's University of Technology Thonburi application for 
it grows into a tree. If the user completes all the levels, a real, (KMUTT) in Thailand. smartphone
physical tree will be planted.
Mã HS Links traders directly to the Vietnam customs website  Launched in 2010, USAID’s Support for Trade Mobile application 
and places HS code data at the fingertips of importers  Acceleration Project (STAR Plus) supports Vietnam for smartphone  
and exporters. Mã HS is a mobile app that provides Harmonized economic integration. It developed the Mã HS app (iOS only)
System (HS) codes. HS codes are internationally standardized in October 2013 to make it easier for traders to do 
classification codes which cover 5,300 articles or commodities business in Vietnam. The project works to implement 
organized under headings and subheadings, arranged in 99 trade agreements, modernize customs, facilitate 
chapters, and grouped in 21 sections. HS codes inform tariff rates; agricultural trade, and increase legal transparency.  
choosing the correct one is required by international law, and See USAID Project Table for more detail.
impact competitive pricing. Mã HS solves problems of finding and 
navigating the HS classification, and decreases the misclassification 
of HS codes.
For more information, visit: https://itunes.apple.com/us/app/ma-hs-
viet-nam/id694763980?mt=8
118 Integrating Mobiles into Development Projects
INTRODUCTION COMPONENT 1 COMPONENT 2 COMPONENT 3 COMPONENT 4 COMPONENT 5 CONCLUSION RESOURCES
M4D INVENTORY
Sector Name Description How and Where it’s Being Used Technical Details
Magpi Data collection system. Magpi (formerly EpiSurveyor) is Created by DataDyne in 2008, there are numerous Mobile application 
the most widely used mobile data collection system in the projects using Magpi for data collection globally. for all device types
international development sector, with over 25,000 users  
in more than 170 countries worldwide. In Myanmar, Pact’s WORTH/Swan-Yi project began 
using Magpi in 2012. As of December 2013, Pact used 
For more information, visit:  Magpi to survey over 2,000 women and 1,000 savings 
http://www.datadyne.org/magpi-mobile/ groups across 3 projects operating in 12 townships. 
All of Pact Myanmar is now using Magpi for data 
collection.
Mobile4D A bi-directional and crowd sourced disaster information,  Initially developed in October 2012, Mobile4D was Mobile application 
alerting, and reporting system. Students of Computer Sciences installed and tested in April 2013 in Luang Prabang for smartphone 
at the University of Bremen and the United Nations University province in Laos. Initial field tests were successful, and (Android only)
in Macao have developed a vigilance system that gives warnings the Lao Ministry for Agriculture and Forestry (MAF) 
of natural disasters. Mobile4D is a program for sustainable has agreed to further collaborate.
development aimed at improving communications between the 
regional civil authorities and the population living in villages along 
the Mekong. Based on a smartphone system, with a server and 
self-developed app, data concerning all types of natural disasters 
like floods, animal and plant diseases, and outbreaks of malaria  
can be monitored, evaluated, and subsequently communicated  
on mobile devices.
For more information, visit: http://mobile4d.capacitylab.org/
119 Integrating Mobiles into Development Projects
INTRODUCTION COMPONENT 1 COMPONENT 2 COMPONENT 3 COMPONENT 4 COMPONENT 5 CONCLUSION RESOURCES
M4D INVENTORY
Sector Name Description How and Where it’s Being Used Technical Details
Nationwide Up-to-date information on weather in the Philippines. This mobile app was developed in 2012 in the Mobile application 
Operational Project NOAH’s mission is to undertake disaster science research Philippines and has more than 30,000 active users  for smartphone 
Assessment and development, advance the use of cutting edge technologies, as of July 2013. (Android OS 2.2 
of Hazards and recommend innovative information services in government’s and up)
(NOAH) disaster prevention and mitigation efforts. The app opens to 
a detailed Philippine map and updates users on rain forecast, 
weather outlook, and weather station summary features from  
data from the Department of Science and Technology (DOST) 
and its participating agencies.
For more information, visit: http://noah.dost.gov.ph/
Nokia  Nokia Life Tools is a pre-installed application on select Nokia Launched in 2009, as of November 2012, more than Mobile application 
Life Tools devices that offers a wide range of services in Agriculture, 85 million people have used Nokia Life (across all of for select Nokia 
Education, Entertainment and Healthcare. Depending on the its services) in Indonesia, India, China, Nigeria. devices
service, users either subscribe to it, or download content when 
needed. If users subscribe to a service, the service sends the  
user text messages to his/her Nokia Life Tools inbox.
Provides crop tips, market prices, weather info, and news. 
Nokia Life Agriculture provides agriculture information in 18 
local languages on market prices (up to 3 crops in 1-3 nearby 
markets per subscription), daily weather forecasts, and news and 
advice (including agronomy advice for select crops, best practices, 
location-based agriculture news, hyper-localized advice, and other 
information). Market prices are collected from over 9,000 local 
markets on a daily basis for over 400 crops and commodities, and 
crop advice is managed by a team of agricultural experts.
Provides health tips and advice related to motherhood, 
disease, and men’s health. Nokia Life Health provides health 
information and advice on pregnancy, childcare, motherhood, 
health and fitness, diseases, men’s health, and women’s health in 
all countries. There is also a range of health topics like respiratory, 
heart, diabetes, hepatitis, and digestive health which are specific  
to some countries.
For more information, visit: http://www.nokia.com/in-en/support/ 
faq/?action=singleTopic&topic=FA132357
120 Integrating Mobiles into Development Projects
INTRODUCTION COMPONENT 1 COMPONENT 2 COMPONENT 3 COMPONENT 4 COMPONENT 5 CONCLUSION RESOURCES
M4D INVENTORY
Sector Name Description How and Where it’s Being Used Technical Details
Nutrient Provides farmers in Indonesia and the Philippines  Developed by the International Rice Research  IVR and SMS for 
Manager with fertilizer advice matching their particular farming Institute (IRRI) in 2012, Indonesia and the all device types; 
for Rice conditions. NMRice is a computer- and mobile phone-based Philippines have mobile and website applications, mobile application 
(NMRice) application; NMRiceMobile is targeted for farmers and extension while there are website only applications in for smartphone 
workers without internet access. When internet access is Bangladesh, China, India, and West Africa. (Android only)
available, Nutrient Manager for Rice web-based application is 
recommended. With NMRiceMobile, a farmer or extension 
worker in the Philippines or Indonesia calls a toll-free number to 
access the Nutrient Manager for Rice. A voice prompt instructs 
the caller to answer questions about his/her rice field by pressing 
the appropriate number on the phone’s keypad. After all the 
questions are answered, NMRiceMobile sends a text message  
with a field-specific nutrient management guideline for rice.
For more information, visit: 
https://sites.google.com/a/irri.org/nutrient-manager-2/
Pinoy A helpdesk and customer support service that links Originally launched in the Philippines in 2004 as SMS for all  
Farmers’ experts, extensionists, and farmers by answering rice- the Farmers’ Text Center (FTC), the Pinoy Farmers’ device types
Text Center related queries through SMS. Pinoy Farmers’ Text Center Text Center (PFTC) is implemented by PhilRice 
(PFTC) provides regular updates on rice prices, agriculture  and receives an average of 100 texts daily. PFTC is 
related news, and agricultural trends to farmers. Text Centers  a component of the Open Academy for Philippine 
are located in Batac, Isabela, Nueva Ecija, Los Baños, Bicol,  Agriculture which explores text messaging in  
Negros Occidental, Agusan del Norte, and Cotabato. Philippine agriculture. Since the OpAPA started 
operations, it has registered 30,000 rice farmers 
For more information, visit:  through PFTC.
http://www.philrice.gov.ph/?page=resources&page2=extension 
Public Eye Allows citizens to report experiences with government Public Eye is currently under development by Mobile application 
services and to learn about the service quality at different King Mongkut's University of Technology Thonburi for smartphone
agencies, as well as identifies the government/non- (KMUTT) in Thailand.
government agencies that provide services to the general 
public. Public Eye allows the general public to improve service 
quality at government agencies by providing reviews and feedback. 
It aims to increase transparency and accountability.
For more information, visit: http://www2.kmutt.ac.th/en_index.aspx
121 Integrating Mobiles into Development Projects
INTRODUCTION COMPONENT 1 COMPONENT 2 COMPONENT 3 COMPONENT 4 COMPONENT 5 CONCLUSION RESOURCES
M4D INVENTORY
Sector Name Description How and Where it’s Being Used Technical Details
QStream A mobile platform that engages in fun, scenario-based  Developed at Harvard, QStream is used in more  Mobile application 
challenges to improve knowledge. QStream delivers scenario- than 100 countries across sectors. In SE Asia, the for smartphone
based challenges to users’ mobile device, produces sophisticated, USAID-funded CAP-TB project is using QStream  
real-time analytics, and provides insights into knowledge gaps. in Myanmar, China, and Thailand: 
Users respond to questions on mobile devices and learn from 
the resulting answer page. There is a built-in game, scoring, leader •	  To provide technical training of MDR-TB  
boards and integrated blogs, to create positive competition and concepts and guidelines. The QStream online 
ensure strong user engagement. Daily user notifications include training hub enables FHI 360 and other CAP-
email and push notifications to mobile apps and RSS feed readers. TB partners to develop courses that consist of 
Full Unicode support allows QStream to be deployed in any simple multiple choice or fill-in-the-blank questions 
language. This application is based on the principle that knowledge accompanied by a brief explanation for the correct/
is best retained when it is intermittently reinforced and tested incorrect answers. The questions are sent to the 
over time. mobile phones of participants enrolled in the 
course, and their response is relayed back to the 
For more information, visit: http://qstream.com/ training hub to track performance.
•	 T o complement a monthly MDR-TB Conference, 
during which time key concepts for MDR-TB 
and TB/HIV are taught. Each monthly session 
has approximately 5 key concepts, which are 
highlighted at the end of each teaching session. 
These key concepts are then be sent out to all of 
the participants as simple quiz questions, spaced 
about twice weekly using the QStream algorithm, 
to reinforce learning over time. See USAID Project 
Table for more detail.
Rainmaker Assists small plot farmers to deploy drip irrigation through Having proof of concept in India since deployment  Mobile application 
a network of independent retailers. Rainmaker allows local in 2010, MyRain is exploring expansion throughout  for smartphone 
entrepreneurs to easily and quickly design and sell drip irrigation the region in 2014. (Android only)
systems by producing a cost estimate, parts list, and drip irrigation 
system design blueprint from field parameter inputs. The blueprint 
enables dealers and farmers to visualize what the system will look 
like in their fields in real-time during the sales process.
For more information, visit: http://www.myrainindia.com
122 Integrating Mobiles into Development Projects
INTRODUCTION COMPONENT 1 COMPONENT 2 COMPONENT 3 COMPONENT 4 COMPONENT 5 CONCLUSION RESOURCES
M4D INVENTORY
Sector Name Description How and Where it’s Being Used Technical Details
Saraphi Survey, collect and digitize health data. The Saraphi Health  Saraphi Health is part of a three-year project to Mobile application 
Health app transfers raw data collected from the sources to the central create a digital archive for public healthcare policy for smartphone
system located at Saraphi Hospital via public cellular network.  development and management in order to improve 
The data collector enters information into the system when they public health services and address urgent health 
visit people in Saraphi district, and because the information they situations efficiently in Thailand.
collect is embedded in the location of the house, it can be plotted 
on a map.
For more information, visit: http://www.prcmu.cmu.ac.th/hotnews_
detail_eng.php?perin_id=525 and https://play.google.com/store/
apps/details?id=com.saraphihealth.apk&hl=th
Surveillance Early warning disease surveillance system for post-disaster Launched in 2010 in the Philippines by the  SMS for all 
in Post situations. SPEED is an early warning surveillance tool that World Health Organization and the Philippine device types; web 
Extreme monitors health conditions and trends after an emergency or Department of Health, an external evaluation application for 
Emergencies disaster using SMS and web-based applications. It detects early conducted in 2012 found the SPEED program has feature phone and/
and Disasters potential disease outbreaks, monitors emerging health conditions, been successfully developed, tested, refined, and or smartphone with 
(SPEED) and provides timely information on health trends and situations deployed nationwide. data plan
in the affected communities, paying special attention to non-
communicable diseases which may have public health significance.
For more information, visit:  
http://healthmarketinnovations.org/program/surveillance-post-
extreme-emergencies-and-disasters-speed
123 Integrating Mobiles into Development Projects
INTRODUCTION COMPONENT 1 COMPONENT 2 COMPONENT 3 COMPONENT 4 COMPONENT 5 CONCLUSION RESOURCES
M4D INVENTORY
Sector Name Description How and Where it’s Being Used Technical Details
Verboice A free and open source tool to create and run projects  Launched in 2012, Verboice can be used globally in any IVR for all  
that interact via voice. Verboice allows users to listen and sector and for any community, no matter their level of device types
record messages in their own language and dialect or answer literacy or technological sophistication.
questions with a phone keypad.
In Cambodia, Verboice is used by: 
For more information, visit: http://verboice.instedd.org/ and  
http://instedd.org/technologies/verboice/ •	  The International Labour Organization (ILO) and 
Better Factories Cambodia to connect directly with 
factory workers and educate them about their 
rights. Better Factories Cambodia set up a quiz in 
which factory workers can answer questions about 
salary, work safety, and personal health.
•	 M arie Stopes International Cambodia as part of  
the post abortion follow-up process and to educate 
women about safer contraception options.
•	  The Open Institute and Women’s Media Center  
to provide an information telephone hotline for  
on demand health information.
We Heart Raises awareness and combats stigma regarding HIV/AIDS. Launched in 2014 in Thailand, the We Heart app Mobile application 
The We Heart app encourages early testing and provides services online campaign was endorsed by several Thai for smartphone
to HIV+ individuals such as reminders to take drugs on time and celebrities and prompted over 600 people to join  
an online social care network. in the first week. We Heart won the 2014 Microsoft 
Imagine Cup Thailand.
For more information, visit: http://weheartcampaign.com/
124 Integrating Mobiles into Development Projects
INTRODUCTION COMPONENT 1 COMPONENT 2 COMPONENT 3 COMPONENT 4 COMPONENT 5 CONCLUSION RESOURCES
M4D INVENTORY
Sector Name Description How and Where it’s Being Used Technical Details
Wildlife Market monitoring of illegal trade of endangered wild The Wildlife Conservation Society in China  Mobile application 
Guardian animals. Wildlife Guardian improves the accuracy and efficiency released Phase I (iOS system only) in March 2013; for smartphone  
of law enforcement actions against illegal trading of endangered Phase II (Android and iOS systems) is currently  (iOS 5.1 and up)
species by enabling users to quickly submit intelligence reports under development; and Phase III is anticipated  
to the police authorities or NGOs of their choice. There is a to end by 2015.
3-step identification process once a user determines an animal 
may be endangered: 1. photograph and upload, 2. transfer info 
to authoritative expert, and 3. receive feedback within 2 days for 
normal cases, within 2 hours for urgent cases. Geographic location 
is used to provide quick reference to the closest law enforcement 
and animal welfare organizations, to facilitate interventions through 
the submission of detailed reports, and to collect anonymous 
statistics for assessing the size and distribution of reported illegal 
wildlife trade. The database back-end provides an easy-to-use 
interface that allows for a collaborative management and updating 
of 400 and counting detailed species records.
For more information, visit: http://goo.gl/GhULy and http://china.
wcs.org/Initiatives/WildlifeTrade.aspx
Wildlife Awareness raising and protection of the wildlife throughout Released in May 2012, Wildlife Watch was created  Mobile application 
Watch in Cambodia. Wildlife Watch informs users of heavily trafficked out of collaboration between Wildlife Alliance, for smartphone  
species, pinpoints trade hotspots, and teaches how to identity TRAFFIC, and Jeff Corwin Connect in Cambodia. (iOS only)
products and foods made from threatened animal or plant species. 
The Incident Report feature notifies Wildlife Alliance when a user 
reports illegal trade. The app provides detailed information on 
Southeast Asian animal and plant species courtesy of TRAFFIC,  
the wildlife trade monitoring network.
For more information, visit: http://www.wildlifealliance.org/page/
view/92/mobile-apps and https://itunes.apple.com/us/app/wildlife-
watch/id518454388?mt=8
125 Integrating Mobiles into Development Projects
INTRODUCTION COMPONENT 1 COMPONENT 2 COMPONENT 3 COMPONENT 4 COMPONENT 5 CONCLUSION RESOURCES
M4D INVENTORY
Sector Name Description How and Where it’s Being Used Technical Details
Wildscan Species identification and response application.  Implemented by Freeland, the USAID-funded ARREST Mobile application 
Wildscan is being developed to help front-line police, customs, program (Asia’s Regional Response to Endangered for smartphone 
wildlife/conservation officers and the general public correctly Species Trafficking) has completed the research phase (Android only)
identify, report and handle marine and terrestrial animals caught and anticipates releasing the mobile application in 
in illegal wildlife trade. Features include a species library, first 2014. ARREST focuses on awareness raising, building 
responder advice, a comprehensive contact registry, and incident law enforcement capacity, and strengthening networks 
report function. to fight against wildlife trafficking in ASEAN and China. 
See USAID Project Table for more detail.
For more information, visit:  
http://www.usaid.gov/asia-regional/fact-sheets/lmi-asias-regional-
response-endangered-species-trafficking-arrest
126 Integrating Mobiles into Development Projects
INTRODUCTION COMPONENT 1 COMPONENT 2 COMPONENT 3 COMPONENT 4 COMPONENT 5 CONCLUSION RESOURCES
USAID PROJECTS IN SOUTHEAST  
ASIA USING MOBILES
NOTE: This is not an exhaustive list of USAID projects currently using mobile applications in Southeast Asia. This list was generated by desk research conducted in  
Washington DC and through email correspondence with USAID Mission staff in Southeast Asia and a few other countries elsewhere in Asia and the Pacific in 2013-2014.
Country Project Name and Description How They Are Using Mobiles
Cambodia Development Innovations, formerly named Social Innovation Lab Kampuchea As this project is still in start-up, sample mobile-related activities 
(SILK), is implemented by DAI and enables Cambodian-led technology products include: 
to meet CSO demands and trigger transformative changes in the ways CSO 
conduct programs. At the same time, investing in the domestic information and •	 E stablish a Social Innovation Lab as a gathering place for the community to 
communications technology (ICT) sector will enable it to become an engine of learn, meet, hold learning events, work collaboratively, and access resources.
growth in the economy. This emerging ecosystem of technology and civil society 
will result in CSOs’ increased ability to access technology tools and increase their •	 B uild capacity through group training curriculum and one-on-one guidance 
proficiencies in order to apply knowledge of mobile, Internet, and social media on human-centered design, ICT4D proposal writing, social media, and 
tools to amplify their programmatic results and support civic change. developing information security.
For more information, visit:  •	  Provide financial and technical assistance through a grant fund to support 
http://dai.com/our-work/projects/cambodia%E2%80%94development-innovations the development of content, technology, and implementation of ICT-enabled 
projects that support civil society objectives.
•	  Develop a sustainable market for social innovation in Cambodia by educating 
civil society on the potential of technology to improve scale and impact of 
programming, and developing the technical skills of local technology and 
service providers to support cutting-edge programming.
Cambodia TB CARE I and TB CARE II, implemented by multiple partners, are One of the implementing partners, FHI 360, developed a TB SMS system 
mechanisms to build and expand upon previous successful TB control programs, under TB CARE I to enable laboratory technicians to transmit TB test results 
particularly the Tuberculosis Control Assistance Program (TB CAP). TB CARE immediately instead of waiting for health center staff located in more peripheral 
is one of the main global mechanisms for implementing USAID’s TB strategy as locations to come and collect it on a weekly basis.
well as contributing to TB/HIV activities under the US President’s Emergency 
Plan for AIDS Relief (PEPFAR). TB CARE collaborates with other national and 
international initiatives in providing global leadership and support to National TB 
control efforts. 
For more information, visit: http://www.tbcare1.org/ 
127 Integrating Mobiles into Development Projects
INTRODUCTION COMPONENT 1 COMPONENT 2 COMPONENT 3 COMPONENT 4 COMPONENT 5 CONCLUSION RESOURCES
USAID PROJECTS IN SE ASIA USING MOBILES
Country Project Name and Description How They Are Using Mobiles
Cambodia Structuring Partnerships for an Innovative Communications  Examples of how SPICE uses mobile technologies in programming  
Environment (SPICE), implemented by Open Institute, aims to build efforts include: 
partnerships between technology-oriented civil society organizations (CSOs) 
and private sector entities to utilize mature technologies to promote and  •	 C reating partnerships with Internet Service Providers (ISPs) and Mobile 
deliver a greater diversity of information to the public, improve communications Network Operators (MNOs) that give innovators easy access to platforms 
in Khmer via mobile devices, and increase the capacity of CSOs to use social and business models that can be used to start creative services based either 
media for development purposes. SPICE responds to the need to disseminate on voice or SMS messages as the means of communication.
information and ensure connectivity among Cambodians in Khmer, disseminate 
information instantaneously, and improve CSOs’ capacity to respond to situations •	  Creating a Mobile Radio, a voice service in which users can call and select 
quickly and safely in order to improve effectiveness. By engaging the private  the type of information that they want to access by dialing numbers in their 
sector to extend services through MNOs, SPICE promotes the concept of  telephone’s keyboard.
for-profit social innovation for democratic development.
•	 C reating an SMS distribution platform that allows innovators to develop 
For more information, visit: http://www.open.org.kh/spice#.U34oEPldVt0 services that use SMS as the means of communication or means of payment 
for services.
•	  Developing a number of applications for Android phones, including tools 
to better use languages spoken in Cambodia, such as Khmer and Cham 
dictionaries and other Khmer language tools (spell-checkers, predictive text).
Cambodia, CAP-Malaria contributes to a reduction in the incidence and mortality  In Cambodia, CAP-M has a radio program with interactive voice response  
Myanmar, and related to malaria in the Greater Mekong Sub-region by containing the spread  (IVR) that listeners can call to access additional information and to leave 
Thailand of multi-drug resistant P. falciparum malaria. CAP-Malaria implements innovative questions or comments for the call-in program. The radio call-in program 
and evidence-based interventions to reach vulnerable populations and broadcast from three major cities encourages listeners to answer malaria 
communities while strengthening the health system for effective and sustainable questions and quiz to get free phone card. During FY 2013, 940 SMS  
malaria programming. messages were received and 80% of the answers were correct.
For more information, visit: http://capmalaria.org/ 
Cambodia, Asia’s Regional Response to Endangered Species Trafficking (ARREST), ARREST has developed the Wildscan app to help front-line police, customs, 
Laos, Thailand, implemented by Freeland Foundation, will fight trafficking in illegal wildlife in Asia in wildlife/conservation officers, and the general public correctly identify, report, 
and Vietnam by reducing consumer demand, strengthening law enforcement, and strengthening and handle marine and terrestrial animals caught in illegal wildlife trade. Features 
regional cooperation and anti-trafficking networks. include a species library, first responder advice, a comprehensive contact 
registry, and incident report function. See M4D Inventory for more information.
For more information, visit: http://www.usaid.gov/asia-regional/fact-sheets/lmi-asias-
regional-response-endangered-species-trafficking-arrest 
128 Integrating Mobiles into Development Projects
INTRODUCTION COMPONENT 1 COMPONENT 2 COMPONENT 3 COMPONENT 4 COMPONENT 5 CONCLUSION RESOURCES
USAID PROJECTS IN SE ASIA USING MOBILES
Country Project Name and Description How They Are Using Mobiles
China, Control and Prevention of Tuberculosis (CAP-TB), implemented by FHI CAP-TB is using QStream, a mobile platform that engages in fun, scenario-
Myanmar, and 360, aims to reduce Multi-Drug Resistant TB (MDR-TB.)-related incidence and based challenges to improve knowledge, for technical training of MDR-TB 
Thailand mortality in Myanmar, China, and Thailand. concepts and guidelines. See M4D Inventory for more information.
For more information, visit: http://www.cap-tb.org/ 
India Scaling CommCare for Community Health Workers in India is USAID’s contribution to Dimagi catalyzed the global deployment of 
implemented by Dimagi. CommCare allows any community health organization CommCare, allowing the mobile technology to be refined for use in 10 
to quickly create and customize health applications and download them onto the countries across the globe. CommCare technologies provide mobile tools 
phones of community health workers for free use. Dimagi’s objective is to ensure for community health workers (CHW) encouraging them to enroll all 
that beneficiaries, CHWs, and managers all have the right information, at the right  eligible clients, to conduct more timely visits to patients, and to correctly 
time, in the right place by scaling their CommCare technology in India. follow procedures and clinical protocols. CommCare also provides a radically 
new level of monitoring with an emphasis on delivering actionable data for 
For more information, visit: http://www.commcarehq.org/home/ performance improvement. See M4D Inventory for more information.
Indonesia e-MITRA, implemented by NetHope, provides technical advisory services to e-MITRA is a mobile money project that 
essential participants in Indonesia’s mobile money sector, including MNOs, financial 
institutions, and payment platform providers—to name a few. The program is 1.  Raises awareness and interest in mobile money offerings within the  
designed to assist in the development of strategies that will lead to the growth private sector 
and scale of mobile money platforms in Indonesia, provide concrete tools to 
create mobile money strategies and, ultimately, help drive momentum for private 2.  Demonstrates and documents the business case for mobile money, i.e.  
sector offerings of economically viable mobile money products. As a component by promoting deployments in payment streams that can provide scale and 
of its technical services, e-MITRA will also conduct qualitative research to be support for nascent mobile money systems (such as G2P payments, utility 
published on key issues in mobile money in Indonesia. payments, and NGO programming)
For more information, visit: http://emitraindonesia.org/ 3.  Promotes testing different business models and industry participation in  
the mobile money ecosystem to allow for market evolution and creative 
market entry strategies.
4.  Promotes partnerships and deployments that offer a variety of access points 
for mobile money services and test consumer attitudes, acceptance and 
active use of mobile money and mobile financial services more broadly.
129 Integrating Mobiles into Development Projects
INTRODUCTION COMPONENT 1 COMPONENT 2 COMPONENT 3 COMPONENT 4 COMPONENT 5 CONCLUSION RESOURCES
USAID PROJECTS IN SE ASIA USING MOBILES
Country Project Name and Description How They Are Using Mobiles
Indonesia Hati Kami, implemented by Mercy Corps, focuses on helping new mothers The project is conducting an Operations Research (OR) project, mPWS (short 
among Jakarta's poorest residents. The project developed Mothers Support for Local Area Monitoring in Indonesia). Utilizing mobile technology, mPWS 
Groups (MSGs) to allow women to gather and share stories, ask questions and generates timely and accurate reporting and analysis of the Ministry of Health’s 
learn new skills mindful of both their and their babies’ health and wellbeing. maternal and child health Local Area Monitoring and Tracking (MCH-LAMAT) 
data system for local decision-making. mPWS engages the main MCH service 
For more information, visit: http://www.mercycorps.org/tags/hati-kami providers and community for data collection and tracking in MCH-LAMAT. 
Hati Kami is investigating if using mobile phone technology can improve the 
quality of MCH-LAMAT data by providing a cost-effective, efficient and user-
friendly mobile-based electronic health record system. The intervention package 
being tested in Rawa Buaya utilizes Magpi’s CommCare website and cloud 
data system to create an overall framework for health records data collection 
by community volunteers, as well as 10 private midwives. This included the 
provision of basic mobile phones and SIM cards, as well as specific training and 
step-by-step pocket data collection guides, to provide easy reference for data 
collectors. See M4D Inventory for more information.
Philippines All Children Reading Grand Challenge, implemented by EDC, works with the The project promotes the use of National Achievement Test score data sent  
Philippines Department of Education to develop and test an innovative approach by SMS to improve the decision-making process in local school administration 
to using low-cost mobile phone technology to enable time efficient transmission of early grade reading programs.
and analysis of student performance data and technical guidance to the school for 
improved instruction and improved student reading.
For more information, visit: http://www.edc.org/newsroom/press_releases/edc_
receives_usaid_education_grand_challenge_award_international_literacy 
Philippines Ecosystems Improved for Sustainable Fisheries (ECOFISH), implemented In partnership with the Government of the Philippines and Microsoft, ECOFISH 
by Tetra Tech, seeks to build and innovate on the FISH Project by reforming the is using the new TV White Space (TVWS) broadband technology to deliver 
fisheries sector through an application of ecosystem-based fisheries management better services to fishing communities in five outlying municipalities in Bohol 
in the eight marine conservation areas. in the Philippines by establishing connectivity in remote areas and facilitating 
mobile fisherfolk registration. TV White Space refers to the vacant frequencies 
For more information, visit:  located between broadcast TV channels, which can be used to provide wireless 
http://www.usaid.gov/philippines/energy-and-environment/ecofish data connectivity to remote communities in the country.
130 Integrating Mobiles into Development Projects
INTRODUCTION COMPONENT 1 COMPONENT 2 COMPONENT 3 COMPONENT 4 COMPONENT 5 CONCLUSION RESOURCES
USAID PROJECTS IN SE ASIA USING MOBILES
Country Project Name and Description How They Are Using Mobiles
Philippines Scaling Innovations in Mobile Money (SIMM) Project, implemented by DAI, To reach these goals, SIMM targets three broad areas of strategic intervention: 
advances three inter-connected goals: 1) to boost expansion and rapid adoption (i) the payment system, (ii) government services, and (iii) electronic payroll 
of m-money services; 2) to create an enabling environment for m-money; and 3) (e-Payroll) distribution. Cutting across these strategic areas, the activities of 
to increase financial inclusion for broad-based economic growth. SIMM will also address both (a) supply and (b) demand constraints to broader 
adoption of m-money in the Philippines and (c) promote global knowledge 
For more information, visit: http://www.simmphil.org/ sharing.
Solomon The Coral Triangle Support Partnership (CTSP), implemented by WWF, CTSP worked with the Solomon Islands Ministry of Fisheries and Marine 
Islands supports six nations of the Coral Triangle (Solomon Islands, Papua New Guinea, Resources (MFMR) to launch Hapi Fis Hapi Pipol for inshore fisheries data 
Timor Leste, Indonesia, Malaysia and the Philippines). CTSP addresses the management. Hapi Fis Hapi Pipol leverages mobile phone technology to gather 
challenges in fisheries management, live reef fish trade and climate change through and analyze inshore fisheries data—both socio-economic and environmental—
international cooperation. in real time to enable effective management of these important resources. See 
M4D Inventory for more information.
For more information, visit:  
http://wwf.org.ph/wwf3/programs/conservation/coraltriangle 
Timor-Leste Liga Inan / Mobile Moms, implemented by Health Alliance International, has  Liga Inan is using mobile phones to connect expectant mothers with  
three main components: 1) to promote healthy behavior for pregnant women; health providers in Timor-Leste to improve the likelihood of a healthy 
2) to support midwives to improve the availability and quality of emergency pregnancy and birth.
obstetric and newborn care (EmOC); and 3) to connect pregnant women  
and midwives to increase communication and healthy behavior. Midwives can use a mobile phone to register expectant mothers, track their 
progress, know when they go into labor and make arrangements for attending 
For more information, visit: http://www.ligainan.org/ the delivery. Mothers continue to receive support through the first six weeks  
of the newborn’s life.
Liga Inan also sends automated health promotional information via SMS to 
all registered pregnant mothers throughout their pregnancy to help them  
make better decisions about their pregnancy and link them with regular  
prenatal care. See M4D Inventory for more information.
131 Integrating Mobiles into Development Projects
INTRODUCTION COMPONENT 1 COMPONENT 2 COMPONENT 3 COMPONENT 4 COMPONENT 5 CONCLUSION RESOURCES
USAID PROJECTS IN SE ASIA USING MOBILES
Country Project Name and Description How They Are Using Mobiles
Vietnam Sustainable Management of the HIV/AIDS Response and Transition  The SMART TA program designed the Fansipan Challenge, a mobile game  
to Technical Assistance (SMART TA), implemented by FHI 360, is building  to reach people who inject drugs (PWID) population. See M4D Inventory  
the capacity of local institutions to implement and take full ownership of for more information.
evidence-based interventions designed to reverse the spread of HIV/AIDS.  
FHI 360’s technical assistance focuses on integrated prevention, care and 
treatment for injecting drug users, female sex workers and their clients, and  
men who have sex with men.
For more information, visit: http://www.fhi360.org/projects/sustainable-
management-hivaids-response-and-transition-technical-assistance-smart-ta
Vietnam Support for Trade Acceleration Project (STAR Plus), implemented  STAR Plus developed the Mã HS app in October 2013 to make it easier  
by DAI, works to implement trade agreements, modernize customs, facilitate for traders to do business in Vietnam by linking traders directly to the Vietnam 
agricultural trade, and increase legal transparency. Customs website and places HS Code data at the fingertips of importers and 
exporters. See M4D Inventory for more information.
For more information, visit: http://dai.com/our-work/projects/
vietnam%E2%80%94support-trade-acceleration-project-star-i-ii-plus 
132 Integrating Mobiles into Development Projects
INTRODUCTION COMPONENT 1 COMPONENT 2 COMPONENT 3 COMPONENT 4 COMPONENT 5 CONCLUSION RESOURCES
GLOSSARY OF TERMS
2G AGGREGATOR BASIC PHONE 
2 nd generation mobile internet system that provides Aggregators are companies that negotiate  Mobile phone that provides access to voice and  
data at the speed of 9.6 kbit/s to 28.8 kbit/s agreements directly with multiple mobile network text-based services; common worldwide including  
operators for things such as bulk SMS, short codes,  in rural communities 
3G and USSD rates. Consumers can purchase these  
3rd generation mobile internet system that provides items through the aggregator across multiple mobile BULK MESSAGING 
data at a speed up to 348 kbit/s networks, instead of having to set up their own  Sending SMS text messages to many mobile users  
separate agreements with each one. at the same time
4G 
4 th generation mobile internet system that provides API BUSINESS MODEL 
data at a speed up to 1gbit/s (also known as Long  Application Program Interface; a technology that  A plan for the successful operation of a business, 
Term Evolution or LTE) allows services to communicate with each other identifying sources of revenue, the intended customer 
base, products, and details of financing; in terms of  
ACCEPTABILITY APPS a mobile service, a business model refers to the plan  
The social norms, cultural norms, and issues of trust  Programs that are designed to be user-friendly  for sustainability
that impact uptake of a mobile service or device. and to provide a specific service to a mobile phone  
or tablet; apps, figuratively speaking, sit on top of CDMA 
AFFORDABILITY operating systems since they require the operating Code-Division Multiple Access, the competing digital 
The financial ability of a user to access a mobile service, system to run, but an end-user can access an app  cellular system to GSM 
resulting from the cost of the device, usage fees, and directly without first accessing an internet browser.   
additional costs such as fees to charge the battery of  Apps are specific to an operating system (i.e. Google CONDITIONAL CASH TRANSFER 
the mobile device Play apps can only be accessed on Android phones), A grant or subsidy that is sent to an individual only  
therefore, a developer must build multiple versions  if they meet certain conditions (i.e. a parent receiving 
AGENT [MOBILE MONEY AGENT] if they wish for the app to be accessed by all money from the government in return for sending  
A point-of-sale (POS) location that is often a small  smartphone and tablet users. their child to school)
retail shop at which the teller has been trained to 
conduct mobile money transactions, including deposit 
and withdrawal
133 Integrating Mobiles into Development Projects
INTRODUCTION COMPONENT 1 COMPONENT 2 COMPONENT 3 COMPONENT 4 COMPONENT 5 CONCLUSION RESOURCES
GLOSSARY OF TERMS CONT.
CONNECTIVITY ELECTRONIC PAYMENT FUNCTIONALITY  
A broad indicator of mobile access that is  A transfer of money that uses technology rather than The range of operations that can be run on a mobile 
measured by both the level of mobile telephone cash; including card-based payments, funds transfers, and device; the ability of a mobile service to serve its 
coverage and the level of cell phone ownership,  cloud-based payments intended purpose within a given context
and which is usually disaggregated to be more specific 
(i.e. connectivity to basic mobile phones, connectivity  ENABLING ENVIRONMENT  GPS 
to mobile internet, etc.) Attitudes, policies, and practices that stimulate Global Positioning System; GPS uses satellites to provide 
and support effective and efficient functioning of geo-location services to mobile devices
CONTENT organizations and individuals; in the case of mobiles this 
The information made available through a mobile  includes the regulatory framework, data security and GSM 
device or service privacy, and the level of market freedom available to Global System for Mobile Communications, one of the 
mobile service providers leading digital cellular systems, distinguished by the use of 
CUSTOM-BUILT a SIM card; the de facto standard in most of the world
A mobile service that is built specifically for one need  FEATURE PHONE  
or development project Mobile phone that provides access to voice, text,  HARDWARE 
and internet-services; enables the use of applications  The physical storage and display device which provides 
DATA PRIVACY and multimedia content mobile access
The aspect of mobile services that deals with the ability 
an organization or individual has to determine what FINANCIAL LITERACY HUMAN-CENTERED 
personal information can be shared with third parties The ability to effectively and critically navigate and (OR USER-CENTERED)  DESIGN 
evaluate financial services and to manage money;  In broad terms, a type of user interface design, and  
DELIVERY MODEL in the case of M4D, financial literacy is important for a process in which the needs, wants, and limitations of 
A specific method for delivery content to a mobile mobile money adoption and usage end users of a product are given extensive attention  
device (i.e. voice, messaging, web browsing, and apps) at each stage of the design process
FRAMEWORK  
DIGITAL LITERACY Software tools that are built with the intention of ICT4D 
The ability to effectively and critically navigate, evaluate, enabling multiple uses and customizations Information and communications technology for 
and create information using a range of digital development, a term referring the use of technology 
technologies such as mobile phones and computers to achieve 
development goals
134 Integrating Mobiles into Development Projects
INTRODUCTION COMPONENT 1 COMPONENT 2 COMPONENT 3 COMPONENT 4 COMPONENT 5 CONCLUSION RESOURCES
GLOSSARY OF TERMS CONT.
INFRASTRUCTURE M4D MOBILE DATA COLLECTION 
Infrastructure necessary to facilitate mobile uptake Mobiles for development, a term referring to the use of The use of portable, electronic devices to collection 
includes electricity, cell towers, data servers, and sales mobile devices to achieve development goals information for monitoring and evaluation and for 
distribution networks evidence-based decision making
MANY-TO-MANY 
INTEGRATED APPROACH Collective communication MOBILE DEVICE 
The use of mobile service as part of a complex The physical piece of mobile equipment, generally 
development program, rather than as an isolated MMS (MULTIMEDIA MESSAGING SERVICE)  divided into three different categories: basic, feature, and 
approach A protocol accepted on most feature phones  smartphone
that enable users to send and receive audio images  
INTERACTIVE and videos MOBILE ECOSYSTEM  
A description of any service that allows for a A complex and multi-faceted system that encompasses 
simultaneous two-way flow of information; a service that MOBILE ACCESS (MACCESS) the full range of different mobile devices, business 
responds to a user’s input The ability of individuals to benefit from mobile devices models, content delivery models, and user habits 
and services without being hindered by location, income, available in a country or region 
INTERACTIVE VOICE RESPONSE (IVR) gender, or other variables beyond their control
A technology that allows a computer to interact with MOBILE MONEY 
humans through the use of voice and tones inputted  MOBILE BANKING A term used to describe the use of a mobile phone 
via a mobile keypad The use of a mobile phone to interact with a personal account to store and access funds, which are held in a 
bank account; used to check balances, pay bills, and mobile wallet account
JAVA transfer money between accounts
A high-level programming language that allows software MOBILE NETWORK OPERATOR (MNO)  
developers to build applications for WAP-enabled MOBILE BROWSER A private company that provides mobile network 
feature phones The application through which a mobile user can access services to customers
the internet; a scaled-down version of internet browsers 
LITERACY used on computers MOBILE VIRTUAL NETWORK OPERATOR 
Basic literacy is defined by the World Bank as anyone (MVNO) 
“who can, with understanding, read and write a short, A private company that provides mobile network 
simple statement on their everyday life” services to customers using a mobile network 
135 Integrating Mobiles into Development Projects
INTRODUCTION COMPONENT 1 COMPONENT 2 COMPONENT 3 COMPONENT 4 COMPONENT 5 CONCLUSION RESOURCES
GLOSSARY OF TERMS CONT.
infrastructure that they do not own. They purchase  PARTNERSHIPS PULL 
bulk access to network services at wholesale directly An aspect of a business model for a mobile service by A function that allows a central user to request 
from MNOs and then sell back those services at  which the appropriate donor, private sector, non-profit, information from an individual through their  
retail prices to customers. and government organizations are brought together in mobile phone
order to effectively implement the service
NATIVE VOICE PUSH  
Peer-to-peer communication via voice on a mobile PERSON-TO-PERSON (P2P) TRANSFER  A function that allows a central user to send information 
phone A transfer of money from one individual to another to an individual’s mobile phone
through a mobile money account
OFF-THE-SHELF RISK ANALYSIS 
A mobile service that is used in its pre-existing condition PLATFORM A technique to identify and assess factors  
The operating system that provides the overarching that may jeopardize the success of a project or  
ONE-TO-MANY COMMUNICATION environment for accessing mobile services achieving a project goal
between and individual user (i.e. a development 
organization) and many individual users PLUGIN SERVICE DESIGN 
A software component that adds a specific feature  The concept of mobile service which includes the 
ONE-TO-ONE to an existing software application technology, business model, partnerships, and promotion
Communication between two individual users  
(i.e. a development organization and a user) PROJECT GOAL SIM CARD 
The ultimate aim of a given development project A smart card inside a mobile phone, carrying an 
OPEN SOURCE SOFTWARE identification number unique to the owner, storing 
Generically, open source refers to a program in  PROMOTION  personal data, and preventing operation if removed
which the source code is available to the general  The marketing and communication of mobile service 
public for use and/or modification from its original  including traditional advertising, training, and/or SIM OVERLAY 
design free of charge grassroots outreach A thin, rubber sheet that can be laid ontop of a SIM 
card enabling the user to access additional services and 
OPERATING SYSTEM PROPRIETARY SOFTWARE  features from a third-party provider
The system through which a smartphone user accesses Privately owned and controlled; in the terms  
data, including internet and apps (i.e. Android) of M4D, proprietary is the opposite of open source
136 Integrating Mobiles into Development Projects
INTRODUCTION COMPONENT 1 COMPONENT 2 COMPONENT 3 COMPONENT 4 COMPONENT 5 CONCLUSION RESOURCES
GLOSSARY OF TERMS CONT.
SMART INDICATORS THEORY OF CHANGE 
Data points by which to monitor the success of project An explicit presentation of the assumptions about 
which are Specific, Measurable, Attainable, Relevant, and how changes are expected to happen in relation to a 
Time-bound particular project and/or due to the implementation  
of a specific mobile service
SMARTPHONE 
Mobile phone that provides access to voice, text, and USABILITY 
advance operating systems for accessing the internet; The ability and ease at which an individual can operate  
enables the use of wireless internet (WiFi) and GPS/ a mobile device or service for its intended purpose 
location-based services
USER HABITS  
SMS The typical ways that people choose to interact with 
Short Message Service; SMS is a service for sending their phones
short text messages between mobile phones
USSD (UNSTRUCTURED 
SOFTWARE SUPPLEMENTARY SERVICE DATA)  
Anything that can be stored electronically is software; in A protocol used to communicate with a mobile service 
terms of mobiles, software can be divided into platform, provider’s computers; unlike SMS, USSD creates a real-
framework, and apps (refer to relevant glossary entries) time connection, allowing for multiple two-way messages 
to be sent during a single USSD session
STORAGE 
The ability of a mobile device to hold information  WAP (WIRELESS APPLICATION PROTOCOL)  
for future use A secure, basic specification that allows users to access 
information via the internet instantly via a mobile phone; 
TABLET most often used on older model feature phones
A mobile device that provides similar functionality  
to a smartphone with a larger screen
137 Integrating Mobiles into Development Projects
INTRODUCTION COMPONENT 1 COMPONENT 2 COMPONENT 3 COMPONENT 4 COMPONENT 5 CONCLUSION RESOURCES

