EMPOWERING AND MOBILIZING PEOPLE 
LIVING WITH HIV/AIDS  
Using phones to promote healthy, positive living in Ghana 
BEHAVIOR CHANGE COMMUNICATION 
Implementation date: February 2012 to January 2014  
Ghana has succeeded in keeping HIV prevalence relatively low (1.3 percent of people aged 15 to 49 in 2013), 
through strong support of government, NGOs and civil society. These stakeholders support the 90-90-90 target which 
focuses on ensuring that 90 percent of the population is tested, 90 percent of people living with HIV (PLWHA) are on 
treatment, and 90 percent of people on treatment have suppressed viral loads. The Empowering and Mobilizing 
People Living with HIV/AIDS (EMPower II) was a USAID funded project that worked with local organizations to ensure 
that the most at-risk populations in Ghana have access to necessary HIV prevention information and support services. 
EMPower II supported the development and transition of support groups into functional NGOs and equipped them 
with the knowledge, skills, and attitudes necessary for participating in comprehensive HIV and AIDS prevention 
activities. 
About EMPower II 
A key component of EMPower II Project was raising PLWHA SGs talked to SGs about the benefits of receiving 
awareness among PLWHA about key behaviors that prevent the messages.  The phone numbers of interested people 
 
the transmission of HIV. To reach the largest number of were forwarded monthly to NAP+ and these numbers were 
people, the Project used bulk text messaging to enrolled to receive messages. The Project began sending HIV 
c onfidentially communicate important HIV prevention and prevention messages via bulk text to voluntary subscribers in 
treatment messages to subscribers.  These messages were November 2012. “Call back” system was available to allow 
designed to ensure that PLWHA had the information about subscribers to get further counseling . Counselors were 
H IV transmission (including key behaviors to minimize reimbursed by NAP+ for their time given over the phone 
transmission) and access to treatment and services.   The counseling.  
Project conducted a formative assessment among  200+ 
s upport group (SG) members, to guide development of Additionally, EMPower II adapted INFOREACH (an existing 
message content.   HIV Prevention outreach guide for lead trainers) to suit the 
particular needs of the project’s target groups. INFOREACH 
E MPower II provided support to Ghana Network of People covers the 10 key prevention behaviors, including legal 
Living with HIV and AIDS (NAP+ Ghana) by contracting a issues, family planning, and stigma and discrimination. The 
local software development firm, DreamOval, to send bulk INFOREACH content was recorded on mobile phone 
 
text messages using a platform called myTXTbuddy. memory cards and CDs and distributed to Lead Trainers and 
Messaging costs were covered by DreamOval and then Counselors for sharing with PLHWA. The recordings were 
r eimbursed monthly by NAP+.  Staff of NAP+ were trained used by Lead Trainers in one-on-one and SG sessions, and 
on the platform, to manage subscribers and messages.  To for large anti-stigma outreach campaigns. The information 
attract subscribers, Lead Trainers and Counselors of was also used by antiretroviral treatment (ART) centers.  
 
16  |  mHealth Compendium Volume 4 
 Evaluation and Results 
By project end, over 850 people were enrolled to 
receive text messages on HIV and AIDS prevention and 
treatment. On average, recipients received 8 different 
messages each month and the system registered an 
average of 77 total “call-backs” per month.  
Qualitative and quantitative methods of data collection 
were used in the baseline and endline studies to examine 
changes in knowledge, attitudes, and practices among SG 
members who received the messages.  The qualitative 
data were collected using mainly focus group discussions 
(FGDs) with target beneficiaries – men who have sex 
with men who test positive for HIV (MSM+ve), female sex workers who test positive for HIV (FSW+ve), and community 
members.  In-depth interviews were also held with key stakeholders such as MSM+ve and FSW+ve.  Quantitative data were 
collected using questionnaires administered by a team of trained Research Assistants on one-on-one basis.   
The following are highlights of EMPower II beneficiary responses knowledge, attitudes, and practices related to HIV:  
 The commitment to partner reduction increased from 52.6 to 72.2 percent (27.1 percentage increase) with FSW+ves 
with the greatest pledge to reduce their partners. 
 The Support Groups became the most preferred source of condom and lubricant supply  from 6.8 to 26.5 percent 
 The percentage of those who would disclose their HIV status was between 69.3 to 85.7 percent.  FSW+ves were noted 
to be more likely to disclose their status (76.5 to 97.6 percent). 
 Increased proportion of respondents with knowledge of their partners’ status from 37.5 to 54.4 percent with a 
percentage increase of 45.1 percent .  
 Increased proportion of those on medication was observed – from 71.6 to 91.8 percent with a percentage increase of 
28.2 percent. Medication uptake among the FSW+ves became universal at the endline from 64.7 percent. Those who 
migrated to full ART also increased from 47.6 to 85.2 percent. 
 Increased reduction in ART default was also noted – from 60.9 to 39.5 percent, a 35.1 percent decrease. This implies 
more people were now adhering to their ART regimens.  The bulk text messaging was cited to have played a 
protagonist role in this change.  
Lessons Learned Geographic Coverage: Ghana 
 Involve project beneficiaries in all stages of the project, from design Implementation Partners: World 
through to the implementation, management, and evaluation Education, Inc., Kharis Foundation, 4-H 
Ghana; Ghana Red Cross Society, Network 
 Even when there are no financial incentives, the receipt of information 
Association of PLHIV (NAP+)  
can be motivation enough to participate in an intervention if the target 
population is involved enough in the design of the project to personally Funder: USAID 
understand the value of the content  
Contact Information: 
World Education, Inc. | Huai-Ming Sun, Senior 
Conclusion 
Program Officer (hsun@worlded.org) 
EMPower II achieved its project goals and objectives by enhancing the USAID | Emmanuel Essandoh, HIV Prevention 
administrative and technical and capacities of the partner NGOs and Specialist (essandoh@usaid.gov) 
support groups to effectively lead and participate in the prevention of the 
spread of HIV in Ghana. Mobile technology played a significant role in the 
success of EMPower II. The bulk text messaging played a major role in reminding subscribers of issues relating to drug 
treatment adherence, positive living, and changes in attitude, most significantly towards alcohol and how its consumption can 
influence unhealthy behaviors. Bulk text messaging also reduced administrative costs for NAP+ by reducing time involved in 
sending letters to invite people for meetings and informing Regional and district officers of other important decisions, such as 
shortages of drugs and where people can get their stock.  
 
mHealth Compendium Volume 4  |  17 
