spotlIght
JUNE 2013
lIVIng gooDs
UGANDA
BAcKgroUnD
living Goods operates networks of avon-like micro-entrepreneurs who 
go door-to-door selling a wide range of life-changing products, including 
treatments for malaria and diarrhea, fortifi ed foods, clean cook stoves, and 
Empowering solar lights. our networks of franchised micro-entrepreneurs, over 1,000 in 
Micro-Entrepreneurs To uganda, leverage living Goods’ brand, buying power and marketing tools to 
Deliver Life-Changing deliver vital products at accessible prices to the people who need them most. 
By combining the best practices from the worlds of micro-enterprise, fran-
Products To The chising and public health, living Goods is creating a fully sustainable system 
Doorsteps Of The Poor to improve the health, wealth, and productivity of the world’s poor.
lIVIng gooD’s MoBIle plAtforM
 
We built an end-to-end mobile platform designed to drive demand, increase 
access, and reduce costs for delivering products that save and change lives. 
simple phones are quickly becoming the single most transformative tool for 
our success: empowering agents to earn more, delivering targeted health 
messages, dramatically lowering the cost to market and monitor, enabling real 
time salesforce management and igniting social connections that drive impact 
and business success. By fusing together best practice mhealth applications, 
mobile marketing tools, and robust user training this comprehensive technol-
ogy platform is quickly becoming the backbone of our business model.
We’re building a powerful client database across the regions we serve - to 
date, we have over 35,000 numbers in uganda. We’re leveraging that data-
base and the speed and effi  ciency of mobile to driver better health in many 
ways:
MAMA: moBile alliance FoR maTeRnal acTion | spoTliGhT June 2013 1
Real Time TReaTmenT RemindeRs: every day, agents use their phones to up-
load treatments for malaria, diarrhea, and respiratory infection in real time to 
the living Goods data warehouse. after agents send a treatment sms, their 
client receives free automated treatment adherence reminders.  
QuickeR, cheapeR QualiTy conTRol: Before mobile phones all program 
monitoring was done on foot – a slow, costly approach. now, when agents 
log treatments by mobile living Goods can call or text clients immediately to 
check the quality and accuracy of diagnoses. 
help on call: all our agents post their mobile number in every client home. 
nanyanzi harriet, a living Goods agent in clients can call their agent any time of day or night when a child is ill to get 
nsangi, uganda, with two of her clients. immediate advice or request a house call. This saves parents time, trouble 
harriet registered them both to receive the and worry, and helps kids get treated faster. 
‘happy Baby’ sms service. Both appreci-
ated the service and are proud to show off 
their healthy newborns. nahura sharon ensuRinG healThy pReGnancies: agents use sms to register every pregnant 
(left) said it was like “having a hospital at woman and newborn child in their community. once enrolled, these clients 
home”. (photo credit: Tine Frank) receive automated stage and age appropriate sms messages to promote a 
healthy pregnancy and safe delivery.  This free sms service improves health 
impact and helps agents build stronger customer relationships that drive 
more sales her way.
Use of MAMA MessAges 
We used mama’s maternal health messages to inspire our set of automated 
sms messages for pregnant women and new mothers – our ‘happy Baby’ 
service.  once enrolled by their agents, clients receive automated weekly 
stage and age appropriate sms messages to encourage a healthy pregnancy 
and delivery.
The ‘happy Baby’ service is part of our larger goal to not only build aware-
intensive hands-on training with agents ness and educate but also drive action. To support our agents on the ground 
on how to access and send sms messages 
is key to the platform’s success. sarah and increase their sales, we end several messages with a clear call to action 
Balisanyuka, our mafubira agent, bragged, including the name and mobile number of the client’s agent. We integrate 
“in the beginning there were challenges, specific product recommendations that support a healthy pregnancy, like 
but now i’ve gotten used to the system. i iron folate, clean burning cook stoves, and safe delivery kits - all available 
send sms reports faster than my written 
reports.” (photo credit: living Goods) through our agents - into the messages. 
example: dizziness, headaches, tiredness are all symptoms of low iron. Take 
a daily iron supplement. need iron? call living Goods (nakamya Rebecca 
0774862596). 
We also include educational messages to attain a healthy pregnancy, not 
necessarily linked to our agents’ products and sales. many of these messages 
come directly from mama with slight variations. 
example: you are eating for two now!  make sure to eat plenty of fruits, veg-
etables, meat and beans.
and finally, leveraging findings from mama, we use emotionally engaging 
messages to keep our clients interested and engaged in the service through-
out their pregnancy and beyond. again, many of these messages come 
directly from mama.
MAMA: Mobile AlliAnce for MAternAl Action | spotlight june 2013 2
example: your baby is about the size of half a banana! if you could look inside 
your belly you would see a fully formed baby with ten fingers and toes.
in less than one year, since our use of mama messages began, over 7,300 
pregnant women have been registered.
chAllenges
The challenges we’ve encountered may sound familiar to other organizations 
working in Bop markets. our system is dependent upon agents collecting 
and uploading client information via sms. But when we began we found 
that basic texting was still foreign to many agents. To increase agent usage, 
agents use sms to register every preg- we provided intensive training and an incentive scheme to drive adoption. in 
nant woman and newborn child in their addition, many agents shared phones with their family members and did not 
community. once enrolled, these clients always carry them in the field – making it difficult to register clients on the 
receive automated stage and age appro- spot. in response, we offered our agents financing for a good-quality, low-
priate sms messages to promote a healthy 
pregnancy and safe delivery. (photo price phone - more than 40 percent of agents bought one.
credit: esther havens)
fUtUre plAns
We believe that good business is good development. our long-term goal is 
to establish a thriving double bottom-line business. But to create a commer-
cially viable venture, we must first achieve sustainability of our county oper-
ations. our mobile system is a key component to reaching that sustainability. 
it empowers our agents to earn more, dramatically lowers our cost to market 
and monitor, enables real time salesforce management and improves our 
health impacts. 
not unlike mama, we believe in the power of sharing our methods and tools 
with other organizations. To create impact at scale, we intend to facilitate 
widespread replication of our micro-franchise model. no single organization 
agents support and track all pregnant can solve the problems we confront at the scale they exist today. in that spirit, 
women in their service areas through 
we established a separate division exclusively dedicated to providing consult-
regular visits, home-based education, and 
doorstep delivery of essential health prod- ing support and tools to help our partner organizations learn from, optimize, 
ucts like vitamin supplements, de-worm- and deploy living Goods inspired micro-franchise systems.
ing medication, malaria prophylaxis, and 
clean birthing kits (seen here). 
(photo credit: Tine Frank)
MAMA: Mobile AlliAnce for MAternAl Action | spotlight june 2013 3
The mama community spotlight series 
shines a light on some of the great work 
being done by organizations using mama’s 
adaptable mobile messages. each month 
we feature a new organization that has 
downloaded our messages and is using 
mobile technology to improve maternal, 
newborn and child health.  
inspired by these innovative programs? 
download the mama messages for yourself 
by visiting www.mobilemamaalliance.org 
and completing our short questionnaire.
For inquires about working with our 
partnership, contact: 
mama Global
 tel: 202.887.9040 
email: info@mobilemamaalliance.org
media inquiries, contact: 
mabinty koroma 
tel: 202.862.6315 
email: mkoroma@mobilemamaalliance.org
