CASE STUDY
HEALTH
Malaria Consortium 
inSCALE: iCCM for 
Improving Child Health
In collaboration with the London School 
of Hygiene and Tropical Medicine 
and University College of London, 
the inSCALE project aims to increase 
coverage of appropriate treatment for 
sick children in Mozambique.
PROJECT OVERVIEW 
The inSCALE project seeks to demon-
strate that government-led Integrated At a Glance
Community Case Management 
(iCCM) can improve healthcare ser-
vices and expand coverage in Implemented: Mozambique, 2013-2015
Mozambique, a country where only Sectors: Child health, pneumonia, malaria, iCCM
52% of the population has health-
care coverage.  The project adopted Features: Active data management, decision & 
CommCare and CommConnect to diagnostic support, respiratory rate counter, motivational 
strengthen communication between messages (for CHWs & Supervisors), case management, 
community health workers (CHWs) and 
health facility supervisors, and with multimedia, custom reporting
heavy involvement of the Ministry of Number of users: 179
Health, inSCALE has the potential to 
expand into other areas of the health 
system, with the goal of improved 
diagnosis, treatment, and monitoring 
of disease throughout Mozambique.
BACKGROUND mobile health (mHealth) system 
Around the world over six million with Dimagi in 2013 to enhance children under the age of five the country’s iCCM program,
lose their lives each year to diseases and boost CHW performance lev-
that are preventable and treatable. els, morale, and job satisfaction. 
These deaths occur primarily in poor The five year project was first imple-
rural settings, particularly in sub-Saha- mented in 2009 and includes an 
ran Africa, often as a result of strained 18-month randomized control 
health systems and limited access trial (RCT) in Inhambane Province, 
to simple, affordable interventions. Mozambique. The RCT’s aim is to 
One approach to improving these study the effects of mHealth applica-
systems is integrated Community tions on CHW motivation, including MOZAMBIQUE
Case Management (iCCM), a strat- analyzing data to better understand 
egy that extends case manage- the accuracy of CHWs’ patient diag-
ment of childhood illness beyond nosis and prescribed treatment.
health facilities and into communi- The project is Mozambique’s larg-
ties [WHO, 2013]. Through the iCCM est Android deployment to date 
model, community health workers and an opportunity to explore 
(CHWs) are trained to diagnose, treat, the potential impact of mHealth 
and refer children with key child- on a national system of childcare.
hood illnesses, including diarrhea, 
pneumonia, and malaria, and have THE TWO MOBILE APPLICATIONS
demonstrated potential to reduce Malaria Consortium’s mHealth system 
childhood mortality by 60 percent. consists of two mobile applications. The system currently centers upon a 
In Mozambique, a national network primary application for CHWs, with 
of 1,950 CHWs (locally referred to a complementary application devel-Both applications:
as Agentes Polivalentes Elementares oped for supervisors. There is also  
- or APEs) provide iCCM services an Active Data Management (ADM) • Integrate CommCare 
to the country’s four million chil- component to help district level (mobile app for CHWs) 
dren. However, the program’s supervisors analyze child health and CommConnect (SMS 
effectiveness can been negatively data collected by CHWs, by pro-based-system). 
impacted by low CHW motiva- viding timely report outs. Malaria • Were designed with input & 
tion, limited availability and usage Consortium’s system also utilizes feedback from Ministry of Health 
of health information, and limited custom reporting features, a web-officials and CHWs to ensure 
support and supervision of CHWs. based reporting dashboard, and they remain consistent with pre- monthly SMS motivational messages 
existing protocols. 
MHEALTH FOR IMPROVED ICCM provided through CommConnect • Work offline and save data on to  better support both CHWs and 
To address these challenges, the phone until there is a net- health facility level supervisors.
Malaria Consortium developed a work connection. 
Feature Spotlight
Respiratory Rate Counter
In order to diagnose symptoms of pneumonia, CHWs are trained to 
determine a patient’s respiratory rate during patient visits. This is often 
one of the most challenging tasks for CHWs and can result in improper 
diagnoses. 
To address this challenge, a respiratory timer  has been integrated into 
inSCALE’s CommCare application. The timer enables CHWs to tap the 
phone screen each time a patient breathes, and automatically produces 
a respiratory rate for the patient at the end of the minute, improving 
CHWs’ ability to diagnose symptoms of pneumonia.
 
The CHW application is designed of designing this project, includ-
to better support 132 CHWs dur- ing in application and custom report 
ing patient visits based on pre-exist- design, n iteration, training, and 
ing paper-based job aids. The appli- deployment. All user feedback was 
cation is based on diagnostic and sought via interviews and in observ-
treatment protocols from the Ministry ing CHWs during patient visits at dif-
of Health for diarrhea, pneumonia, ferent points of the iteration process. 
malaria, and malnutrition, including 
an immunization plan for children TRAINING OF TRAINERS
under  five. It also acts as a support The project also used a “Training of 
tool for CHWs to diagnose, treat and Trainer” approach, to prepare staff 
refer children with these diseases, as for the training of provincial health 
well as prompt CHWs with a check- workers at different levels in the 
list of danger signs exhibited by preg- province, increasing project owner-
nant women, newborns, and children ship and sustainability. These train-
for appropriate referral and follow-up. ers ultimately trained a total of 
132 CHWs and 47 supervisors for 
The supervisory application is the final implementation phase. 
used by 47 health facility-level super- In addition to training CHWs and super-
visors, and is designed to facili- visors on how to use the CommCare 
tate better supervision and provide applications, project staff were aware 
supervisors with heightened data. that most CHWs were unaccustomed 
The application enables supervisors to using Android phones. Dimagi 
to score CHWs’ performance dur- and Malaria Consortium held extra 
ing monthly visits, and track CHWs’ trainings and introductory sessions 
progress overtime. It was designed on Android phones, and used an 
with reporting indicators from exist- AppBlocker to lock down unnecessary 
ing monthly reports at the Ministry features of the phone. As a result of 
of Health, and utilizes the national these trainings, CHWs demonstrated 
rubric for comprehensive case man- the necessary technical literacy lev-
agement. The application also incor- els needed to use the application. 
porates Active Data Managemetn 
capabilities from CommCare so that The trial represented Mozambique’s 
supervisors can analyze and act upon largest Android deployment to 
child health collected by CHWs and date, and as such the team dis-
follow targeted follow-up action steps covered new insights in the 
for their district’s network of CHWs. transition from J2ME phones.
CHW-FOCUSED DESIGN For more information and lessons 
User-centered design was a key learnt from the project implemen-
element of this mHealth system. tation, please visit: http www.malar-
Ministry of Health staff and CHWs iaconsortium.org/inscale/pages/
were heavily involved in every step innovations/mobile-technology.
CommCare, CommConnect 2014
commcarehq.org
Photos © Dimagi 2014; Malaria Consortium 
2014,  Mozambique
Malaria Consortium inSCALE
www.malariaconsortium.org/inscale
Dimagi, Inc.
585 Massachusetts Ave
Suite 3
Cambridge, MA 02139
t +1 617.649.2214
f +1 617.274.8393
Dimagi delivers open source and innovative 
technology to underserved communities 
around the world
