  
  
c Stock 
 
B rief Overview 
 
Hard-to-reach communities in Malawi rely on community health 
surveillance assistants (HSAs) to provide quality medicines and 
services for the treatment of childhood illnesses.  However, these 
HSAs frequently experience stock outs of essential medications.  
The Improving Supply Chains for Community Case Management 
of Pneumonia and Other Common Diseases of Childhood Project 
(SC4CCM) is a five year project funded by the Bill & Melinda 
Gates Foundation that focuses on finding affordable, simple, and 
sustainable supply chain solutions that address the unique 
challenges of community health workers. 
cStock is a rapid SMS, open-source, web-based system that was custom designed by SC4CCM and the Malawi 
Ministry of Health (MOH) to resupply, monitor and manage community-level essential medicines and 
commodities for child health, family planning and HIV testing. The system allows HSAs to transmit information 
regarding their supply of nineteen essential medicines to the health center.  This community level information 
is also available to decision makers at all levels of the system.  
The project started in November 2009 and runs until October 2012 and works in Ethiopia, Malawi, and 
Rwanda. 
 
 
 
 Geographic Coverage: 
Malawi 
 
 Implementation Partners: 
Supply Chains for Community Case Management Project (SC4CCM), John Snow 
International (JSI) 
 
 Funder: 
Bill & Melinda Gates Foundation 
 
 For More Information Contact: 
SC4CCM, JSI  
 Yasmin Chandani, Project Director; 
1616 N. Fort Myer Drive, 11th Floor, Arlington, Virginia, USA 22209;  
Tel: +703-528-7474; email: yasmin_chandani@jsi.com 
 
 39 
 
Logistics 
 cStock 
 
About cStock 
To address the lack of data visibility in the supply chain, 
SC4CCM worked with MOH and partners to create 
cStock.  Each community-based HSA was trained in 
cStock to report commodity information via SMS. 
cStock automatically calculates the resupply needs for 
each HSA based on reported stock levels and  transmits 
this data to the health center, enabling health center 
staff to pre-pack orders and text the HSA when orders          
are ready.   
 Additionally, there was a significant adoption of cStock 
In addition, cStock alerts higher level staff via SMS if among HSAs. After cStock was implemented 97 percent 
supplies cannot be replenished or an HSA remains at of HSAs reported logistics data to their respective 
low levels of stock despite being resupplied. Data is health center compared to only 43 percent prior to 
available via a web-based dashboard that provides timely cStock.   Supervisors also reported HSA collection of 
visibility into actual stock levels held by HSAs, enabling supplies also improved with approximately half of all 
real time identification of problem areas and overall HSAs collecting products within one to two days of 
monitoring of supply chain performance by the district receiving a message that products were ready. One 
and central level administration.  additional encouraging outcome was that access to 
 cStock appeared to motivate HSAs without phones to 
To launch the system, MOH Malawi and SC4CCM quickly purchase phones to be able to access the 
partnered to provide one day of training to HSAs, health system.  
center staff and district staff on using cStock. It is  
essential that staff at all levels of the system understand Lessons Learned 
their role in the system. As cStock is more than a one- • Having good visibility into the messages 
way reporting system, each person needs to fully received from HSAs on the cStock website was 
understand how to respond in a timely way. critical so that data entry errors, like using the 
 letter ‘O’ rather than the number zero (0), 
 could be quickly identified and addressed. 
Evaluation and Results • HSA trainings should be done in pairs: one who 
The formal program evaluation will begin in January knows how to write and send SMS messages 
2013, thus the information below are preliminary result can be a mentor to one who cannot. 
from a smaller sample obtained during regular  
monitoring of activities.  Results from monitoring visits Conclusion 
found a two-fold increase in the percent of registered Given SC4CCM’s focus on sustainability, the project 
HSAs who had four essential medicines (cotrimoxazole, decided not to provide phones to HSAs, to minimize 
Artemether, lumefantrine and ORS) in stock; these risks to the long term effectiveness of the system. One 
drugs were used as “tracers” to monitor general positive and encouraging outcome was that access to 
availability of supplies. As illustrated below, in the first cStock appeared to be a motivating factor; some HSAs 
quarter of the project 61 percent of HSAs had the four who arrived at the training without phones used their 
“tracer” products in stock during the monitoring visit per diem to purchase phones so that they too could use 
compared to only 27 percent before cStock was cStock. This not only underlines their trust and 
implemented.  commitment to invest in the system but will improve 
 their communication regarding supplies and enable them 
to better communicate with clinical supervisors, friends 
and family. 
40 Information was excerpted from:  cStock: Creating an SMS system to improve supply of 
child health medicines for CCM in Malawi: http://sc4ccm.jsi.com/Docs/MwSC4CCMcStock 9.12.11 1 1.pdf 
