Leveraging MobiLe  
TechnoLogies for MaTernaL, 
newborn & chiLd heaLTh:
A FrAmework For engAgement
November 2012 
William C. PhilbriCk
mhealth alliaNCe, UN FoUNdatioN

Table Of COnTenTs
ACknowLeDgementS ………………………………………………………………………………………………… 4
eXeCUtIVe SUmmArY …………………………………………………………………………………………………6
LISt oF ACronYmS …………………………………………………………………………………………………… 7 
IntroDUCtIon AnD methoDoLogY ………………………………………………………………………………9
the “whY” - rAtIonALe For tArgetIng mnCh AnD USIng mheALth ……………………………………9
the “where” - geogrAphIC FoCUS …………………………………………………………………………… 11
the “whAt” - StrAtegIC objeCtIVeS ………………………………………………………………………… 11
the “how” - gUIDIng prInCIpLeS AnD operAtIonAL prIorItIeS ………………………………………… 15
the “who” - StAkehoLDerS ……………………………………………………………………………………… 16
the “when” - ConCLUSIon  ……………………………………………………………………………………… 16
AppenDICeS
Appendix “A” Using mobile technology in other Sectors that Impact mnCh ..................................................18
Appendix “b” health Systems Strengthening: Illustrative outcomes/milestones ..............................................19
Appendix “C” Integration: Illustrative outcomes/milestones ............................................................................ 20
Appendix “D” gender mainstreaming and women’s empowerment: Illustrative outcomes/milestones ...........21
Appendix “e” operational priorities:  Illustrative Activities .................................................................................22
Appendix “F” operational priorities, guiding principles and Illustrative Stakeholders ...................................... 23
enDnoteS …………………………………………………………………………………………………………… 24
3
TOC  Leveraging MobiLe TechnoLogies for MaTernaL, newborn & chiLd heaLTh
Photo Cover: Farran, UN
Photo inside Cover: Perret, UN
aCknOwledgemenTs
there are a number of individuals who contributed to this Framework and to whom 
i owe a debt of gratitude. First, i want to acknowledge the mhealth alliance and its 
staff whose support made the development of this Framework possible. i would 
particularly like to thank Patty mechael, executive director of the alliance whose 
vision for using mhealth to not only improve mNCh, but to also address gender 
disparities connected in all areas of health and development, is inspiring. Gratitude 
also goes to Jonathan Payne for his comments and advice regarding integration 
and interoperability of technologies relating to mNCh. kirsten Gagnaire, the Global 
director of mama contributed significantly to the Framework by sharing the work 
of mama, along with her insights connected with using mhealth for mNCh in 
bangladesh, Ghana, South africa and india. thanks go to Francis Gonzales for his 
editing and thoughtful comments in reviewing the Framework.
Special acknowledgment and gratitude go to madhu deshmukh, whose sharp 
and strategic thinking and experience in mNCh, gender and governance issues 
significantly influenced the concepts, particularly around the role of gender 
mainstreaming and women’s empowerment, incorporated into the Framework.
another individual who also deserves special recognition is marc mitchell of d-tree 
international. his current work and conceptual thinking significantly contributed to 
the development of many of the concepts incorporated into the Framework. many 
of the concepts contained in his paper (written with Jonathan Payne), “accelerating 
Progress on maternal, Newborn and Child health: how can technology Pave the 
Way?” are reflected in this Framework.
acknowledgement and gratitude are owed to a number of individuals interviewed 
or who otherwise provided invaluable input that is reflected in the Framework: ada 
kwan, ann Jimerson, Soumya alva, martin Were, Gladys Faba, Pam riley, Caricia 
Catalani, alice Fabiano, anu Gupta, Chaitali Sinha, Garrett mehl, laura raney, 
andi Friedman, Fatima Sanz de leon, adam Slote, hamish Fraser, Sean blaschke, 
barbara bulc, Carolina danovaro, trina dasGupta, Jeanne koepsell, Frederik 
kristensen, Yunkap kwankam and mark landry.
4
aCknOwledgemenTs  Leveraging MobiLe TechnoLogies for MaTernaL, newborn & chiLd heaLTh
The rapidly advanCing 
innOvaTiOns in mhealTh 
and iCT will COnTribuTe 
TO glObal effOrTs TO 
imprOve mnCh.... 
Photo: Perret, UN
eXeCuTive summary most significant gaps in mnCh coverage exist 
(the “where”). efforts to achieve impact, however, must 
the global community has identified improving maternal, come from the entire global community. third, the 
newborn and child health (“mnCh”) as a strategic Framework proposes that there are three strategic 
development priority, embedding the goal within objectives (the “what”) that lead to improving mnCh in 
millennium Development goals 4 (reducing child mortality) LmICs. the Framework conceptualizes in broad terms 
and 5 (improving mothers’ health). while there has been how mhealth potentially contributes to each of these 
global progress toward achieving these goals by the strategic objectives:
target date of 2015, there are still significant gaps and 
disparities in achieving better women’s and children’s · health systems strengthening by using mhealth to 
health in LmICs.1 contribute to each of the who’s 6 building blocks;
A powerful tool exists that has the potential to reduce these · integration of health services, cross-sectoral services, 
disparities and improve access to quality health services health technologies, health systems and data systems;
leading to significantly improved health for women and 
children in the poorest and hardest to reach areas of the · mainstreaming gender and empowering women 
globe. the rapid proliferation of mobile phone technology in by addressing gender and social dynamics that 
LmICs has generated mobile phone based innovations for impact access to quality health services for women as 
facilitating and delivering mnCh and other health services beneficiaries, service providers and designers.
to hard to reach and vulnerable populations (“mhealth”). 
recognizing the potential of mhealth, global initiatives Fourth, the Framework lays out five operational 
such as “Every Woman Every Child” and the “Call-to- priorities (the “how”) for promoting and increasing 
Action – Child Survival,” and related initiatives such as the the effective use of mhealth to achieve the strategic 
Commission on Information and Accountability and the objectives. Addressing the gaps and barriers to using 
Commission on Life-Saving Commodities for Women and mhealth which have been identified in previous studies is 
Children have explicitly identified mobile technology as a the foundation for these operational priorities:
tool to directly and indirectly improve health outcomes in 
almost every corner of the world. · advocacy to mnCh stakeholders who have not yet 
fully embraced mhealth;
the current health landscape includes numerous pilot 
projects using mobile phones. while these pilots are · sustainable financing to pay for mhealth 
generating evidence of the effectiveness of mhealth in interventions and build economic self-sufficiency;
reducing morbidity and mortality, the body of literature 
documenting the evidence is still nascent, and the global · Capacity building to use mhealth, mainstream 
health, implementing and policy communities have not gender, implement health services, measure results, 
yet fully embraced mhealth as a strategic tool. In order to translate evidence into policy, etc.;
unleash the potential that mhealth has for improving health 
outcomes, particularly for women and children, strategic · knowledge dissemination and using data 
coordination is not only necessary, but must happen now. for decision-making to share evidence and 
implementation best practices, and to synthesize 
this paper lays out a strategic framework to help global evidence and best practices to influence stakeholders;
health specialists, implementers and policy makers 
working to achieve mDgs 4 and 5 conceptualize how · evidence generation using rigorous methodologies 
mobile phone technology can be used to improve mnCh. showing both health impact and implementation  
best practices.
the strategic framework for using mhealth to improve 
mnCh (“Framework”) sets forth the “why”, “where” Four guiding principles crosscut the strategic 
“what”, “how” and the “when” to best use mhealth objectives and operational priorities:
to improve mnCh. First, it lays out the justification for 
focusing on mnCh and the reasons for using mhealth · target the most vulnerable;
to improve mnCh (the “why”). Second, the Framework 
identifies low and middle income countries (LmICs) as the · Apply a human rights approach which includes 
geographic target, particularly the countries where the working toward equitable health systems;
6
eXeCuTive summary  Leveraging MobiLe TechnoLogies for MaTernaL, newborn & chiLd heaLTh
lisT Of aCrOnyms
cbo ………………………… Community-based organization
cd4 …………………………………Cluster of differentiation 4 
 (type of white blood cell that fights infection)
chw ……………………………… Community health Worker
· ensure accountability and good governance ehealth ……………………… electronic technology including 
through monitoring and evaluation and;  web-based and mobile for health
· working through partnerships that span sectors and dhis2 ……………… district health information Software 2
include new and innovative groups. egaT …………………………… bureau for economic Growth, 
 agriculture and trade (USaid)
Fifth, the Framework identifies those key stakeholder 
groups that have not yet fully embraced mhealth, but are eMr ……………………………… electronic medical records
important partners if mhealth is used to improve mnCh 
(the “who”). these stakeholders include implementers fbo ………………………………… Faith-based organization
(ngos), global health specialists, funders, policymakers gsMa …………………………………………GSm association
(governments), gender groups and community-based 
organizations (Cbos). Stakeholders who may have already icT …………… information and Communications technology
embraced mhealth, particularly those in the technology 
fields such as mobile phone operators and mobile iMci ……… integrated management of Childhood illnesses
application developers, are a secondary target audience. K4health …………………………………knowledge for health
Lastly, the time for action is now (the “when”) with LMics  …………………… low and middle income Countries
2015 as the target date for achieving mDgs 4 and 5. 
however, there will certainly be a need well past 2015 MaMa ……………………mobile alliance for maternal action 
to improve mnCh in LmICs. the rapidly advancing MchiP ………………………………… maternal & Child health 
innovations in mhealth and ICt will contribute to global  integrated health Program
efforts to improve mnCh, particularly as implementation 
experience and studies demonstrating health impact are Mdg …………………………… millennium development Goal
collected and broadly disseminated.
Mgso4 …………………… magnesium Sulfate (for eclampsia)
mhealth……………………… mobile technology, particularly 
 mobile phones, for health 
MhTf ……………………………… maternal health task Force
Mnch ………………… maternal, Newborn and Child health
Moh ………………………………………… ministry of health
ngo ………………………… Non-Government organization
nTd ……………………………… Neglected tropical disease 
odK ……………………………………………… open data kit
openMrs ……………………… open medical record System
PLwa …………………………………… People living with aids
PMnch ……………………………… Partnership for maternal, 
 Newborn and Child health
PMTcT …………Prevention of mother-to-Child transmission
rfP …………………………………… request for Proposals
rMnch ..reproductive, maternal, Newborn and Child health 
sMs ……………………… Short messaging Service (texting)
swoT …… Strengths, Weaknesses, opportunities, threats
Usaid ……………………………………United States agency 
 for international development
wash ………………………… Water, Sanitation and hygiene
who …………………………………World health organization 
7
lisT Of aCrOnyms  Leveraging MobiLe TechnoLogies for MaTernaL, newborn & chiLd heaLTh
The framewOrk is...an 
OverarChing COnCepTual 
mOdel fOr prOmOTing  
and using mhealTh frOm 
whiCh wOrkplans and 
resulTs framewOrks  
Can be develOped. 
Photos top to bottom: Schneider, UN; Jamal, UN
inTrOduCTiOn  challenges for health care systems. In the poorest nations 
and meThOdOlOgy of the world, mnCh is tied to achieving the millennium 
Development goals, the global blueprint for lifting nations 
the Framework sets forth a strategy for utilizing mobile out of extreme poverty. mnCh is specifically reflected in 
technology, primarily mobile phones, to improve the targets for mDgs 4 and 5 (reducing child mortality 
mnCh. Insofar as mhealth is a strategy in and of itself and improving mothers’ health). mnCh also impacts and 
for improving mnCh, the Framework unpacks the is impacted by mDgs 1, (eliminating poverty), 2 (universal 
components for using mhealth, providing the rationale education), 3 (gender equity), 6 (combatting hIV, malaria 
and conceptual components for using mhealth to and other diseases), 7 (safe water and sanitation) and 8 
improve mnCh. (using new technologies, access to essential medicines 
and working with the private sector).  
the Framework is not a workplan or a results framework (See Appendix “A”)
but rather an overarching conceptual model for promoting 
and using mhealth from which workplans and results mnCh should be viewed as a continuum of 
frameworks can be developed. reproductive, maternal, newborn and child 
health services for women and children (the “rmnCh 
while referring to them, the Framework does not include Continuum”). this means that health services should 
technological strategic and operational priorities relating not be viewed as, or delivered mutually exclusive of 
to mhealth.2 each other, but rather holistically. when delivered as an 
integrated package of interventions targeting both mother 
the Framework contributes to two major global initiatives, and child over a period spanning pre-pregnancy, birth 
“Every Woman Every Child” and the “Call to Action – and the life of the child, health services are most effective 
3
Child Survival”. Accordingly, the Framework reflects and in achieving better mnCh.  
complements the United Nations Secretary General’s 
Global Strategy for Women’s and Children’s Health and the rmnCh Continuum includes services affording 
the strategies of the Partnership for Maternal, Newborn access to:
and Child Health (pmnCh), the Maternal Health 
Task Force (mhtF), the Commission on Life-Saving · Quality antenatal care 
Commodities for Women and Children, and the UN 
Commission for Information and Accountability. · Skilled birth attendants
the methodology for developing the Framework · prevention of mother-to-child transmission of hIV 
was collaborative and included: 1) interviews with key (pmtCt) prophylaxis
stakeholders in the mnCh and mhealth communities; 2) 
a Swot analysis; 3) a gaps and trends analysis of health · breastfeeding and infant and young child feeding  
initiatives, programs and evidence addressing mnCh (IYCF) counseling
and/or the use of mhealth; 4) a review of the strategies 
and workplans of initiatives and organizations whose · Immunizations
missions are to improve mnCh (or a component thereof); 
and 5) a literature review of articles addressing the use · mosquito nets
of mobile technology to improve mnCh and other health 
and development areas which are relevant to mnCh. these services, based upon evidence clearly 
demonstrating long-term health impact should  
The “why” - raTiOnale fOr also include:
TargeTing mnCh  · Sexual and reproductive health services  
and using mhealTh (e.g., modern means of contraception)
why mnCh and hOw dO we define iT? · Family planning
Improving the health of mothers, newborns and children, 
particularly in LmICs, is an important global health · early childhood development interventions  
priority. their wellbeing is directly linked to the wellbeing (cognitive, socio-emotional and motor)4
of future generations and can predict future public health 
9
inTrOduCTiOn & why Leveraging MobiLe TechnoLogies for MaTernaL, newborn & chiLd heaLTh
Photos top to bottom: Schneider, UN; Jamal, UN
progress is being made in the area of improving mnCh by health authorities and ministries of health:
in LmICs, but there are still major gaps and areas that 
are lagging in achieving global health goals. these areas · Data collection and management
include (but are not limited to): reducing maternal mortality 
attributable to hemorrhage, access to ArVs for hIV, · Disease surveillance
pmtCt, post-natal follow-up, pediatric malarial treatment, 
preventing pediatric diarrheal diseases, and increasing an increasing body of evidence shows that 
access to modern contraceptives.5 mhealth is being used effectively in areas  
related to mnCh to:
why mhealTh?
· Increase access to antenatal services
A component of a much larger ecosystem known as 
“ehealth” that includes systems such as electronic medical · Increase access to breastfeeding and infant  
records (emrs), laboratory and pharmacy systems, health and young child feeding counseling
information systems, and related infrastructure, mhealth 
is expanding exponentially each year. LmICs have fueled · reduce the three delays associated with  
global mobile cellular subscriptions to reach almost 6 maternal mortality 7
billion (in a global population of over 7 billion people) 
at the end of 2011. Cellular subscriptions in LmICs · Improve anti-retroviral adherence for hIV+ patients
accounted for more than 80% of the 660 million new 
mobile-cellular subscriptions added in 2011 alone.6 · Improve follow-up visits for both mothers and 
their children in the prevention of mother-to-child 
bolstered by the proliferation of phone subscriptions, transmission
LmICs are exploring and using mobile phones to facilitate 
the delivery of health services to populations that are · educate communities with key messaging relating  
hard-to-reach by reasons of geographical, social, gender to prenatal, postnatal and early childhood care
and/or economic status. 
· Deliver pediatric malarial treatment regimens
various uses of mhealth include: 
· Deliver hIV test results connected with early infant 
by community health workers (Chws)  diagnosis (of hIV)
and health facility workers:
· Deliver safe water and sanitation (wASh) interventions8 
· point of care diagnostics and referrals
· provide family planning messaging and information 
· Decision support about modern means of contraception
· patient tracking and follow-up · Collect and manage health data for health authorities.
by patients: · Implement integrated management of childhood 
illnesses (ImCI) protocols 
· treatment adherence
· remit vouchers for the payment of health services
· emergency medical assistance
· health education and sensitization (behavior change)
RMNCH Continuum
Source: PMNCH
ehold
Commun
Hous ity & Outreach
ADOLESCENCE AND PREGNANCY POSTNATALBEFORE PREGNANCY ( Mother ) MATERNAL HEALTH
BIRTH
POSTNATAL INFANCY CHILDHOOD
(Newborn)
10
Health Facilities
inTrOduCTiOn & why Leveraging MobiLe TechnoLogies for MaTernaL, newborn & chiLd heaLTh
The “where” – geOgraphiC fOCus decision-making”13). this includes tracking progress 
toward achieving the mDgs (countdown to 2015) 
geOgraphiCal fOCus and contributing to the recommendations of the Un 
the Framework focuses on the countries in which gaps commission for information and accountability.  
in mnCh and achieving mDgs 4 & 5 have been identified It also includes having ICt policies around data  
(Countdown to 2015), prioritizing those countries with 1) the privacy and hosting (see “Leadership and good 
largest gaps in mnCh service coverage, 2) potential political governance” below).
will to support mhealth, and 3) access to the necessary 
technical and connectivity capacity and infrastructure to 4 medical products, vaccines and technologies 
mainstream mobile technology into global health.9 working Using mobile for supply chain logistics and ensuring 
toward the operational priorities described below requires a women and children have access to life-saving 
global effort. medicines and commodities in accordance with the 
recommendations of the commission on Life-saving 
The “whaT” –  commodities for women and children.
14 this 
sTraTegiC ObjeCTives also includes mobile-phone-based technologies for diagnostics (e.g., CD4 counts, mgSo4 dosages) 
healTh sysTems sTrengThening 5 financing Using mobile as innovative delivery 
the first strategic objective that leads to improving both channels for financing mnCh services. these financing 
mnCh and the health of the general population in LmICs is channels include vouchers, conditional cash transfers, 
the strengthening of health systems.10 the world health mFinance, social enterprises and performance  
organization (who) has identified six (6) “building blocks” based financing. 
for health systems strengthening, and is developing an 
mhealth and ICt Framework for rmnCh that describes 6 leadership and good governance Using mobile to 
how mhealth strengthens health systems across the ensure accountability of frontline workers and health 
rmnCh Continuum.11 mobile technology can be harnessed providers to women and children clients, as well as 
to contribute to each of these 6 building blocks:12 to the health system (e.g., gpS to monitor time spent 
with each patient). Using mobile to track, monitor 
1 service delivery Using mobile to increase and and attribute the work of all stakeholders pursuant 
improve coverage, quality, access, adherence, to the recommendations of the Un commission for 
timeliness and respectful provision of care and health information and accountability.15 most countries 
services. this includes facilitating the supply and lack sufficient ehealth policy, which is required for 
demand of essential services. strategic coordination. this includes having proper 
governance structures, sufficient resource allocation 
2 health workforce Using mobile for task shifting for coordination and support, and ICt policies around 
including building capacity and accountability, as well data privacy and hosting. the issue of privacy and 
as monitoring the performance of frontline  security has been identified as a significant barrier to 
health workers. scaling mhealth initiatives and securing more private 
sector investment.16 
3 information systems Using mobile to improve 
data collection, management and usage (“data for 
ILLUSTRATIVE USES OF MOBILE TECHNOLOGY
• Treatment Compliance • Surveillance • Training • Vouchers • GPS Real time
• Follow-up • Data Collection • Decision Support • mFinance    Performance Monitoring
• Diagnostics Supply Chain • Data Management    ( Task Shifting ) • Community Scorecards
• Behavior Change Support Management • Data Analysis ( Data for • Referrals
• Decision Support    Decision-making )
• Referrals
Medicines, Products
Service Delivery & Information Health
Leadership
Systems Financing
Vaccines Workforce
&
Governance
WHO Health Systems Stengthening Building Blocks
See appendix “b” for health Systems Strengthening: Illustrative milestones/outcomes
11
where & whaT Leveraging MobiLe TechnoLogies for MaTernaL, newborn & chiLd heaLTh
inTegraTiOn Of serviCes and sysTems and indirectly impact the quality of health services 
the second strategic objective for improving mnCh, and health outcomes. Addressing and integrating 
the integration of health services and systems, leads services to achieve the non-health mDgs (e.g., poverty, 
not only to improved health impacts, but also greater hunger, universal education, safe water and access to 
cost efficiencies.17 Improved cost efficiencies allow for medicines) contribute to addressing underlying causes 
the better allocation of increasingly scarce financial for gaps in mnCh coverage. mobile technology is 
and human resources for global health. Conceptually, used in each of these non-health areas.  
integration and how mobile technology facilitates (see appendix “a”). 
integration can be broken down into four components.
3 integrating health Technologies: For each of 
1 integrating health services: Linking services in the numerous pilots and programs using mobile 
a number of health areas such as antenatal care, technology to address mnCh, hIV and neglected 
nutrition, hIV prevention, care and treatment, malaria tropical Diseases (ntDs), there is almost an equal 
control and psycho-social support leads to more number of mobile technologies and software 
cost-efficient delivery of services, greater health impact applications being used (e.g., oDk, CommCare, 
and contributes to the health-related mDgs 4, 5 & 6 Frontline SmS). the lack of interoperability of many 
(reducing child mortality, improving mothers’ health of these technologies with each other and with the 
and eliminating hIV, malaria and other diseases). broader ehealth system has been identified as a barrier 
to mhealth.19 Integrating these various technologies 
tools and guidelines have been developed to facilitate and applications by achieving interoperability serves to 
integration of services such as ImCI, the essential increase efficiencies and facilitate using mhealth.20 
package for hIV and early Childhood and Development 
and the guidelines for the Integration of pmtCt, mnCh 4 integrating data systems and reporting: 
and nutrition. Use of mobile technology for standard related to integrating technologies, various systems 
protocols offer a promising tool to not only deliver that collect and manage health data for reporting 
integrated interventions but to extend the services of the and analysis require integration to a) better monitor 
facility into the community and at the household level, the interrelationships between and among health 
where many conditions related to maternal and child conditions; b) monitor and track the delivery and 
mortality can be prevented.18 services; c) effectively allocate resources, medicines 
and commodities where there is a need; and d) 
2 integrating Cross-sectorally: Integration also develop common indicators for measurement and 
includes linking health services with economic comparisons. examples of tools for integrating data 
development, agriculture (food security), education, and donor reporting systems include openmrS, 
early childhood development (cognitive, socio- DhIS2 and the who Indicator repository.
emotional, motor) and wASh, all of which directly 
INTEGRATION
eHealth
Mobile
Technology
Integrate Health Other
Integrate
MDGs MDGs Data &Technologies 4, 5, 6 1, 2, 3, 7, 8 Reporting
Systems
Integrate Integrate 
Health Cross- 
Services SectoralServices
See appendix “c” for Integration: Illustrative milestones/outcomes
12
where & whaT Leveraging MobiLe TechnoLogies for MaTernaL, newborn & chiLd heaLTh
gender mainsTreaming and wOmen’s empOwermenT
Women as
Service Women as
Providers Designers
mHealth
Gender Women as 
Women as Mainstreaming Policymakers 
Clients and Women’s Empowerment and 
MDG 3 Policy Influencers
See appendix “d” for gender mainstreaming and women’s empowerment: Illustrative milestones/outcomes
mainsTreaming gender   the relationship between women’s empowerment and 
and empOwering wOmen gender mainstreaming with the use of mobile technology 
the third, but often overlooked strategic objective leading is a two-way relationship. mobile phones can empower 
to improved mnCh involves addressing gender power women by providing them with essential information to 
dynamics. major gaps and barriers for women accessing make well-informed health decisions. mobile phones 
quality health care are attributable to privacy concerns, can also directly or indirectly (through Chws) be used 
fear of gender-based violence and women not having the to afford women access to a variety of quality services 
same access to information and services as their male which, in turn, leads to improved mnCh. women who 
partners. gender power dynamics affect women’s ability are empowered with information and access to quality 
to obtain essential health information, access quality services are better equipped to negotiate through difficult 
health services and make informed decisions regarding power dynamics, leading to, increased demand for, and 
their own health.21 gender also plays a role in phone access to mobile phones.24
ownership and access to using phones. phone ownership 
rates in LmICs are often much lower for women.22 there are a number of tools and job aids available 
Addressing these gender dynamics by empowering that build the capacity to address and mainstream 
women, mainstreaming gender and working toward gender considerations into health and other economic 
gender equity (mDg 3) in key areas connected with development interventions.25 the way forward in 
health plays a role in achieving better mnCh outcomes. developing a workplan for this Framework could 
include 1) leveraging the mwomen report, conducting 
Accordingly, harnessing the potential of mobile a situational analysis of how gender dynamics play a 
technology to improve mnCh requires addressing gender role in women taking advantage of mhealth tools for 
power dynamics as they relate to using and owning improving their own health and the health of their children; 
mobile phones. the ability of women to own and use 2) mapping available gender tools and frameworks; 3) 
mobile phones without fear or retribution bears upon their analyzing and contextualizing those gender tools and 
ability to benefit from mhealth.23 It is vital to understand frameworks to mhealth; and 4) developing a framework 
and address these gender dynamics as they play a role and tools for mainstreaming gender and empowering 
and impact women as: 1) patients, 2) health service women in the mhealth context.
providers, 3) technology designers, and 4) policymakers 
and policy influencers.
13
where & whaT Leveraging MobiLe TechnoLogies for MaTernaL, newborn & chiLd heaLTh
harnessing The  
pOTenTial Of mObile 
TeChnOlOgy TO  
imprOve mnCh  
requires addressing 
gender dynamiCs....
Photos: mckulka, UN
The “hOw” – guiding prinCiples  OperaTiOnal priOriTies
and OperaTiOnal priOriTies the operational priorities address the barriers and 
obstacles to using mhealth. Several recent studies have 
assumpTiOns identified these barriers and obstacles
26: 
the Framework has been developed under the 
assumption that usability, feasibility and acceptability · Lack of rigorous evidence
of mhealth have been evaluated and addressed. the 
use of mhealth is very context-specific, depending upon · Limited technological integration
the practical logistics of any given situation. Issues of 
connectivity, workability of the software, technological · Limited sources of sustained financing
requirements, acceptability of the technology and 
messaging (if relevant) both by patients and service · policy challenges (limited precedence for providing  
providers using mobile devices all must be addressed  an enabling policy environment for m/ehealth)
and ascertained.
· Lack of capacity (to design and implement  
guiding prinCiples mhealth interventions)
1 focusing on the most vulnerable efforts to improve 
mnCh using mhealth should include the poorest, based upon studies, gaps analyses, identification of 
pLwA, orphans, indigenous populations, commercial trends, the following operational priorities were identified 
and transactional sex workers and those living to address the barriers and obstacles:
27 
furthest from health services, taking into account the 
prevalence of illiteracy in many rural areas. 1 generating evidence promoting and generating 
quality evidence with rigorous research methodology 
2 rights based approach every person has a right to that links mhealth to improved operational and Mnch 
quality health care. this includes addressing stigma, outcomes. this would include focused research 
discrimination, social and economic marginalization. such as randomized control trials (when appropriate) 
that include methodologies for attribution, cost-
3 partnerships Collaborating with other organizations in effectiveness studies and cost-efficiency studies. 
various sectors (health, private- health and technology, just as important, and a major gap in using mhealth 
government, research, ngos, gender groups, Cbos, for mnCh, is capturing program implementation 
Fbos) is necessary to achieve the Strategic objectives. best practices using tools such as implementation 
working with private technology companies and science and value chain analysis. Understanding 
operators around using new technologies, and practical lessons from implementing mhealth 
the pharmaceutical industry to afford access to interventions, particularly around scaling up, requires 
essential medicines is a feature of Mdg 8. working working with implementers and generating evidence 
in partnerships also includes innovative and new pertaining to social and gender dynamics. 
partnerships with organizations that have not yet 
been major stakeholders in using mhealth. these 2 knowledge sharing, dissemination & synthesis 
include ngos, gender groups and community-based (Data for Decision-making): Identifying, collecting, 
organizations. curating and disseminating evidence and real-time 
data (on health impact, cost-effectiveness and cost-
4 accountability and good governance tracking, efficiency) – focusing on reaching the global health, 
monitoring and evaluating progress generate ngo, policy and funder communities. tools 
accountability for achieving the Strategic objectives. include listservs, databases, communities of practice, 
this includes ensuring there is: a) effective and efficient convening and presenting at forums. this operational 
monitoring and evaluation systems; and b) ongoing priority does not stop at dissemination, but must include 
research using rigorous research methodologies for using the evidence to feed into policy analysis and 
evaluating processes, outputs, outcomes and impact. how decisions are made for programs.
Vital to ensuring accountability and good governance 
is including members of the community, Cbos and 3 sustainable financing Identifying and promoting 
Fbos in evaluation processes and feeding findings business models and sustainable sources of 
back to them. financing for using mhealth in mnCh programs. 
Such sources may include vouchers, conditional cash 
transfers, results based financing, voluntary savings 
15
hOw Leveraging MobiLe TechnoLogies for MaTernaL, newborn & chiLd heaLTh
Photos: mckulka, UN
and loan groups, microfinance (including mbanking 3 the Framework includes forming new innovative 
and mpayments), public-private partnerships and partnerships with groups such as gender organizations 
social enterprises. and community-based organizations (Cbos).
4 advocacy Advocating for global, national and 4 the Framework promotes linking and 
organizational policies that support the use of mobile to complementing the activities of other 
improve mnCh. this includes a focus on heightening  organizations and initiatives that promote the  
the awareness of the global health, implementing, use of mobile technologies and ehealth. 
policymaking and funding communities. Advocacy 
must be based upon evidence-based policy analysis. 5 the Framework complements and feeds into  
key collaborating stakeholders might include the white the strategies and workplans of other 
ribbon Alliance and the Core group. organizations and initiatives which support  
the Un global strategy. 
5 Capacity building building the capacity of the health 
community with a particular focus on global health 
specialists and evaluators, implementers, donors, Stakeholders: mHealth for improving MNCH
frontline health workers and other stakeholders to 
design, integrate and evaluate mhealth interventions 
to improve mnCh. Capacity building includes building Technology
an understanding of a) the underlying causes and MoH and Researchers
influences on mnCh such as gender and poverty; Policymakers
b) best practices for implementation (through 
implementation science); and c) the role that mhealth 
potentially plays in impacting both underlying causes 
and implementation practices. tools might include: Gender Improved PolicyGroups Analysts
developing conceptual frameworks (e.g., pmtCt- MNCH
mhealth framework), workshops and web-based 
instructions.
Private
Sector Funders
See appendix “e” for operational priorities: Illustrative Activities (MDG 8) Global 
Health
NGOs, 
The “whO” – sTakehOlders CBOs, FBOs
1 the most important stakeholders are, and always 
will be, the mothers, newborns and children being appendix “f” for operational priorities, guiding principles  
targeted for improved mnCh. they play a role  and Illustrative Stakeholders 
in holding the health providers and health  
systems accountable. The “when” – COnClusiOn
2 the Framework focuses on promoting mhealth with the global community has set the year 2015 as the 
the global health, ngo, policy analysts, ministries goal for achieving the mDgs, including mDgs 4 and 5. 
of health (Moh), policymakers, cbos, fbos and however, improving mnCh in LmICs (and globally) will be 
funding communities working in mnCh, with the an ongoing effort that expands well past 2015. 
goal of sensitizing and building the capacity of those 
communities to the potential of mhealth. particularly the Framework attempts to apply a holistic lens to 
important is focusing on the groups that implement concepts that are often viewed in siloes. working 
health interventions in LMICs. Stakeholders who holistically, applying policy analysis to evidence of 
may have already embraced mhealth, particularly both health impact and implementation best practices, 
those in the technology fields such as mobile phone addressing gender dynamics, and collaborating through 
operators and mobile application developers, are a innovative partnerships that includes implementing, 
secondary target audience. gender and community-based groups, are key 
components of a blueprint for effectively using mhealth to 
improve mnCh.
16
hOw & whO Leveraging MobiLe TechnoLogies for MaTernaL, newborn & chiLd heaLTh
 sTraTegiC framewOrk: 
mhealTh fOr imprOving maTernal,  
newbOrn, and Child healTh
Operational Strategic Guiding
Priorities Objectives Principles
Advocacy Mobile Technologies
Target Most
Vulnerable
Sustainable Health Systems 
Financing Strengthening
Human Rights
Approach
Gender and 
Capacity Integration Women’s 
Building Empowerment
Accountability
and Good
Governance
Knowledge
Sharing &
Data For RMNCH
Decision Making Continuum
MDGs 4&5 Partnerships
Evidence
GOAL: 
Improved Maternal, Newborn, and Child Health
Lessons Learned
17
whO & when Leveraging MobiLe TechnoLogies for MaTernaL, newborn & chiLd heaLTh
appendiX “a” – using mobile Technology in Other sectors that impact mnCh
intervention relationship to mnCh mdg how mobile  
Technology is used
economic generates income to pay for health 1 reduce poverty mobile phones used to 
strengthening services. healthy women better able to and hunger transmit market data
work and earn income.
education Literacy for access to written health 2 Universal mobile learning initiatives in 
information. healthy children can go  education rural African primary schools 
to schools. (UneSCo)
hiv hIV is leading cause of mortality in 6 Combat hIV, SmS for treatment 
southern Africa. Antenatal services malaria and other adherence and pmtCt 
include hIV testing. diseases follow-up
safe water water-born diarrheal diseases leading 7 environmental mwASh mobile applications 
killer of children in developing world. Sustainability - provide underserved 
Awareness of mothers around health and Access to safe communities info on water 
water impose accountability on those water supply/quality.
who monitor water supplies.
gender gender power dynamics at the household 3 gender equity Using mobile phones to build 
and community levels impede mothers’ community connections and 
ability to make informed health decisions mechanisms for support 
and access to quality health care services. groups and making referrals.
Malaria malaria is a leading cause of child 6 Combat hIV, Using mobile phones to 
mortality in developing world. healthy malaria and other implement pediatric malaria 
children better able to survive malaria. diseases treatment protocols.
access to essential medicines to prevent 8 global merck using mobile phones 
medicines hemorrhaging during delivery; ArVs to partnerships - for supply chain logistics to 
keep hIV+ mothers alive and healthy. working with track medicine supplies
pharma to afford 
access  
to drugs
18
appendiX a Leveraging MobiLe TechnoLogies for MaTernaL, newborn & chiLd heaLTh
appendiX “b” – health systems strengthening: illustrative Outcomes/milestones
strategic illustrative Outcomes/milestones
Objective
health 
systems 
strengthening
service delivery - mobiles are used to improve health service quality, improve timeliness, improve coverage, increase 
access to quality mnCh health services
- models and frameworks are developed and evidence of health impact, implementation best practices, 
scale-up and improved efficiencies is collected and disseminated 
- Capacity building tools are developed to use mobile in service delivery and for scaling up
- ministries of health, who, funders and policy makers recognize mobile as a standard of practice to 
deliver health services in legislation, policy recommendations, practice guidelines, and rFps
health - mobiles are used to train health workers, particularly in rural areas
workforce - mobiles are used to operationalize task shifting in areas where human resources are scarce
- mobiles are used to deliver health protocols to enable health workers to diagnose and make referrals
- mobiles are used to monitor, supervise and improve performance of health workers
- evidence of impact, implementation best practices are collected and disseminated 
- workforce capacity building tools using mobiles to build health workforce capacity,  
making referrals and task shifting are developed and used in the field
- ministries of health, who, funders and policy makers recognize mobiles as a standard of practice to 
build workforce capacity
information    - mobiles are used by Chws and health authorities to collect, manage and evaluate patient and  
systems health data
- mobiles are used for surveillance of health conditions (e.g., disease outbreaks, pregnancies in the 
community, verbal autopsies)
- ministries of health incorporate mobiles as an information gathering tool for national health surveys
Medicines, - mobiles are used in supply chain logistics to track and monitor medical commodities and drugs
Products, - mobile applications are used to track vaccinations of children
vaccines - mobile applications are used as a tool by health workers to determine correct dosages of drugs  
(e.g., mgSo4)
financing - mobiles are used for Vouchers, mpayments and conditional cash transfers to pay for health services
- models for social enterprises and franchises that use mobile and are linked to payment of health 
services are developed, evaluated, documented and disseminated
- Sustainable business models such as results based financing for mobiles using tools such as value 
chain analysis are identified, tested, documented and adopted by the private sector
Leadership & - mobiles are used to track community health worker performance and monitor health service centers
governance - mobiles are used by community members to hold health workers and health systems accountable
19
appendiX b Leveraging MobiLe TechnoLogies for MaTernaL, newborn & chiLd heaLTh
appendiX “C” – integration: illustrative Outcomes/milestones
strategic illustrative Outcomes/milestones
Objective
integration
health services - mobile based protocols, job aids and SmS messages developed and used to integrate maternal and 
newborn health (e.g., ImCI) messaging and services to same client
- protocols, job aids, SmS messages linking maternal and child health with hIV testing, counseling, care 
and support 
- mobile used for tracking delivery of different health services to same client
- evidence of health impact, cost effectiveness, cost efficiencies and implementation best practices, 
collected, documented, analyzed and disseminated
- ministries of health, who, funders, and policy makers recognize mobile as a standard of practice for 
integration of health services
cross-sectoral - mobile is used to integrate knowledge about safe water and sanitation services with health messaging 
services and health services
- mobile used to link primary education with knowledge about healthy behaviors and access to  
health services
- mobile used to link economic enterprises such as village savings and loan groups with health 
messaging and health services
- models for integration are identified, evaluated and promoted
- evidence of health impact, cost effectiveness, cost efficiencies and implementation best practices, 
collected, documents, analyzed and disseminated
- ministries of health collaborate with other ministries around models for integrating cross-sectorally using 
mobile and ICt
health - health technologies used for ntD surveillance are integrated and interoperable with other health 
Technologies technologies used for hIV, mnCh and other health conditions: oDk, CommCare, rapidSmS, mobenzi
- Standard for interoperability of technologies are developed and promoted
data systems - multiple mhealth data bases are linked in same country bringing coverage of different health conditions 
into one consolidated data base (e.g., openmrS)
- Standards of interoperability of data systems are developed and promoted
20
appendiX C Leveraging MobiLe TechnoLogies for MaTernaL, newborn & chiLd heaLTh
appendiX “d” – gender mainstreaming and women’s empowerment: illustrative Outcomes/milestones
strategic Objective illustrative Outcomes/milestones
gender 
Mainstreaming 
and women’s 
empowerment
women as clients - A situational analysis is performed, documented and disseminated to key stakeholders identifying 
gender related issues that impact women’s ability to make health decisions and their access to quality 
mnCh and related health information and services (e.g., privacy and confidentiality laws, policies  
and customs)
- A situational analysis is performed, documented and disseminated to key stakeholders identifying 
gender related issues that impact women’s ability to own and use mobile phones
- existing tools for gender mainstreaming and empowering women that can be contextualized to health 
and the use of mobile are mapped
- existing tools for gender mainstreaming and women’s empowerment are contextualized for mhealth; 
new tools are developed as appropriate
- Framework for mainstreaming gender and empowering women as clients of mhealth is developed and 
promoted with key stakeholders
- tools are validated in various LmIC contexts
- policy analysis is performed on results of situational analyses to develop key advocacy messages and 
strategies for policymakers
- Stakeholders (men and women) are trained and sensitized with tools for mainstreaming gender and 
empowering women
- evidence is collected, documented, analyzed for policy implications and disseminated to key 
stakeholders
- policies and laws are adopted addressing barriers and obstacles related to gender and mhealth; 
communities sensitized to gender related barriers to mhealth (access and use of mobile and  
health services) 
women as  - outcomes/milestones same as above but addressing gender dynamics and obstacles associated with 
service providers women community health workers using mobile phones in their work (e.g., exposure to gender based 
violence in the community because of mobile ownership and usage)
women as  - outcomes/milestones same as above but addressing gender dynamics and obstacles associated with 
designers women as designers of mobile applications to be used by and serve women as clients and service 
providers (e.g., women and girls accessing science, mathematics, engineering classes)
women as  - outcomes/milestones reflect ensuring that gender dynamics are addressed in policies and that 
policymakers and women’s voices and perspectives are incorporated into policymaking and policy implementation
policy influencers
21
appendiX d Leveraging MobiLe TechnoLogies for MaTernaL, newborn & chiLd heaLTh
appendiX “e” – Operational priorities: illustrative activities
Operational illustrative activities
priorities
advocacy - presenting evidence-based messaging about mhealth to global health specialists, ngos, ministries of 
health, funders and policymakers at one-on-one meetings and global forums
sustainable - Identify business models for using mhealth
financing
- promoting and supporting group savings and loans. Social enterprises and franchise models connected 
with ICt and mnCh
- promote mVouchers to remit conditional cash transfers
capacity - workshops and web-based seminars on how to mainstream gender and mhealth
building
- building research capacity to evaluate mhealth
- building policy analysis skills for using mhealth evidence
- building capacity of district health officials to monitor medical and drug supplies
- protocols for Chws to deliver integrated interventions
Knowledge - policy analysis to synthesize mhealth evidence
sharing data 
for decision - Using targeted and global forums to share mhealth evidence and implementation best practices
making
- Applying value chain analysis to evidence to evaluate where mhealth might add value to service delivery
evidence - promoting, collecting and curating quality evidence on the impact of mhealth
- Implementation science to evaluate best practices in the field
- research on gender and social drivers and barriers to mhealth
22
appendiX e Leveraging MobiLe TechnoLogies for MaTernaL, newborn & chiLd heaLTh
appendiX “f” – Operational priorities, guiding principles and illustrative stakeholders
• White Ribbon Alliance
Advocacy • PMNCH, WHO
• CORE Group
• MDG Health Alliance
• Communities, CBOs
• Gender Groups, mWomen Target Most
• NGOs Vulnerable
• Private Sector • MoH
• GSMA
Sustainable • EGAT (USAID)
Financing • mHealth Alliance
• UNESCO, UNDP
• Human Rights Groups
• MDG Health Alliance Human Rights
• CBOs, FBOs Approach
• Gender Groups
• mHealth Alliance
• Private Sector, USAID
Capacity • CORE Group
Building
• Commission on Life-
 Saving Commodities • CBOs, communities
• UN Commission on Accountability
 Information and Transparency & GoodGovernance
• Countdown to 2015
• PMNCH, WHO
Knowledge • mHealth Alliance
Sharing-Data
for • mHealth Working Group,
Decision-making  K4Health
• USAID • PMNCH, WHO
• CORE Group
• MDG Alliance Partnerships
• MHTF 
• WHO • USAID, Govt. Funders
• NGOs, MAMA, MCHIP
Evidence • Research Institutions
• CBOs 
• Funders (e.g., USAID)
23
FRAMEWORK  STRATEGIC  OBJECTIVES
appendiX f Leveraging MobiLe TechnoLogies for MaTernaL, newborn & chiLd heaLTh
endnOTes
1 See, e.g., Countdown to 2015, Maternal, Newborn & Child Survival: Building a Future for Women and Children, The 2012 Report 
(who and UnICeF 2012). (hereinafter, “2012 report”).
2 For example, the issue of standards and interoperability best practices is a key technology. effective integration is dependent upon 
everybody using the same terminologies and harmonizing best practices for achieving interoperability. these include country-level 
norms, guidelines, legislation, and even international agreements, etc. Initiatives such as the maternal health Concept Lab are 
working toward harmonizing the mnCh terminology being used in mhealth. the International Standardization organization technical 
Committee 215 is working toward standardization in the field of information for health and ICt, promoting interoperability between 
independent systems, to enable compatibility and consistency for health information and data, as well as to reduce duplication of 
effort and redundancies.
3 See, e.g., bhutta, Z. A., Ali, S., Cousens, S., Ali, t. m., haider, b. A., rizvi, A., okong, p., et al. (2008). Alma-Ata: rebirth and revision 
6 Interventions to address maternal, newborn, and child survival: what difference can integrated primary health care strategies make? 
The Lancet, 372(9642), 972-989. elsevier Ltd. retrieved from http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/18790320
4 See, e.g., holt, r. L., & mikati, m. A. (2011). Care for child development: basic science rationale and effects of interventions. 
Pediatric Neurology, 44(4), 239-253. elsevier Inc. retrieved from http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/21397164; kerber, k. j., De 
graft-johnson, j. e., bhutta, Z. A., okong, p., Starrs, A., & Lawn, j. e. (2007). Continuum of care for maternal, newborn, and child 
health: from slogan to service delivery. The Lancet, t370(9595), 1358-1369. elsevier. retrieved from http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/
pubmed/17933651
5 See, 2012 report; Countdown to 2015 Decade report (2000-2010), taking Stock of maternal, newborn and child survival (world 
health organization and UnICeF 2010) (hereinafter “Decade report”); hogan, m. C., Foreman, k. j., naghavi, m., Ahn, S. Y., wang, 
m., makela, S. m., Lopez, A. D., et al. (2010). maternal mortality for 181 countries, 1980-2008: a systematic analysis of progress 
towards millennium Development goal 5, The Lancet, 375(9726), 1609-1623. elsevier Ltd. retrieved from http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.
gov/pubmed/20382417; You, D., wardlaw, t., Salama, p., & jones, g. (2010). Levels and trends in under-5 mortality, 1990-2008,  
The Lancet, 375(9709), 100-103. retrieved from http://linkinghub.elsevier.com/retrieve/pii/S0140673609616019.
6 ItU world telecommunications/ICt Indicators Database (International telecommunication Union 2012)
7 the “three Delays” model proposes that pregnancy-related mortality is overwhelmingly due to delays in: (1) deciding to seek 
appropriate medical help for an obstetric emergency; (2) reaching an appropriate obstetric facility; and (3) receiving adequate care 
when a facility is reached. See, e.g., barnes-josiah, D., myntti, C., & Augustin, A. (1998). the “three delays” as a framework for 
examining maternal mortality in haiti. Social science medicine. retrieved from http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/9579750.
8 hutchings, m.t. et al., 2012. mWASH: mobile phone applications for the water, sanitation, and hygiene sector. oakland, CA, USA: 
pacific Institute and Los Angeles, CA, USA: nexleaf Analytics. 114 p. : 12 fig., 4 tab. 95 ref. Available at: <http://www.pacinst.org/
reports/mwash/full_report.pdf> [Accessed 18 may 2012].
9 See “ehealth readiness Survey” (who ?); the who-ItU ehealth national Strategy toolkit (june 2012); global ehealth observatory 
report ( who 2011 ).
10 See e.g, the partnership for maternal, newborn & Child health, Strategic Framework 2012-2015 (world health organization 2011), at 8.
11 the who mhealth and ICt Framework describes the potential value of mhealth solutions in strengthening health systems across 
the rmnCh Continuum. WHO mHealth and ICT Framework for RMNCH (developed in collaboration with jhU gmI by 
Lavanya Vasudevan, Alain Labrique and garrett mehl for the who mhealth Advisory group (mtag) on evidence, Impact and Scale in 
reproductive, maternal, newborn and Child health.
12 See monitoring the building blocks of health Systems: A handbook of Indicators and their measurement Strategy (world health 
organization 2010); health Systems Strengthening (pepFAr), http://www.pepfar.gov/strategy/ghi/134854.htm.
13 See Splettstoesser, D., & kimaro, F. (2000). benefits of It-based decision-making in developing countries. The Electronic Journal of 
24
endnOTes Leveraging MobiLe TechnoLogies for MaTernaL, newborn & chiLd heaLTh 
endnOTes
Information Systems in Developing Countries, 3(3), 1-12. retrieved from http://www.is.cityu.edu.hk/research/ejisdc/vol3/v3r3.pdf; 
pappaioanou, m., malison, m., wilkins, k., otto, b., goodman, r. A., Churchill, r. e., white, m., et al. (2003). Strengthening capacity 
in developing countries for evidence-based public health: the data for decision-making project. Social science medicine, 57(10), 1925-
1937. elsevier. retrieved from http://linkinghub.elsevier.com/retrieve/pii/S0277953603000583.
14 Un Commission on Life-Saving Commodities for women and Children, Commissioners’ report, September 2012, Every Woman 
Every Child (United nations 2012).
15 Commission on Information and Accountability for women’s and Children’s health, Keeping Promises, Measuring Results, Every 
Woman Every Child (world health organization 2011).
16 email from Sean blaschke, Child Survival Systems Strengthening Specialist, UnICeF, oct. 31, 2012.
17 See Schweitzer, j., & Synowiec, C. (2012). the economics of ehealth and mhealth. Journal of Health Communication, 17(sup1), 73-
81. retrieved from http://www.tandfonline.com/doi/abs/10.1080/10810730.2011.649158.
18 See, e.g., electronic protocols improve child health in tanzania, retrieved from http://www.fic.nih.gov/news/globalhealthmatters/jan-
feb-2012/pages/mhealth-children-tanzania.aspx.
19 mechael, p., & Searle, S. (2010). barriers and gaps Affecting mhealth in Low and middle Income Countries : policy white paper, 
Columbia University. earth Institute. Center for global health and economic development (CgheD 2010): with mhealth Alliance. 
retrieved from http://www.mobileactive.org/files/file_uploads/mhealth_barriers_white_paper.pdf.
20 See, e.g., Crichton, r., moodley, D., pillay, A., gakuba, r., Seebregts, C., An Architecture and reference Implementation of an open 
health Information mediator: enable Interoperability in the rwanda health Information exchange (2012). retrieved from http://www.
cair.za.net/research/outputs/architecture-and-reference-implementation-open-health-information-mediator-enabling.
21 See, e.g., mbizvo, m. t., & bassett, m. t. (1996). reproductive health and AIDS prevention in sub-Saharan Africa: the case for 
increased male participation. Health San Francisco, 11(1), 84-92. retrieved from http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/10155880; 
Striving and Surviving: exploring the Lives of women at the base of the pyramid (gSmA mwomen 2012). 
22 women and mobile: A global opportunity (gSmA mwomen 2010).
23 Striving and Surviving: exploring the Lives of women at the base of the pyramid (gSmA mwomen 2012).
24 Id.
25 See, e.g, CAre’s gender mainstreaming tools at  
http://gender.care2share.wikispaces.net/gender+equity+and+Diversity+work+at+CAre.
26 Dalberg research and analysis from world bank’s “Study on mobile Applications for the health Sector”; mechael, p., & Searle, S. 
27 Id.
25
endnOTes Leveraging MobiLe TechnoLogies for MaTernaL, newborn & chiLd heaLTh
The mHealth Alliance champions the use of mobile technologies to improve health throughout the world. Working with diverse partners to  
integrate mHealth into multiple sectors, the Allinace serves as a convener for the mHealth community. The mHealth Alliance also hosts Health 
Unbound (HUB), a global online community for resource sharing and collaborative solution generation. For more information, visit mHealthAlliance.org.
