Lessons Learned 
on the Way to 
500,000 Subscribers
Acknowledgments
On behalf of the entire MAMA family, we want to thank the DNet team and the community 
of stakeholders they have engaged to make MAMA Bangladesh an international model 
of success. MAMA Bangladesh launched before the broader MAMA program and was the 
inspiration that sparked the MAMA work on the global level. Thanks to the vision our 
founding partners — USAID, Johnson & Johnson, United Nations Foundation, mHealth 
Alliance and BabyCenter — we have been able to turn the ideas, lessons and success of 
Bangladesh into a global movement that currently reaches more than 1.2 million women and 
their families. As this work expands globally, we continue to look to the MAMA Bangladesh 
team as a leader in sharing lessons learned and best practices which guide us all in creating 
mobile messaging services for scale, impact and sustainability.
Through the leadership of the DNet team, an innovative group of social entrepreneurs, 
MAMA Bangladesh is putting the power of health into the hands of more than 500,000 
women and families. Thank you.
IN-COUNTRY PARTNERS IN BANGLADESH: 
PARTNERS THAT CONTRIBUTED TO THE APONJON PILOT INITIATIVE: 
BANGLADESH PARTNERS:
MAMA GLOBAL PARTNERS: 
Table of Contents
Glossary  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  2
Executive Summary  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  3
1 . The Context  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  4
2 . M AMA and Aponjon Service Overview  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  6
3 . Formative Research  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  8
Key findings with regard to female phone ownership,  
technical literacy and inclusion of family members   .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  8
4 . Content Development  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  10
Message content identification   .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  10
Message design and production  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  10
Quality assurance   .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  11
Subsequent adaptations   .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  . 12
5 . Customer Acquisition   .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  13
CAs and outreach partners  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  13
Issues with CAs and decision to use BPs   .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  . 15
Self-registration   .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  . 16
Media campaigns   .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  . 16
6 . N GO, Public and Private Partnerships   .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  18
Public   .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  . 19
Corporate   .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  20
Mobile Network Operators   .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  . 21
Tech platforms and counseling Line  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  22
7 . Business Model   .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  23
Subscriber fees  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  23
Advertisement revenue in IVR: a new channel   .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  26
8 . Performance Monitoring Plan  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  27
Dashboard and monitoring project outputs   .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  27
Measuring change in knowledge, attitudes, behaviors and practices   .  .  .  .  .  .  .  27
External evaluation by icddr,b   .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  29
Conclusion   .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  31
Endnotes   .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  32
Glossary
BP Brand Promoter
BRAC Bangladesh Rural Advancement Committee
BTRC Bangladesh Telecommunications Regulatory Commission 
CA Community Agent
DHS Demographic and Health Survey
Dnet A  Bangladeshi social enterprise that promotes access to information and knowledge through innovations. 
Dnet is implementing the MAMA initiative in Bangladesh under the brand name “Aponjon .”
Gatekeepers K ey family members of enrolled women that include husbands, mothers, mothers-in-law, fathers-in-law or 
other family members, who may influence decisions around pregnancy and child health or use of mobile 
phones.
icddr,b International Centre for Diarrheal Disease Research, Bangladesh
IVR  Interactive Voice Response, a mobile phone technology allowing for voice- or touchtone-based interaction 
with an audio menu.
KABP Knowledge, attitudes, behaviors and practices
M&E Monitoring and Evaluation
MAMA Mobile Alliance for Maternal Action
MaMoni  Integrated safe motherhood and family welfare, newborn care and family planning project, funded by 
USAID and implemented by Save the Children Bangladesh.
MDG Millennium Development Goal
MCC Multimedia Content and Communication Limited, a subsidiary of Dnet
MCHIP  Maternal and Child Health Integrated Program, a flagship program of USAID’s Global Health Bureau and 
the primary USAID funding mechanism of MAMA Bangladesh.
MNCH Maternal, Newborn and Child Health
MNO Mobile Network Operator 
MOHFW Ministry of Health and Family Welfare
NGO Non-Governmental Organization
NHSDP  (USAID’s) NGO Health Services Delivery Project, implemented by Pathfinder International. Operates 328 
primary health care clinics and 8,000 satellite clinics nation-wide.
PMP Performance Monitoring Plan
SES Socio-economic status
Shortcodes S pecial telephone numbers – significantly shorter than full telephone numbers – that can be used to 
address SMS and MMS messages from certain service providers’ mobile phones or fixed phones.
SMC  Social Marketing Company, a nonprofit established by the Government of Bangladesh, Population Services 
International and USAID.
SMS  Short Message Service, a mobile phone technology that allows text messages to be sent to and received by 
subscribers
SSD Tech  Systems Solutions and Development Technologies, a software development company in Bangladesh
Taka Currency of Bangladesh
UISC Union Information Service Center under the Government of Bangladesh
USAID United States Agency for International Development
2
Executive Summary
This document explores the programmatic processes, successes and lessons learned by 
the Mobile Alliance for Maternal Action (MAMA) program in Bangladesh, known locally 
as Aponjon, meaning “the dear one” in Bangla. MAMA is an innovative public-private 
partnership that engages a global community to deliver vital health information to new and 
expectant mothers and their families through the use of mobile technology.
Bangladesh has made large strides with regards to improving maternal, newborn and child 
health (MNCH) outcomes, but in order to continue to progress in these areas and achieve 
the Millennium Development Goals 4 and 5, it is essential that Bangladesh leverage existing 
and new methods and tools to reach the women and families that need them the most. 
Of every 100 people in Bangladesh, just 55 have access to sanitation facilities, but 64 have 
mobile subscriptions.1 This suggests that Bangladesh could both benefit from and support a 
mobile health program for MNCH.
In order to fully harness the potential of mobile technology to achieve scale, sustainability 
and impact, the Aponjon team tackles challenges related to female literacy and phone 
ownership, and diverse preferences from urban and rural populations. The Aponjon team has 
developed a highly complex technical platform, conducted robust formative research, and 
developed a strategic business plan for long term sustainability.
After a year of pilot testing, Aponjon was launched nationally in December 2012 by 
Bangladeshi social enterprise Dnet, in partnership with the Government of Bangladesh 
Ministry of Health and Family Welfare (MOHFW). Dnet has brokered partnerships with 
five mobile network operators, three large corporate partners and six outreach partners with 
community agents (CAs) in all 64 districts in Bangladesh. As of mid May 2014, Aponjon was 
reaching more than 500,000 mothers and families.
3
 1. The Context 
In Bangladesh, of every The Government of Bangladesh has demonstrated significant interest to improve MNCH 
100 people, just 55 have through investing resources and making commitments with support from a number of 
access to sanitation partners. Maternal mortality in Bangladesh has declined at an average of about 3.3 percent 
services while 64 have per year, compared with the average annual rate of reduction of 3.0 percent required for 
mobile subscriptions. achieving MDG 5 in 2015. As such, Bangladesh appears to be on track to reduce the maternal 
This confluence of mortality ratio by three quarters from 1990 levels.2 
factors — high mobile 
penetration and a need As Figure 1 demonstrates, Bangladesh is also on track to meet MDG 4: reducing the under-
to improve MNCH five mortality rate by two-thirds from 1990 levels. Bangladesh’s neonatal mortality decline 
outcomes — signifies that in the last decade is double the regional and global averages. Figure 2 illustrates the progress 
a MAMA program is a that Bangladesh has made in MNCH, and its trajectory towards meeting the MDGs.
good fit for Bangladesh.
Although Bangladesh has made large strides with regards to improving MNCH outcomes, it 
must continue to steadily decrease mortality to achieve the 2015 MDG targets. It is essential 
that Bangladesh leverage existing and new methods and tools to reach the women and 
families that need it the most. 
Across the developing world, approximately 40% of people subscribe to mobile services.5 
In some countries, more people have access to a mobile phone than to a toilet, electricity, 
or even clean water. In Bangladesh, of every 100 people, just 55 have access to sanitation 
services while 64 have mobile subscriptions.6 This confluence of factors — high mobile 
penetration and a need to improve MNCH outcomes — signifies that a MAMA program is a 
good fit for Bangladesh.
While the number of mobile subscriptions in the developing world has skyrocketed, 
women have not proportionately benefitted. The GSMA Development Fund discovered, for 
example, that “a woman is 23% less likely to own a mobile phone than a man if she lives in 
Africa, 24% if she lives in the Middle East, and 37% if she lives in South Asia.”7 As such, Dnet 
hypothesized before Aponjon’s pilot phase that very few women would possess their own 
phones to receive the messages. Another potential barrier to reaching women over mobile 
phones is illiteracy—in Bangladesh, female literacy is around 50% and is significantly lower 
in rural areas (47%) than in urban areas (62%).8  To determine how best to reach women with 
varying literacy levels and phone ownership, as well as to understand a variety of other 
related factors, Dnet carried out extensive formative research. 
4
FIGURE 1. 
High-mortality countries with greatest percentage declines  
in under-five mortality rate from 1990-20123 
BANGLADESH 72%
NEPAL 71%
MALAWI 71%
LIBERIA 70%
TANZANIA 68%
ETHIOPIA 67%
TIMOR-LESTE 67%
BHUTAN 66%
BOLIVIA 66%
NIGER 65%
ERITREA 65%
RWANDA 64%
MADAGASCAR 63%
UGANDA 61%
MOZAMBIQUE 61%
0% 10% 20% 30% 40% 50% 60% 70% 80%
DECLINE IN UNDER-FIVE MORTALITY, BY PERCENT
FIGURE 2. 
Maternal and Child Health in Bangladesh4 
MATERNAL MORTALITY RATIO, 
600 PER 100,000 LIVE BIRTHS 
574
500
400
322
300 UNDER 5 MORTALITY, 
PER 1,000 LIVE BIRTHS
200 194
143 143 144
100 95
71 51 48
0
1990 1995 2000 2005 2010 2015 MDG
TARGET
MATERNAL MORTALITY AND UNDER-FIVE MORTALITY IN BANGLADESH, 1990-2015
5
 2.  MAMA and Aponjon  
Service Overview
Information is delivered The Mobile Alliance for Maternal Action (MAMA) — founded by the U.S. Agency for 
twice weekly in one of two International Development, Johnson & Johnson, United Nations Foundation, mHealth 
forms: SMS or 60-second Alliance and BabyCenter — is an innovative public-private partnership that engages a global 
voice messages. The community to deliver vital health information to new and expectant mothers and their 
voice messages are a mix families through the use of mobile technology. MAMA directly supports country programs 
of “mini-skit” messages, in Bangladesh and South Africa, with India scheduled to launch in 2014. These programs 
with local actors playing support more than 750,000 women and families through their pregnancies and the first 
the roles of a doctor, three years of parenting.
pregnant woman, mother 
and mother-in-law; and The MAMA Bangladesh program is called Aponjon (meaning ‘the close/dear one’ in 
direct messages. Bangla). After a year of pilot testing, Aponjon was launched nationally in December 2012 by 
Bangladeshi social enterprise, Dnet, in partnership with the Government of Bangladesh 
MOHFW. Dnet has also brokered partnerships with six outreach organizations, five 
mobile network operators, and three large corporate partners. In the 15 months since 
launch, it has grown to serve 500,000 mothers and families and trained over 3,000 CAs and 
brand promoters (BPs) who assist subscribers to sign up for the service. Currently, 88% of 
customers are registered by assistance through the call center, CAs, or BPs, while just 12% 
self-register. Self-registration is completed by sending SMS keywords to the shortcode 16227 
or through dialing 16227 and following the IVR menu to self-register. 
6
Information is delivered twice weekly in one of two forms: SMS, or 60-second voice 
messages. The voice messages are a mix of “mini-skit” messages, with local actors playing 
the roles of a doctor, pregnant woman, mother and mother-in-law; and direct messages. In 
the dramatic format, characters enact scenarios in an entertaining and educational way. 
Dialogues range from the doctor explaining the importance of iron-rich food, to reminding 
the pregnant character that it is time for her medical checkup. Messages around medical 
emergencies and warning signs are in the direct, straightforward format. Dnet also created 
a unique service specifically for husbands and other household members, which reinforces 
messages provided to the mother and encourages family involvement in healthy decision-
making around pregnancy, birth and infant care. This service adds one additional message 
per week, increasing the total from two to three messages weekly. In addition, Dnet offers 
a counseling line to subscribers which serves as a direct channel to communicate with a 
doctor about health problems. To offer this service, the Dnet collaborates with Synesis IT, an 
IT firm that serves as the call center service provider.
During registration, subscribers are asked to provide the date of their last menstrual period, 
their estimated delivery date or their baby’s birth date. This information is used to time the 
messages so that they are delivered to correspond with the user’s pregnancy stage or baby’s 
age, reflecting her particular experience at that time. The user is also able to select a preferred 
time of day for message delivery so that the message is received when it is most convenient. 
Dnet generates multiple streams of revenue through low user fees, advertisements, 
corporate partnerships and a ‘Sponsor-a-Ma’ campaign in the stores of Bangladesh’s largest 
retailer. Aponjon costs 2 taka (about $0.025 USD) per message, but the service is provided 
free-of-charge to the poorest 20% of subscribers. Upon registering subscribers, the Aponjon 
team collects socioeconomic status information which determines whether or not they 
qualify for the service free-of-charge.
7
 3.  Formative Research
The formative research Dnet carried out extensive formative research before launching the service nationally. The 
was conducted to formative research included 1,403 subscribers from five Divisions, including 349 pregnant 
gain knowledge in the women (25%), 575 mothers of children under age one (41%), and 479 other household 
following broad subject decision-makers (e.g. husbands, mothers-in-law) (34%). The formative research period lasted 
areas: gender and mobile from September 1, 2011- May 31, 2012.
phone ownership; 
effective strategies for The formative research was conducted to gain knowledge in the following broad subject 
enrollment and promoting areas: gender and mobile phone ownership; effective strategies for enrollment and 
user awareness; promoting user awareness; acceptable cost models; user satisfaction of the content and 
acceptable cost models; tech platform; influence of content on MNCH-related health seeking behaviors; and the 
user satisfaction of the involvement of family members in the service. The primary mechanisms included a pre-
content and tech platform; test focus group, registration forms, deregistration data, payment status data, structured 
influence of content on interviews, field observations and phone surveys.
MNCH-related health 
seeking behaviors; and The Johns Hopkins School of Public Health (JHSPH) mHealth Initiative produced a research 
the involvement of family report that examines and analyzes Dnet’s formative research. JHSPH’s report explores 
members in the service. programmatic decision-making and implementation science— making Dnet’s formative 
research a useful tool for the greater mHealth ecosystem. Findings from JHSPH’s Formative 
Research Report are included and cited throughout this document. 
Key findings about female phone ownership,  
technical literacy and inclusion of family members
The formative research revealed that female phone ownership was much higher than 
expected—just over half of the women who subscribed to the Aponjon service reported using 
their own phones to subscribe to and receive the messages. Of those who did not use their own 
phones, 35% used a family member’s phone and 6% used their neighbor’s phone. Keeping this in 
mind, Dnet worked closely with the CAs to choose the best timeslot of the day for a woman to 
receive the message based on when she would have direct access to a mobile phone. The lack of 
exclusive access to mobile phones was found to be a challenge to the service in a variety of ways: 
a series of in-depth interviews revealed that women who could listen to or read the messages on 
their own did better in terms of retaining the information provided through the service, versus 
those who had the content of the messages repeated to them through a third party. 
The team also learned that women who have received little or no schooling tend to be basic 
users of mobile phones—they know how to receive or discontinue a call by pressing the “send” 
or “end” button on the phone, but lack further technical literacy. As such, Dnet developed an 
option to send voice messages through a “message push” service where users receive a voice 
message through an incoming call and only have to press the receive button to listen to the 
message. During the in-depth interviews users expressed high levels of satisfaction with this 
option. Women surveyed also approved of the ability to select a time to listen to the message 
because it allowed them to listen when they were less busy and/or in the mood to do so. 
This had implications for the technology platform. Due to the demand from women to 
receive messages at different times of the day, it was important that the tech platform could 
effectively manage traffic. Aponjon’s technology partner, SSD-Tech, worked to ensure that at 
a certain time of day the platform did not fail to deliver messages to certain clients due to 
8
volume overload. They worked to predict the volume and make necessary preparations to 
accommodate varying message flows.
Dnet also learned that it is important to involve other family members in the program, The formative research 
e.g. the woman’s husband, mother-in- law, or other relatives, to ensure that the mother is confirmed that inclusion 
supported. Surprisingly, almost 60% of these “gatekeepers” reported that they do not own of other household 
the mobile phone they use for the service and the majority (73%) reported that they were decision-makers resulted 
not heads of their households.9 While no data was collected to disaggregate gatekeepers in better household 
by gender or age, these findings suggest that many “gatekeepers” are mothers-in-law practices in terms of 
(Bangladesh has a patrilineal kinship system). nutrition, antenatal visits, 
preparation for delivery 
The formative research confirmed that inclusion of other household decision-makers and other types of care 
resulted in better household practices in terms of nutrition, antenatal visits, preparation for important for a pregnant 
delivery and other types of care important for a pregnant woman and newborn. Moreover, woman and newborn. 
willingness to pay for the service was higher when men were included rather than when Moreover, willingness to 
women paid for the service alone. In the pilot, slightly more than half (53%) of other pay for the service was 
household members received the messages along with the target women. During the pilot, higher when men were 
separate messages were provided to these family members, but in a generalized form. Dnet included rather than 
decided after the pilot to personalize the messages for each type of family member based on when women paid for the 
the large amount of interest they showed in participating in the service. service alone. 
9
 4. Content Development
Dnet decided to offer The development of message content for Aponjon was completed by an in-house Dnet 
the service in the form content team with assistance from Multimedia Content and Communication Limited 
of voice messages using (MCC), a subsidiary of Dnet. MCC Ltd employed a four-step process to develop the 
interactive voice response messages, which included: message content development; message design; development of 
(IVR) in addition to voice and text; and quality assurance.
SMS in order to reach 
subscribers with low Message content identification
literacy levels. Dnet found 
that 78% of subscribers Message content identification consisted of ethnographic research, a review of national 
who registered through guidelines and international literature on MNCH, and an expert review by a panel of 
CAs chose the voice Bangladeshi physicians, researchers and communications professionals. Input and expertise 
message option. from this panel helped to ensure content comprehensiveness. 
As part of the process, research was conducted to assess women’s awareness of the 
Bangladeshi government’s separate circulated MNCH messages. Of those surveyed, 63%  
said they had heard of them and 77% said that they needed more advice/information 
in addition to what was contained in these government circulated messages. As such, 
the Aponjon team decided that its messages should both reinforce and complement the 
government circulated messages.
Message design and production
The ethnographic research consisted of a needs assessment survey of 300 women (with 
at least one child) and 300 family members. This research was used to gain insight into 
mothers’ preferences around message delivery, and their ability to understand the content 
based on different tones and formats. 
Important findings from this part of the needs assessment included: 63% of survey 
respondents preferred to have the messages repeated; women first realized they were 
pregnant around 6-7 weeks; the majority (64%) of respondents reported that they preferred 
to receive medical advice from a female doctor; and the majority wished to receive messages 
until the child’s first birthday. As such, the Dnet decided that messages would be sent twice 
weekly, have the option to be repeated, begin at the sixth week of pregnancy, use the voice of 
a female doctor and continue until the child’s first birthday.
Dnet carried out language research to determine which language(s) to use in the text 
messages. One of the large challenges for SMS was that most (92%) of the basic feature 
phones did not support Unicode-based Bangla. Conveniently, the majority of survey 
respondents said their preferred language was Banglish (Bangla written in English 
characters). In addition, survey respondents were in favor (88%) of customary English words 
being displayed in English instead of Bangla synonyms. As such, Dnet opted to use Bangla 
with English characters for SMS messages.
Dnet decided to offer the service in the form of voice messages using interactive voice 
response (IVR) in addition to SMS in order to reach subscribers with low literacy levels. 
Dnet found that 78% of subscribers who registered through CAs chose the voice message 
option, while subscribers in urban locations and with a higher level of education chose text 
10
messages. Dnet conducted audio format research to determine the appropriate format, tone From the formative 
and character for the messages. Subscribers were asked to listen to the messages in three research, the trust of the 
different formats and decide which they favored most. Around 82% reported that a lady messages was found to 
doctor was the most trustworthy source of information. The voice message consisting of a be very high among the 
dramatic role play with a female doctor, Daktar Apa (“a lady doctor”), was preferred most and subscribers — on a Likert 
was hence chosen as the primary voice message format. scale of 1-5, most of the 
subscribers rated their 
After the needs assessment was conducted, feedback from BabyCenter was obtained and trust of the content as 
incorporated into the messages. Finally, the messages were officially approved by the 5 (28%), or 4 (63%). In 
Information, Education and Communication (IEC) committee of the Ministry of Health and addition, over 90% of 
Family Welfare. the respondents felt that 
Aponjon messages were 
In addition, the formative research and content surveys in Chittagong and Sylhet revealed meeting their needs for 
that the content was difficult for people to understand, specifically older subscribers. As information during and 
such, Dnet decided to carry out a short ethnographic survey in mid-2013 to identify the after pregnancy.
specific dialects most commonly spoken by people in these regions. Dnet then translated and 
recorded the MAMA messages in these local dialects and plans to deploy them in mid-2014.
Quality assurance
Quality assurance consisted of user testing in a focus group, structured interviews and 
surveys during the pilot period and after national level launch. This research was conducted 
to assess the acceptability of the messages among potential subscribers. 
From the formative research, the trust of the messages was found to be very high among the 
subscribers — on a Likert scale of 1-5, most of the subscribers rated their trust of the content 
as 5 (28%), or 4 (63%). In addition, over 90% of the respondents felt that Aponjon messages 
were meeting their needs for information during and after pregnancy.
11
Subsequent adaptations
The Aponjon team continues to adapt the messages to meet the demands and needs of 
subscribers, changes in MNCH care, and best practices in mHealth. For example, Dnet 
initially had just one set of messages for household members but upon realizing the 
diversity of this group developed three different message sets: one for the husband, one for 
the mother-in-law, and one for an “other” category that is intended for a generic household 
member. The content is more or less the same, but the messages are more personalized – the 
name of the person being addressed (father, mother-in-law, etc.) is different, as is the way the 
pregnant woman or new mom is addressed (your wife, your daughter-in-law). 
Most of the subsequent adaptations have been to cater the content and format of the messages 
to urban and rural contexts. Urban subscribers reported that much of the content in the 
messages wasn’t relevant to them, such as the content around health workers and clinics. 
Dnet developed a set of messages specific to urban settings, which includes content around 
hospitals, obstetricians, car seats, maternity leave, diapers, etc. 
Additionally, in the first needs assessment survey, rural people said they wanted a “drama”-
style voice message, while urban people wanted a more straight-forward format. However, 
feedback from rural subscribers revealed that in contrast to the findings in the first needs 
assessment survey, they preferred to receive the most important messages/ information in 
a more straightforward format. Rural subscribers also articulated that they wanted more 
repetition of significant content (e.g. information on why a vaccine is important, various 
reminders on when to go to the clinic for the vaccine), but urban subscribers expressed the 
desire for message content to be repeated less. This feedback from both groups informed the 
fourth version of the messages. 
12
Customer Acquisition 5. 
Dnet’s outreach approach includes both assisted registration through local CAs, and self- As of February 2014, 
registration via SMS, IVR or a call center. there were approximately 
3,000 CAs working 
CAs and outreach partners across 44 districts in 
all seven administrative 
Aponjon receives assistance from CAs from outreach partner organizations who make divisions. 
door-to-door visits in rural, remote and often isolated regions of the country. These CAs 
have gained the trust of their communities by providing advice and access to services and The formative research 
information. As such, CAs serve as a gateway to reach and inspire women and their family revealed that 78% of 
members to enroll in the service. As of February 2014, there were approximately 3,000 CAs subscribers were enrolled 
working across 44 districts in all seven administrative divisions. in Aponjon through CAs.
In these districts, CAs assist women with enrollment in the service by filling out a registration 
form. The registration form covers information on socio-economic status, education, date of 
last menstrual period or the baby’s birth date, a valid mobile phone number of the woman and/
or valid mobile phone number(s) of her husband/ family members (if they wish to subscribe to 
the service), choice of the channel of message delivery (IVR/SMS), and the time to receive the 
IVR messages. If a woman chooses to opt in a family member to be included in the service, she 
makes a decision as to whether both messages (two for her and one for the family member) 
should be pushed to the same mobile phone or to two different mobile phones. Completed 
forms are sent to the Dnet office to be entered into the registration database managed jointly 
by the Dnet technology team and SSD-Tech, Dnet’s primary technical partner.
The Dnet team determined that continuous communication with the CAs was essential to 
ensure high-quality registration data and adequate subscription numbers. From September 
2012 to October 2013, Dnet organized and conducted over 100 batches of training. Dnet also 
provides the CAs with a notebook manual in Bangla as a short and simple guide. In addition 
to attending a one-day training session, CAs are expected to answer questions about the 
service, respond to any issues with service delivery, and inform Dnet of any changes in 
subscriber status or deregistration requests. Finally, they are expected to observe and report 
back to Dnet about any changes in subscribers’ health behaviors as a result of the program. 
The formative research revealed that 78% of subscribers were enrolled in Aponjon through 
CAs. As CAs serve people in lower-income settings, 51% of subscribers were from the ultra-
poor category, 25% of subscribers were from the poor category, and 16% came from the lower 
middle income category. Only 5% of subscribers registered by CAs were from the middle 
class, and 3% were from the upper middle class or above.10 
Dnet forged strategic partnerships with six outreach organizations (NGOs and social 
enterprises) to utilize their field level health workers, referred to as CAs. In addition to the 
CAs, there are standalone agents (SAs) who belong to the Smiling Sun Clinics of the NGO 
Service Delivery Project (NHSDP), Blue Star Clinics of Smiling Sun Clinic (SMC) and the 
Union Information Service Center under the Government of Bangladesh. 
Dnet’s outreach and training team provides different types of incentives to CAs, SAs and 
other key stakeholders who are directly involved in field level registration. CAs are given 
cash incentives in the form of 10 to 15 taka per registration. In addition, they are eligible to 
13
receive personal rewards upon successful registration of a certain number of clients (50 
clients, 100 clients, 500 clients etc.) in the form of a gift such as a branded mug or t-shirt. 
BRAC (Bangladesh Rural Advancement Committee) is an NGO that works to alleviate poverty 
and empower the poor. BRAC has a large field level presence for primary health care in rural 
Bangladesh. BRAC’s CAs, called “Shasthyo Kormis”, assist with rural enrollment in 14 districts. 
In addition to collaborating with BRAC to reach rural women, Dnet operates Infolady, 
an entrepreneurship program that focuses on poverty alleviation through improved 
access to information and knowledge as well as empowerment of rural women and the 
poor. An Infolady is a trained, rural woman who delivers a variety of Information and 
Communication Technology (ICT)-based and essential services door-to-door in rural 
communities. Infoladies offer information and communication services related to health, 
education and farming, among others. They also provide contraceptives and sanitary 
napkins to the rural women, who generally do not visit shops to purchase these products 
for social and cultural reasons. Many Infoladies have gained the trust and acceptance of 
thousands of rural women. Since 2011, Infoladies have included Aponjon in their service 
portfolio for rural women and earn extra income in the form of a registration incentive. 
The Maternal and Child Health Integrated Program (MCHIP) is the USAID Bureau for Global 
Health’s flagship MNCH program, which focuses on reducing maternal, neonatal and child 
mortality and accelerating progress towards achieving Millennium Development Goals 4 and 
5. In 2009, MCHIP received an associate award to build on the work of Save the Children and 
USAID’s project called ACCESS in the Sylhet and Habiganj divisions in Bangladesh. MCHIP’s 
project, entitled “MaMoni – Integrated Safe Motherhood, Newborn Care and Family Planning 
Project,” supports Aponjon in the Habiganj district of Sylhet. In addition, USAID’s NGO Health 
Services Delivery Project (NHSHP) assigned 1,297 of their health workers and SAs to work as 
Aponjon CAs across 37 districts of all seven divisions in the country. 
FIGURE 6. 
Outreach Partners and CAs by Division, as of February 2014 11
Outreach Partner Number of CAs with Division
Aponjon
NHSDP and Smiling 1297 37 districts across all 7 divisions of Chittagong, 
Sun Clinics Khulna, Rajshahi, Dhaka, Barisal, Sylhet, Rangpur
BRAC 1221 14 districts across the 6 divisions of Khulna, Barisal, 
Dhaka, Chittagong, Rangpur, Rajshahi
Infolady (run by Dnet) 52 5 districts across 5 divisions in Dhaka, Sylhet, 
Chittagong, Rangpur and Rajshahi
UISC 15 Brahmanbaria District in Chittagong
MaMoni 40  Habiganj district in Sylhet
SMC 245 24 districts across the 6 divisions of Barisal, 
Chittagong, Dhaka, Rangpur, Sylhet, Rajshahi
14
SMC is a nonprofit established by the Government of Bangladesh, Population Services As of December 2013, 
International and USAID. SMC is a major contributor to the Bangladesh national family three hundred BPs had 
planning program, providing contraceptives to more than one third of all users in the subscribed 80,000 
country. It pioneered the large scale use of life saving oral rehydration salts (ORS) in the people to Aponjon.
country and operates one of the largest private sector ORS manufacturing facilities in the 
world. SMC runs Blue Star Clinics, which provide health care to people in different areas of 
the country. 
Finally, UISC CAs provided support to Aponjon towards the end of the formative research 
phase. Today, these CAs are operational only in the Brahmanbaria district in Chittagong. 
Aponjon has 15 SAs working through 15 UISCs. UISCs are entrepreneurial initiatives run by 
the Access to Information Office of the government.
Issues with CAs and decision to use BPs
Dnet has encountered a few challenges working with CAs. One of the principal problems is 
that CAs work under specific outreach partner organizations and have other responsibilities 
and products to sell or promote. CAs are paid by Aponjon’s outreach partner organizations, 
and therefore are not held financially accountable for the part they play in the Aponjon 
registration process. As such, many CAs have been found to be inactive in promoting and 
registering subscribers for the Aponjon service — an assessment in 2013 revealed that of 
nearly 3,000 CAs, only 700 were active in registering subscribers to Aponjon. 
To address these challenges, Dnet decided to focus increasing the productivity of active CAs 
by providing refresher training. The refresher training included a Dnet produced video of an 
exemplary CA who provides subscribers with accurate and complete information regarding 
the service. The video reduced costs for the Dnet outreach team as they were required to 
travel less for training.
In addition, Dnet decided to introduce brand promoters (BPs) to increase subscription to the 
service overall, but also to reach urban women and their families as most CAs are deployed 
to rural and semi-urban areas. BPs are trained professionals whose sole job is to register 
people to Aponjon. BPs are employed by commercial agencies and local NGOs across the 
country. BPs work in hospitals, clinics and doctors’ offices to inform potential subscribers 
about Aponjon and help them register. BPs are deployed in eight districts: Dhaka, Chittagong, 
Rangpur, Rajshahi, Khulna, Barishal, Sylhet and Mymensing. BPs also promote Aponjon by 
distributing leaflets, stickers and other materials.
Dnet found there is a higher one-time hiring and training cost associated with BPs, but little 
to no maintenance as there are no additional incentives to pay. In addition, BPs have a higher 
education level than CAs which helps with issues around filling out the registration forms. 
In addition, because BPs have a designated quota related to their payment, accountability is 
high. Furthermore, Dnet has put into place check points and continuous monitoring of BPs 
to avoid false registrations. As of December 2013, almost three hundred BPs have subscribed 
almost 80,000 people to Aponjon and have been much more efficient than the CAs. However, 
BPs work primarily in urban areas where subscribers also tend to be better educated and 
perhaps more able to pay, which may impact their significantly higher registration numbers.
15
FIGURE 4. 
Average number of registrations per individual CA and BP
350
CA (AVG REG) BP (AVG REG)
301
300
250
212
200 195
160 167
150
114
100 85
62
50
15 17 16 20 17 18 18 22
0
APR. 2013 MAY 2013 JUN. 2013 JUL. 2013 AUG. 2013 SEPT. 2013 OCT. 2013 NOV. 2013
Self-registration is Self-registration
completed by sending 
SMS keywords to the Self-registration is completed by sending SMS keywords to the shortcode 16227 or through 
shortcode 16227 or dialing 16227 and following the IVR menu to self-register. Currently 12% of the clients are 
through dialing 16227 and self-registered while the remaining 88% are registered with assistance through the call 
following the IVR menu center, CAs or BPs. The majority of self-registering subscribers are from the middle class. 
to self-register. Currently Some of these subscribers learned about the service from popular campaigns organized 
12% of the clients are during the pilot. Popular campaign enrollment strategies included leaflets, loudspeaker 
self-registered while broadcasting, posters, arrangements with local hospitals and community meetings. These 
the remaining 88% are popular campaigns were launched in just a few select urban areas, and as a result only 2% of 
registered with assistance women and 5% of other household decision-makers recalled these campaigns.
through the call center, 
CAs or BPs. The majority Media campaigns
of self-registering 
subscribers are from the From October to December 2013 Dnet produced two television commercials, two radio 
middle class. commercials, two billboards and press advertisement designs. These media campaigns 
served to announce the launch of Aponjon, raise awareness of its benefits, promote the 
shortcode 16227, build brand awareness, and establish the visual identity of the brand.
The television commercials consisted of two versions — one focused on pregnant women 
and one on new mothers. They aired on four channels, including Bangladesh Television 
(BTV), a state-owned broadcaster that reaches 80% of the population. The commercials also 
aired on the highly viewed television cable and satellite channel, ATN Bangla, as well as on 
Bangla Vision and My TV. As such, it is estimated that the television advertisements reached 
around five million viewers. 
Aponjon’s television commercials broke out of the conventional public health communication 
approach by creating a more humorous and accessible advertisement. Dnet deemed 
this approach a success due to an increase in the number of calls to the call center and 
16
registrations. The media campaign lasted only fifteen days and resulted in a significant 
increase in the number of new subscribers — 5,919 expecting or new mothers, and 5,270 
family members. The large number of new family subscribers can be attributed to the fact 
that the television commercials highlighted that the messages are for husbands and family 
members as well as pregnant women and new mothers.
In addition to television commercials, Dnet released two Aponjon radio commercials (one for 
pregnant women and one for new mothers) that aired on a major FM station, Radio Today, 
with radio jockeys endorsing the Aponjon service on air. It is estimated that around 200,000 
people listened to the commercials and radio jockeys. Dnet also extended its Aponjon media 
campaign to the newspaper, and released thematic press ads in the major dailies in the 
country for nine days. Around two million people had the opportunity to see the adverts. The 
primary focus of these ads was the shortcode. 
Dnet also developed eight billboards and placed them in four major cities — Dhaka, 
Chittagong, Khulna and Sylhet. The billboards were placed in strategic locations in areas 
with the highest level of traffic. In addition, Dnet implemented a below-the-line campaign 
through local NGOs. This campaign consisted of decoration of three-wheeler rickshaws 
and vans with Aponjon-themed plates, the distribution of 1,000 posters in five districts, and a 
branded MicroBus for Aponjon field level training and visits. Aponjon’s media campaign also 
extended to social media and its website. The social media and online campaign included 
promotion of the Aponjon website through online ads, a Facebook photo and video contest, 
and a mass email. The social media and online campaign generated more than 10,000 likes 
and reached almost 1,000,000 people through the Facebook page in nine months.
Despite relative success, Dnet decided that in the future it would not carry out another large 
media campaign because it is extremely costly and BP channels are more cost effective. 
One further TV commercial has been produced and aired. This commercial adopted a more 
somber tone intended to draw people’s attention to the seriousness of health risks for 
children in Bangladesh. 
Local fairs are also leveraged as an opportunity to market the Aponjon service. These fairs, 
held by Aponjon’s outreach partners (local NGOs), offer free medical services and feature 
performances by local folk singers and other performers. The Aponjon team distributes flyers 
and other collateral to attendees. In addition, the MoHFW in Bangladesh permits Dnet to 
advertise Aponjon at any government health clinic.
17
 6. N GO, Public and Private 
Partnerships
Mobile health project Mobile health project implementation is done best through a consortium of partners. Aponjon’s 
implementation is done consortium includes organizations with technical and content expertise, access to clinical 
best through a consortium services and health workers, and experience in monitoring and evaluation among others. 
of partners. Aponjon’s Aponjon has robust partnerships with outreach organizations (as previously discussed), 
consortium includes the public and private sectors, and fi ve different telecommunication companies. Aponjon’s 
organizations with technology partnerships will be discussed in a subsequent section of this document.
technical and content 
expertise, access to Figure 5 illustrates the variety of partners Aponjon has secured on various levels. At the global 
clinical services and health level, Aponjon’s partners are MAMA’s partners: Johnson & Johnson, USAID, United Nations 
workers, and experience in Foundation, the mHealth Alliance and BabyCenter. Johnson & Johnson and USAID provide 
monitoring and evaluation direct fi nancial support, BabyCenter provides content support, while the mHealth Alliance 
among others. and the UN Foundation provide technical and programmatic support. At the country level, 
the Aponjon team builds upon existing USAID and Government of Bangladesh maternal child 
Dnet serves as the MAMA health and family programs, and is implemented through MCHIP. MCHIP provides technical 
Secretariat in Bangladesh, support to the MAMA global partnership in its evaluation framework, as well as management 
and oversees service and technical support to Dnet. MCHIP has awarded a sub-agreement to Dnet to fund specifi c 
design and deployment. service elements of MAMA in Bangladesh under the brand name Aponjon. Dnet serves as the 
MAMA Secretariat in Bangladesh, and oversees service design and deployment.
FIGURE 5. 
Aponjon Partnerships by Type
NGOs Government
For Profit
18
Public The Bangladeshi 
government has been 
The Bangladeshi government has been involved with Aponjon since the pilot phase. The involved with Aponjon 
MoHFW is the official government partner of Aponjon. The Ministry takes ownership of the since the pilot phase. 
initiative through an Advisory Board consisting of representatives from all relevant agencies The MoHFW is the 
of the government. In addition, The Access to Information Program II (A2I-II) hosted by official government 
the Prime Minister’s Office spearheads the process of mainstreaming e-service delivery partner of Aponjon. 
mechanisms within government agencies and as such facilitates coordination among 
various government agencies for the Aponjon initiative.
Aponjon’s partnership with the Bangladeshi government helps to coordinate efforts with 
related public health awareness campaigns run by the government. In addition, the 
MoHFW validated Aponjon’s messages for accurateness and alignment with national 
health policies. Government health officials and experts on the Aponjon Technical 
Committee on Content work to ensure the Aponjon messages align with new health 
policies, initiatives and information. The partnership with the government also provides 
Aponjon with the opportunity to form new partnerships with national and international 
entities at forums and events. 
Another important public sector contribution comes from the Bangladesh 
Telecommunications Regulatory Commission (BTRC). BTRC is the regulatory body 
for telecommunication and value-added services through mobile networks. As such, 
BTRC coordinates with all telecommunications operators on Aponjon’s behalf and helped 
secure approvals for differential charging for national scale operations. In addition to 
providing technical assistance, BTRC aided Dnet in initiating technical integration with 
Teletalk, Bangladesh’s state-run mobile network operator. BTRC also approved the Aponjon 
Counseling line, a new Aponjon service which allows active subscribers to call a hotline 
number to talk to a doctor. BTRC has the authority to assign and manage the shortcodes, and 
has provided Dnet with access to and help managing its shortcodes.
19
Aponjon’s partners in the Corporate 
private sector, Beximco 
Pharmaceuticals, Lal Teer Aponjon’s partners in the private sector, Beximco Pharmaceuticals, Lal Teer Seed and 
Seed and Rahimafrooz Rahimafrooz Superstores, bring diverse expertise to the table and promote Aponjon through 
Superstores, bring diverse their various channels. Beximco Pharmaceuticals Limited (BPL) is a leading manufacturer 
expertise to the table and of pharmaceuticals and active pharmaceutical ingredients in Bangladesh. BPL is a corporate 
promote Aponjon through founding partner of Aponjon and provides financial support and promotes Aponjon’s services 
their various channels. through its country-wide network of doctors. 
Currently, Aponjon has Lal Teer Seed is the largest biotechnology and seed production company in Bangladesh. Lal 
completed integration Teer has given in-kind support to Aponjon for below-the-line activities to make the initiative 
with five major operators successful. For example, they have promoted the Aponjon service in their leaflets, calendars, 
with a combined market posters, banners, and signboards which reach the doorsteps of farmers in the most remote 
coverage of 98.8%, and areas of Bangladesh. Moreover, Lal Teer has promoted Aponjon to the families of farmers 
Dnet is in talks with the through dramas shown in different districts. 
sixth, Teletalk.
Rahimafrooz Superstores Limited (RSL) has a retail supermarket chain in Bangladesh 
called Agora, which sells Aponjon’s Sponsor-a-Ma package. The Sponsor-a-Ma package 
consists of a gift (e.g. a teddybear) that is purchased in store, coupled with a donation to 
provide the Aponjon service to a mother for a total of 89 weeks, from her sixth week of 
pregnancy through her baby’s first year. Sponsor-a-Ma benefits the 30% of mothers living 
below the poverty line who otherwise would not be able to afford Aponjon. Rahimafrooz has 
coordinated with Agora chain stores to set up a display stall where people can learn more 
about this Sponsor-a-Ma package and Aponjon service. 
FIGURE 7. 
Telecommunications Operators in Bangladesh
Mobile Network Operators Approximate Subscribers (millions)
Grameen Phone Ltd. (GP) 47
Banglalink Digital Communications Limited 28
Robi Axiata Limited (Robi) 25
Airtel Bangladesh Limited (Airtel) 8
Pacific Bangladesh Telecom Limited (Citycell) 1
Teletalk Bangladesh Ltd. (Teletalk) 3
Source: BTRC 2013
20
Mobile Network Operators
One of the main challenges that Aponjon faced during its pilot was to get all the mobile 
network operators (MNOs) under one umbrella. Grameenphone (GP) was the only operator 
partnered with Dnet at the time of the pilot. As such, areas like Chittagong – which had low 
GP coverage – had a much lower number of Aponjon subscribers during the pilot. Before 
the national launch four telecom operators (Grameenphone, Robi, Banglalink, Airtel) were 
integrated into the Aponjon service. Negotiation and technological integration with each 
telecom operator was a lengthy and complicated process and each integration was approved 
by the BTRC. Working with MNOs was also complicated by the fact that Aponjon offers 
differential charging, but doesn’t charge customers directly. Instead the telecoms charge 
subscribers and then share part of this revenue with Dnet. 
Currently, Aponjon has completed integration with five major operators with a combined 
market coverage of 98.8%, and Dnet is in talks with the sixth, Teletalk.
21
Tech platforms and counseling line
Dnet is currently partnered with SSD-Tech, an IT organization, for its technical platform. SSD-
Tech hosts servers that contain subscriber information, and maintains the system connection 
with the telecom operators which is the interface that channels the messages through the 
service. SSD-Tech handles multiple variations in the modes of delivery (IVR/SMS, push/
pull, multiple time slots, inclusion/exclusion of family members, free/paid subscriber mode, 
expecting/new mother mode, stage-based message delivery based on last menstrual period/
child’s birth date, etc). Handling all of these modes of delivery (around 40 variations in total) 
requires highly complex technical designs and bandwidth. The large number of delivery 
types also means that there are many potential bugs and technical glitches. As such, Dnet has 
around-the-clock monitoring for these issues. The platform is also required to facilitate “MT 
charging” whereby the client is charged as and when they receive messages.12
Dnet also collaborates with Synesis IT, an IT firm that serves as the call center service 
provider. Synesis IT developed a customer relationship management system to cater to the 
Aponjon service as well as a separate system for the counseling line. In addition, Synesis IT 
developed a ticketing system linked to the call center that generates “problem tickets” based 
on calls that communicate issues with the Dnet team. Dnet also has an in-house technology 
team that has developed solutions to facilitate the service and its monitoring. These include 
Android applications to be used by BPs to register clients, a project monitoring and reporting 
system (PMRS), a blogging tool, and many others.
During field surveys and the formative research, subscribers said that they would like Aponjon 
to offer a direct channel with which to communicate with a doctor about health problems. After 
three months of testing, a counseling line service was added to Aponjon’s existing services in 
April 2013. During the testing phase, female doctors experienced in gynecology, obstetrics and 
pediatrics were trained to deliver of health information over the counseling line. The service is 
available to active subscribers only. By dialing the 16227 shortcode, subscribers can speak to an 
Aponjon doctor about health concerns. In June 2013, 223 new mothers, 405 expecting mothers, 
and 496 family members called the Aponjon counseling line and talked to doctors. Dnet is aware 
of the limitations of providing medical advice to clients by doctors over the telephone and as a 
result, a large number of referrals to nearby hospitals are made through the service.
22
Business Model 7. 
Aponjon is poised to become the first financially sustainable health information service Aponjon is poised 
utilizing mobile phones to improve health outcomes at national scale in a developing to become the first 
country. Dnet uses innovative financing models, leveraging corporate social responsibility financially sustainable 
(CSR) funding at local and global levels and subsidizing the service for the poorest health information service 
subscribers by charging a small user fee to the slightly more well-off subscribers. Dnet also utilizing mobile phones to 
uses advertising and sponsorship donations. improve health outcomes 
at national scale in a 
As Figure 8 illustrates, Aponjon is financed primarily though support from development developing country.
agencies (88%) , namely USAID. The next largest portion of Aponjon’s funding comes from 
local CSR (7%), followed by the Sponsor-a-Ma campaign (4%). Together, user fees and fees 
charged to companies interested in using the messaging for advertising make up slightly 
less than 1% of Aponjon’s funding. 
Dnet is working to restructure funding for Aponjon to ensure long-term sustainability. Their 
ideal model would derive more funding from user fees (40%) and rely on development 
agencies for just 20% of funding. In addition, Dnet aims for local CSR, advertising and the 
Sponsor-a-Ma campaign to contribute much more to its financing in the future.
Subscriber fees
During the pilot phase Dnet established three tiers of service charges depending on the 
subscribers’ socioeconomic status – free for the ultra-poor, discounted price (1 taka or 1 US 
cent per message) for the poor, and paid service (2 taka or 2.5 US cents per message) for 
subscribers with a slightly higher socioeconomic status. A subscriber was determined to be 
eligible to receive the service for free, at a discounted price or for full price by an algorithm 
FIGURE 8. FIGURE 9. 
Current Funding Structure Future Funding Structure
USER FEES AND SPONSER-A-MA DEVELOPMENT ADVERTISING
ADVERTISING (1%) 4% AGENCIESLOCAL CSR
7%
10%
20%
LOCAL 15%
CSR 40%
88% 10%
DEVELOPMENT USER FEES
AGENCIES SPONSER-A-MA
23
FIGURE 10. 
Formative research payment tiers 13
Payment status (amount includes tax) Percent and number of subscribers assigned
Full pay (2.3 taka*) 57%
Discounted pay (1 taka) 26%
Free status 17%
*including tax
24
FIGURE 11. 
Formative research registration data on willingness to pay among pregnant 
women and new mothers 13
Pregnant women and new mothers New mothers
Willing to pay any amount for 7% 8%
the service
Willing to a pay a small amount 76% 66%
Not willing to pay 9% 13%
Missing 7% 13% 
using demographic information. Over half of the formative research respondents were One of the lessons learned 
qualified to pay for the service (57%), while just 17% were eligible to receive the service for free. by Dnet in this regard is 
that transparency during 
According to the formative research, out of 300 subscribers registered through BRAC, the enrollment process is 
44% had incomplete SES data. Incomplete data can be attributed to a number of factors, paramount to obtaining 
including failure on the part of CAs to disclose pricing information during registration trust of subscribers in the 
and low literacy levels of CAs impeding their ability to correctly fill out the registration program.
forms. Dnet has since implemented a variety of changes to ensure that the forms have more 
complete SES data- including the refresher training of CAs, and hiring of BPs.
Willingness to pay was assessed at two points during formative research — at registration 
and during phone surveys post registration. At registration, 349 pregnant women and 
575 new mothers were surveyed. A very small portion of these pregnant women and new 
mothers reported being willing to pay “any amount” for the service, while the majority said 
they were willing to pay “a very small amount.” 
The second round of research conducted via phone survey did not disaggregate respondents 
by payment tier and instead assumed that they were all paying full price for the service. 
Therefore the analysis of this data must also assume that all respondents were paying the 
full rate. Almost half (45%) of female subscribers paying to receive IVR said the service 
should cost less than one taka per message, and about one-third (31%) said it should cost 
between one and five taka per message.14 
Of the husbands and family members paying to receive IVR messages, 42% reported that 
they think Aponjon should charge two taka per minute, while almost half (46%) said it should 
charge between two taka per minute or higher. It is interesting to note that just 11% of female 
subscribers pay for the service themselves, while almost 90% of gatekeepers paid for the service 
themselves. As such, subscribers that directly paid for the service were willing to pay more for 
it, while subscribers who depended on others to pay for the service were less willing to pay for 
it. Currently, Dnet strives to provide Aponjon free service to the poorest 20% of subscribers.15
The formative research conducted on willingness to pay revealed a number of issues regarding 
outreach partners and CAs. Outreach partners and CAs varied widely in their explanation of 
25
FIGURE 12. 
Phone survey data on willingness to pay 16
How much should the service Pregnant women  Household 
charge per minute on IVR? and new mothers decision makers
<1 taka 45% 19%
1 taka 26% 32%
2 taka or higher 31% 46%
the cost of the service to clients and even enrolled subscribers that were not aware that they 
were being enrolled in the service. Dnet learned during site visits that some CAs did not visit 
community members before enrolling them in the service but instead used data collected at 
outreach offices to fill out or partially fill out registration forms to enroll subscribers. This not 
only affected data quality but raised ethical issues. As such, one of the lessons learned by Dnet 
in this regard is that transparency during the enrollment process is paramount to obtaining 
trust of subscribers in the program. If subscribers are unaware or under-informed of the costs 
this may result in dissatisfaction and distrust of the program and of CAs. Dnet has remedied 
this situation by focusing on CA training, hiring BPs and through continuous and strategic 
monitoring. In addition, Aponjon’s sign-up sheets now feature a checkbox for subscribers to tick 
that says they understand the pricing and all other conditions of the service specifically. 
Advertisement revenue in IVR: a new channel
Aponjon currently generates limited revenue from advertisements in voice messages. 
Findings from content surveys suggested that the subscribers were willing to receive 
product advertisements along with the service. The benefits to commercial organizations of 
advertising in the IVR messages include: reaching their target audience, directly accessing 
a new customer base (reaching customers who were not otherwise accessible), gaining 
insights through access to Aponjon’s rich user database, increasing customer loyalty and 
fulfilling CSR requirements. Aponjon currently advertises for SMC’s product Monimix, a 
government-endorsed micronutrient for children older than six months.
26
Performance Monitoring Plan 8. 
To monitor the implementation and effects of Aponjon, a series of systems and activities were The Dnet team has 
instituted, which are documented in Aponjon’s performance monitoring plan (PMP). The adopted a unique 
PMP provides the framework for generating timely, relevant information for managers for approach to measuring 
evidence-based management decision-making. It outlines approaches for tracking progress KABP outcomes by 
towards programmatic goals and targets, and details methodologies for measuring change instituting three layers of 
in MNCH-related knowledge, attitudes and practices. The PMP includes mechanisms that research methodologies.  
highlight potential problem areas, and establishes a reporting feedback system for all levels of Two methodologies are 
the program. carried-out periodically 
by in-house Dnet 
The PMP breaks down programmatic goals into specifi c output and outcome indicators. researchers, and the 
Output indicators relate to process-type activities associated with program implementation third is a robust external 
and related outputs. The outcome indicators rely on periodic surveying methodologies to evaluation which is being 
measure preventive and care-seeking knowledge, attitudes, and practices of subscribers. conducted by icddr,b.
Dashboard and monitoring project outputs
For the output related data, the Dnet team uses an online dashboard that provides 
graphical presentations of system generated data in real time. To support progress review, 
troubleshooting, and other management tasks, two main types of indicators are currently 
displayed via the dashboard: status and performance. Status level indicators track the type 
of subscriptions and whether they are current or cumulative. Performance indicators track 
the subscription rates by type of user, type of registration (assisted or self-registration) and 
within geographical areas of Bangladesh. Figure 13 below provides an examples of graphs on 
the Aponjon program dashboard.
 
FIGURE 13. 
Examples of graphs on the Aponjon program dashboard
Measuring change in knowledge, attitudes, behaviors and practices
The PMP’s outcome indicators relate to specifi c knowledge, attitude, behavior, and practice 
(KABP) changes that Dnet expects to effect through the Aponjon service. The Dnet team 
has adopted a unique approach to measuring KABP outcomes by instituting three layers of 
27
The first three phone research methodologies. Two methodologies are carried-out periodically by in-house Dnet 
surveys found Aponjon researchers, and the third is a robust external evaluation which is being conducted by icddr,b. 
subscribers to be twice 
as likely to have attended The first, most frequent and lowest cost methodology is a quarterly phone survey carried-
four or more antenatal out by call center agents to subscribers. The phone survey questionnaire is relatively 
care visits, 16% more likely quick, only lasting about 10 to 15 minutes to administer. Participants are asked a series of 
to have had a facility- questions that test their knowledge on certain topics, explore the source of knowledge when 
based birth, and 19% more demonstrated and follows-up with questions regarding household practices adopted and 
likely to have exclusively facility-based services attended during their pregnancy and after birth. The phone surveys 
breastfed than the national have small samples, due to low participation rates, with initially 60 respondents per round in 
BDHS average. 2013, but now include 120 respondents per round. 
The first three periodic phone surveys carried-out between 2012 and 2013 revealed 
significantly higher percentages of Aponjon subscribers reporting adoption of healthy 
behaviors as compared with national averages captured in the 2011 Bangladesh 
Demographics and Health Survey (BDHS). There is no baseline data of KABP levels prior to 
the service and since the BDHS is recent and covers many MNCH-related practices relevant 
to Aponjon, program managers found the BDHS to be a cost-effective comparator for the 
phone survey findings. 
As the table below reflects, the first three phone surveys found Aponjon subscribers to be 
twice as likely to have attended four or more antenatal care visits, 16% more likely to have 
had a facility-based birth, and 19% more likely to have exclusively breastfed than the national 
BDHS average. 
The phone surveys also revealed over 97% of respondents said they have already 
recommended Aponjon to others. When asked about how well they trusted the messages, 
respondents revealed high levels of trust — on a Likert scale of 1 to 5, with 5 being the 
highest, 94% said they would rate it as either 4 or 5.
The phone survey findings are validated by findings from a more robust annual household 
survey, called the Sample Survey. The Sample Survey covers the same KABP questions as the 
phone surveys, plus additional questions for more breadth and depth of understanding on 
the effects of the service on subscribers. The Sample Survey questionnaire takes between 
30 – 45 minutes, thus the household survey approach is more appropriate for that length 
FIGURE 14. 
Aponjon Subscribers vs. 2011 BDHS Results
Aponjon Subscribers 2011 BDHS Results
(N = 180)
Attended 4+ ANC visits 66% 32%
Had a facility-based birth 45% 29%
Exclusively breastfed 82% 64%
28
than a phone survey would be. The Sample Survey is also used to explore additional topics The phone surveys also 
pertinent to program managers, such as changes in phone ownership. The first Sample revealed more than 
Survey was conducted in 2013 with 476 respondents and the 2014 survey is planned to have 97% of respondents 
1470 respondents. Results of the first Sample Survey are expected to be released in mid-2014. said they have already 
recommended Aponjon 
External evaluation by icddr,b to others.
An independent impact evaluation of the Aponjon program is being conducted by 
icddr,b through USAID’s Translating Research into Action (TRAction) project. The icddr,b 
(International Centre for Diarrheal Disease Research, Bangladesh) is an international health 
research organization in Dhaka, known for developing Oral Rehydration Solution in the 
1970s. The Aponjon evaluation employs both qualitative and quantitative research methods in 
four different geographical areas of Bangladesh, with diverse contextual characteristics. 
29
Specifically, the evaluation has been designed to answer the following research questions:
1. D oes the Aponjon program have a positive impact on a mother’s antenatal and postnatal 
care practices? 
2.  For those women who adhere to the Aponjon recommendations, do they have a positive 
impact on their health, and the health of their child?
3.  What aspects of the messaging are most effective in prompting women who are enrolled 
to take action?
Due to the complexities of community-based healthcare delivery in Bangladesh, the kind 
of facility-based research carried-out in other countries would not be appropriate here. Dr. 
Elahi, the Principal Investigator, and his team of researchers have designed an extensive 
evaluation study where the quantitative component includes a household survey with a 
subscriber/treatment group and a control group to understand if the Aponjon subscribers 
have a statistically significant higher propensity for specific behaviors and practices 
promoted through the service than the control group.
The qualitative phase of the study was completed in 2013, and explored the facilitating 
factors and barriers in relation to accessibility, acceptability, affordability and utility of 
the Aponjon intervention. Findings from the qualitative research were used to guide the 
development of quantitative data collection tools.
The quantitative component is still underway, with the household level data collection 
expected to commence in mid-2014. To examine the effects of Aponjon on outcome KABP 
indicators retrospective observational study with propensity score matching (PSM) is 
being utilized. In each study area, a sample of study population from subscribers of Aponjon 
(treatment group) and non-subscribers (control group) will be selected. Data will be collected 
in two phases. In phase I, a sample (treatment and control) of the study population (520 in 
each group) will be selected based-on selection criteria (for each within 6 months and 7-12 
month post-partum). In this phase, background information of the sample population will 
also be collected and analyzed for PSM. In phase II, all the best-matched selected subjects 
will be interviewed using the structured questionnaire for their accessibility, engagement to 
Aponjon intervention including the information for process and outcome indications. To get 
the required sample (i.e. 1040 in total) it is estimated that about 54,000 households will have 
to be visited. 
This study also seeks to address the current gap in empirical evidence globally of the effects 
of MNCH mobile messaging programs by exploring the accessibility, acceptability and 
effectiveness of the Aponjon intervention by end-users. Icddr,b intends to share the results of 
this seminal research nationally and internationally.
30
C onclusion
In the year and a half since its official launch, Aponjon has reached half a million mothers In the year and a half 
and their families with vital health information through mobile technology, and strives to since its official launch, 
reach three million in three years. This tremendous accomplishment is due to the hard work, Aponjon has reached 
dedication, talent and innovative thinking of the consortium of partners at the country and half a million mothers 
global level that make up Aponjon and MAMA. and their families with 
vital health information 
Dnet has overcome challenges related to low female literacy, low female phone ownership through mobile 
and diverse preferences from urban and rural populations by leveraging a highly complex technology, and strives 
technical platform and conducting robust formative research. Dnet is working towards to reach three million in 
achieving long-term sustainability of Aponjon by developing and executing a strategic three years. 
business plan. Aponjon is on its way to achieving scale and impact via the exceptional work 
of Dnet, strong partnerships with the highly involved government of Bangladesh, five 
mobile network operators, three corporations, and six outreach partners. 
From reaching culturally diverse populations in Chittagong and Sylhet by recording local 
dialects, to increasing efforts to provide the service free of charge to the poorest subscribers 
by targeting remote areas, to working to extend the messages through early childhood, 
Aponjon is committed to serving women and families in Bangladesh who most need access 
to vital health information.
31
  Endnotes
1  World Bank, “Data: Mobile cellular subscriptions (per 100 people),” 2012, Apr. 2014, 
<http://data.worldbank.org/indicator/IT.CEL.SETS.P2>
2  USAID, AUSAID, UNFPA, icddr,b and NIPORT, “Bangladesh Maternal Mortality and 
Health Care Survey 2010,” MEASURE Evaluation, Dec. 2012.
3 U NICEF, “Child Info: Monitoring the Situation of Children and Women” 2013, Apr. 2014, 
<http://www.childinfo.org/mortality_underfive.php>
4 W HO, “Cause-specific morality and morbidity: Maternal mortality ratio by country,” 
Global Health Observatory Data Repository, 2013; Bangladesh Maternal Mortality 
Survey (BMMS) 2001, 2010; Bangladesh DHS 2011.
5  GSMA, “Scaling Mobile for Development: A strategic opportunity for operators with a 
presence in emerging markets” 2013, Apr. 2014. 
6 W orld Bank, “Improved sanitation facilities (% of population with access),” 2012, Apr. 
2014, <http://data.worldbank.org/indicator/SH.STA.ACSN> 
7 G SMA, “Women & Mobile: A Global Opportunity: A study on the mobile phone gender 
gap in low and middle-income countries” GSMA Development Fund, 2013.
8 W orld Bank Data, “Literacy rate, adult female (% of females ages 15 and above),”2012, Apr. 
2014, <http://data.worldbank.org/indicator/SE.ADT.LITR.FE.ZS>
9 D net and Johns Hopkins University Global mHealth Initiative, ‘MAMA ‘Aponjon’ 
Formative Research Report’  December 2013.
10  Ibid.
11  Ibid.
12 T he two different options to charge for mobile messages are mobile originated (MO) and 
mobile terminated (MT). People are generally are only charged for messages or calls they 
initiate, so many operators only have the ability for MO charging. Aponjon pushes voice 
messages to users’ phones, which means that they are MT messages, but (some) users are 
still required to pay for them. Because some of the operators can’t do MT charging they’ve 
set up a subscription process where people are billed weekly instead of per message.
13 D net and Johns Hopkins University Global mHealth Initiative, ‘MAMA ‘Aponjon’ 
Formative Research Report’  December 2013.
14  Ibid.
15 I bid.
16  Ibid.
32

Visit MAMA’s website to learn more  
about our impact and initiatives: 
www.mobilemamaalliance.org
For inquires about working with our  
partnership, contact: 
MAMA Global 
tel: 202.887.9040 
email: info@mobilemamaalliance.org
Media inquiries, contact: 
Stephanie Bowen 
tel: 202.864.5157 
email: sbowen@mobilemamaalliance.org

