White Paper Series on mHealth and Aging
CREDIT: TÉLÉCOMS SANS FRONTIÈRS
mHEALTH OPPORTUNITIES FOR 
NON-COMMUNICABLE DISEASES 
AMONG THE ELDERY
ADA KWAN
mHealth Alliance, UN Foundation
October 2013
CREDIT: DATADYNE
ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS
This white paper would not have been possible without the support and commitment of Pfizer, Inc. 
and the mHealth Alliance at the United Nations Foundation. I would be remiss not to thank them 
for having the vision to fuel the timely conversation on how technologies can mitigate the growing 
burden of non-communicable diseases (NCDs) in the world’s quickly aging population. I would also 
like to thank the individuals who, during the development and production of this paper, shared their 
insights and experiences on NCDs, aging and the potential for mobile. These individuals include: 
Cathy Mwangi of CDC Foundation mHealth Kenya, Heather Cole-Lewis of Columbia University, 
Jennifer Pollex of the Institute of Development Studies, Alice Fabiano and Anu Gupta from Johnson 
& Johnson, Bethany Brown and Paul Ong of HelpAge International, Isabella Aboderin of the Oxford 
Institute of Aging, and Ting Shih of ClickMedix. For their critical feedback, coordination and support 
on this paper, I am additionally grateful to my colleagues at the mHealth Alliance: Sharia Khoja, Avrille 
Hanzel, Chelsea Hedquist and Chelsea Solmo. 
Much appreciation specifically goes to Chris Gray and his colleagues at Pfizer, Inc., the mHealth 
Alliance and every member of the mHealth Aging Working Group for acknowledging the under-
recognized health topic of non-communicable diseases (NCDs) in the context of aging. I can only 
hope that this paper becomes a catalyst for producing healthier solutions around the world with 
existing resources and technologies. 
Ada Kwan, mHealth Alliance, United Nations Foundation
2
ABSTRACT 
THIS WHITE PAPER, WHICH HAS EVOLVED stress on caregivers and health systems. If the world 
FROM PRIOR RESEARCH (1), IS ONE PART neglects these issues and chooses not to invest in 
OF A THREE-PART SERIES DEVOTED TO the health of the elderly and capitalize on their life 
EXPLORING THE USE OF MOBILE AND knowledge and experiences, the consequences could 
WIRELESS TECHNOLOGIES IN HEALTH take a devastating human and economic toll around the 
(MHEALTH) and the opportunities for impacting and world (7). Failure to address the aging population could 
advancing healthy aging in low- and middle-income eventually become a larger and more costly threat to 
countries (LMICs). This specific paper focuses on the global economic development than fiscal crises, natural 
use of mHealth for the prevention and control of non- disasters or pandemic influenza (7).
communicable diseases (NCDs) among elderly persons 
in LMICs. The imminent global threat of NCDs, combined with an 
expanding older population, calls for urgent solutions 
In 2000, the number of people in the world over the that have wide reach, strong potential for scale-up 
age of 65 was just over 500 million, and this number and the ability to extend existing health systems into 
is expected to triple by the year 2050 (2). The largest the community. In early 2013, the number of mobile 
growth will occur in LMICs, and this fact reflects phone subscriptions around the world reached 6.8 
many achievements in public health, such as higher billion, and this figure is expected to grow and surpass 
immunization coverage, better disease prevention and the world population in the year 2014 (8, 9). This recent 
control, and improved access to safe drinking water and explosion and near ubiquity of mobile phone uptake 
basic sanitation. However, the growing size of an older around the world may offer opportunities for NCD 
world population foreshadows significant challenges prevention, health promotion, treatment and disease 
ahead (3). As individuals age, nearly half will develop at management. mHealth efforts focused on NCDs are 
least one NCD, such as cardiovascular disease, cancer, already being implemented (10, 11), and new evidence 
diabetes, and chronic respiratory disease (4). Despite based on rigorous trials have begun reporting the 
NCDs being largely preventable, they are associated benefits of text messaging, automated telephone 
with 60% of deaths around the world. Three quarters monitoring, treatment reminders and self-care support 
of NCD-related deaths are among individuals over for improving health outcomes related to chronic 
the age of 60, who comprise an age segment that is disease management (12). This paper describes ways 
often neglected in policy and requires more specialized mHealth can reduce the burden of NCDs affecting the 
attention in health services, particularly for diagnostic, elderly in LMICs. It concludes with a call to action to 
curative and rehabilitative care (5). Existing health systems, bring together stakeholders from a variety of sectors to 
especially those in LMICs, are not prepared for these achieve this potential.
challenges, especially as the aging population will 
increasingly demand more long-term care options and 
specialized attention in homes and communities (6).
The global disease burden from NCDs is predicted to 
progress over time, resulting in increased treatment 
costs and losses to productivity in the estimated 
amount of US $47 trillion over the next 20 years (7). If 
action is not taken now to prevent and control NCDs 
in the context of aging, the burden and corresponding 
costs will grow substantially, which will place great 
3
In 2012, the number of 
people in the world who 
were 60 years or older was 
approximately 810 million, 
which is more than the number 
of children over the age of 5.
INTRODUCTION 
THE BURDEN OF CAREGIVING FOR OLDER to these challenges (4, 7), and over time, it will become 
PEOPLE IS QUICKLY INCREASING AROUND more difficult for the elderly to get appropriate help 
THE WORLD. In 2012, the number of people in the as the demand for specialized attention and care, 
world who were 60 years or older was approximately especially long-term care, increases with a shrinking 
810 million, which is more than the number of children pool of available caregivers (6).
over the age of 5 (5). Growing quickly, this number is 
expected to surpass one billion in ten more years and Despite NCDs being largely preventable, the prevalence 
reach two billion by 2050 (5). The largest growth will and incidence of NCDs are expected to increase 
occur in low- and middle-income countries (LMICs), and substantially alongside a world population growing 
these countries in particular will undergo epidemiologic older over the next two decades, with the majority of 
transitions in which non-communicable diseases (NCDs) the increase occurring in LMICs (18). Between 1990 and 
will replace infectious diseases as the leading causes 2020, ischemic heart disease – the leading cause of 
of death (5). Globally the leading causes of mortality, death in the world (19) – is expected to increase by 120% 
NCDs include cardiovascular diseases, cancer, chronic for women and 137% for men in LMICs (18). The next 
obstructive pulmonary disease, and diabetes mellitus. two decades will be witness to a tripling of ischemic 
As individuals age, nearly half will develop at least one heart disease and stroke mortality in Latin America, 
NCD, commonly with comorbidities  (4). In addition to the Middle East, and sub-Saharan Africa (18). Diabetes, 
the general burden of NCDs, older adults are at higher which affected approximately 171 million individuals in 
risk for long-term consequences of NCDs, which 2000, will affect 366 million people by 2030 (18). If more 
include retinopathy; nephropathy; auditory issues action is not undertaken to avert the growing burden 
related to long-standing diabetes; greater chances of NCDs, the productivity losses and long-term costs 
of congestive heart failure, renal failure, and strokes of treatment will take a devastating toll on individuals, 
related to hypertension; depression; anxiety; cognitive families, and societies and could become one of the 
dysfunction; as well as reduced motor control (13-17). most severe threats to global economic development 
Health systems in LMICs are not prepared to respond in the future (20). LMICs must develop comprehensive 
4
CREDIT: UN/ARAMBURU
health policies to improve health service provision for 
older adults with NCDs by developing primary health With the number 
care services and extending care to communities and 
homes (21). of mobile phone 
Alongside the growing NCD burden and expanding subscriptions predicted 
aging population, the world is witnessing another 
global trend that could be part of the urgently needed to surpass the world 
solution. Mobile and wireless technologies and mHealth, 
which are increasingly prevalent across LMICs, are 
being used to support healthier aging in the prevention, population in 2014, 
treatment and management of NCDs by offering 
new ways to transmit information and easier ways mHealth provides a way 
to communicate. With the number of mobile phone 
subscriptions predicted to surpass the world population to reach individuals in 
in 2014, mHealth provides a way to reach individuals in 
almost all corners of the world (8, 9). The objectives of almost all corners of 
this white paper are (i) to understand the implications 
of NCDs in the world’s aging population and (ii) to the world.
understand how to capitalize on mobile and wireless 
technologies to improve the quality of life and access 
to health services for elderly people living with NCDs. 
The focus will be on LMICs while drawing on relevant 
information from high-income countries (HICs).
5
BACKGROUND
AS PEOPLE AGE, STAYING IN GOOD NCDs are associated with six specific risk factors: high 
HEALTH OFTEN BECOMES A CHALLENGE(12) blood pressure, tobacco use, high blood glucose levels, 
FOlder adults living in poverty are most vulnerable, as physical inactivity, obesity or being overweight, and 
they cannot access quality health services or maintain high cholesterol levels (20). A United Nations High-Level 
proper nutrition, have poor literacy and low levels of meeting on NCDs held in September 2011 described 
education, and rarely have strong caregiver support (5). tobacco control as the “most urgent and immediate 
Thus, this demographic will be the hardest hit by the priority” (21). However, the non-modifiable risk factor 
growing NCD burden. In 2008, NCDs were responsible that will require more attention is age.
for 60% of the 57 million deaths that occurred globally 
(22). NCDs are defined as “diseases of long duration, On the population level, the growing burden of NCDs 
generally slow progression and they are the major is “the result of complex interaction between health, 
cause of adult mortality and morbidity worldwide” (7, 23). economic growth and development, and … is strongly 
Although actual data on cause-specific mortality rates associated with universal trends such as aging of the 
are difficult to achieve because of gaps in surveillance, global population, rapid unplanned urbanization and 
individuals over the age of 60 account for three quarters the globalization of unhealthy lifestyles” (7), and the 
of NCD-related deaths (24). NCD burden is only accelerating as the world grows 
older (3). Effective population-level responses will have 
NCDs are associated with certain risk factors, which to combat not only universal shifting patterns in diets 
is why NCDs have been said to “originate early in dominated by higher fat and sugar content intake, but 
life [and] develop insidiously” (25). NCDs are largely also changing activity patterns at work and in leisure, 
preventable, given the amount of exposure to NCD- which are associated with increasing rates of physical 
related risk factors; however, diseases are often inactivity and tobacco consumption (26, 27). 
symptomless, which makes them difficult to detect at 
preventable or curable stages, particularly in LMICs. The situation will be particularly challenging for LMICs 
Thus, early detection by screening is one strategy to where demographic transitions will place pressure on 
mitigate the effects of advanced stages of illness. Risk governments to work on strengthening health systems 
factors for NCDs are categorized as modifiable or non- to control and respond to NCDs at the same time as 
modifiable. Modifiable risk factors are characteristics responding to infectious diseases. On the policy level, 
that can be changed on the individual or environmental NCDs are not prioritized, despite the fact there is strong 
level. Non-modifiable risk factors are ones that cannot awareness of the importance of addressing NCDs 
be changed, such as age, sex, and genetic tendencies. among decision-makers, donors, and governments 
According to a report from the World Health (19). Few developing countries have committed 
Organization (WHO), a large proportion of deaths from significant resources to disease control, nor have they 
1 The presence of two or more NCDs in an individual.
6
addressed aging (18). More comprehensive policies and can be implemented to mitigate these costs, but more 
fiscal space will need to be developed for integrated solutions in reducing high healthcare costs, medical 
prevention, surveillance, and control approaches that waste, inequality of care, and hospital readmissions 
emphasize the role of aging and the growing population are required (7). The costs of treatment and productivity 
of older adults. Donors and development agencies losses related to NCDs will be devastating to societies 
also do not prioritize investment in aging issues or in and global economic development (7). Cost savings can 
interventions for the prevention and control of NCDs. begin to accrue with effective prevention strategies 
In 2002, only 0.1% of the US$2.9 billion dollars spent (e.g., behavior change interventions that can begin 
by the Official Overseas Development Aid on health promoting more healthful habits, such as better diet 
went to chronic diseases, including mental health and increased physical activity), as well as by adapting 
(18). Poor funding streams and lack of prioritization for health system strengthening efforts for better access 
NCDs affect national NGOs, which can play a large to higher quality primary health care and in-community 
role in reducing risk factors and building in-country disease management for older adults (29).
capacity for strong diet, nutrition and exercise habits 
(18). The Millennium Development Goals (MDGs), which 
were established by the United Nations to reach eight A recent report on 
health and development goals by 2015, helped focus 
global development efforts towards certain targets NCDs estimates 
and have led to “significant and substantial” progress 
in reducing extreme poverty and increasing access to that NCDs will cost 
safe drinking water, but did not address the expanding 
aging population or age-related health conditions, such over US$47 trillion – 
as NCDs (5, 28). A great deal must be done quickly to 
place aging and NCDs on the international and policy 
agendas or else the consequences will be expensive, approximately 75% of 
despite being preventable. the 2010 global GDP – 
Regardless of the root cause at the individual or 
population level, there is a strong economic argument for over the course of the 
taking action now. A recent report on NCDs estimates 
that NCDs will cost over US$47 trillion – approximately next 20 years. 
75% of the 2010 global GDP – over the course of the 
next 20 years (7). Existing knowledge and interventions 
2 Although the majority of countries are equipped with evidence-based guidelines, protocols, or standards for diabetes, hypertension, and dietary counseling, the WHO reports 
less than a third fully implement them (22).
7
CREDIT: TÉLÉCOMS SANS FRONTIÈRS
EXISTING SOLUTIONS: mHealth in NCD interventions
MOBILE AND WIRELESS TECHNOLOGIES (38-40). For improving NCD treatment compliance, a 
HAVE CHANGED THE WAY PEOPLE COM- systematic review of interventions demonstrated that 
MUNICATE AND ACCESS INFORMATION adherence improved most in behavioral interventions 
AROUND THE WORLD, and there is growing that reduced the demands of dose schedules and that 
interest in using mobile to improve health outcomes. had monitoring and feedback (41). For NCD monitoring, 
This section will describe the strategies in which wireless sensors, such as accelerometers, are being 
mHealth is being applied in the context of NCDs and developed with easy access to Internet for sending data 
how mobile solutions can be considered for the aging to clinicians or with algorithms for recognizing abnormal 
population. This section will also include examples of signs (35). Disease surveillance and home monitoring 
projects that are capitalizing on mHealth to prevent, using wearable sensors, including wireless links 
treat and manage NCDs to minimize the growing between mobile phones and backend systems, will 
disease burdens attributed to NCDs. Several of these become more sophisticated with time, and particularly 
interventions address older adults specifically, such as as aging interventions are delivered in the community. 
the Chinese Aged Diabetic Assistant (CADA) Project in Using remote learning options, health workers can 
China and projects implemented by ClickMedix, which improve their education and training on age-related 
are described in more detail later in this section (11, 12, health conditions, as their access to learning modules, 
30-37). literature and the ability to call other health workers 
increases. Tracking medicines and supplies with mobile 
Rigorous trials have reported the benefits of text messag- technologies also offers short-term benefits, as supplies 
ing, automated telephone monitoring, treatment reminders can be monitored to improve limited access to and 
and self-care support for improving health outcomes prevent stock-outs of essential hypertension, diabetes 
related to chronic disease management (12). For NCD and cancer medicine. Long-term benefits include data 
prevention, mHealth behavior change interventions in generated by mobile technologies producing insights 
the form of mobile phone applications or text messaging and facilitating discoveries in drug development and 
have been implemented for encouraging individuals to health care delivery.
exercise, improve their diets, or reduce tobacco use 
8
For NCD prevention, mHealth behavior 
change interventions in the form of mobile 
phone applications or text messaging 
have been implemented for encouraging 
individuals to exercise, improve their 
diets, or reduce tobacco use.
The field of mHealth is fairly new and evolving rapidly, access of electronic medical records for patients with 
and the evidence base for the effectiveness of mHealth chronic inflammatory bowel disease reported that 
in disease management – even without considering the technology considered to be useful for health providers 
aging context – is small and often derived from high- and patients was “multifaceted, self-care promoting, 
income country (HIC) contexts (42). Moreover, mHealth and integrated into the patient’s already existing 
implementation in the context of aging is rarely health and psychosocial support infrastructure” (44). 
discussed and, when it is addressed, it is almost never in These design characteristics of technology have also 
detail. At the time of this report, the link to actual health been demonstrated to be useful to other end users of 
outcomes is equivocal and requires closer scrutiny with mHealth interventions, and thus should be emphasized 
rigorous evaluation methods. This will only happen as in the development of other mHealth solutions (31, 42, 44). 
the periods of evaluation begin to last long enough to Additionally, the actual mechanisms by which mHealth 
assess actual health outcomes and once studies can solutions are able to motivate and encourage behavior 
be conducted in a variety of settings. However, some change that reduces risk factors for NCDs are not well 
feasibility studies suggest mHealth use in NCD-related understood, but are expected to be better understood 
interventions improves user satisfaction (43). One study in the future (45).
found participants with a mean age of 72.93 years 
were satisfied with a telecare system that monitored In Table 1, there are several examples of mHealth being 
their oxygen levels, pulse rates and respiration rates implemented for NCD-related interventions; however, 
(43). Although the study participants found the screen not all of them are specifically targeted towards older 
and buttons difficult to read and use, respectively, the adults. They are divided into cases from LMICs and 
findings suggested that improving the design was a HICs.
better option than not using the technology, and the 
authors called for a rigorous evaluation to assess the 
telecare system’s effectiveness in improving health 
outcomes (43). Another study that assessed Internet 
9
NCD-related mHealth Interventions in LMICs
APPLICATION 
OR 
IMPLEMENTING 
ORGANIZATIONS, PROJECT DEFINITION
LOCATION 
 IMPLEMENTION
The International Federation of Pharmaceutical Manufacturers and Associations (IFPMA), 
International Telecommunications Union (ITU) and WHO is working on the Be He@lthy, Be 
Mobile initiative, which aims to scale up mHealth in eight countries for NCD prevention, 
treatment, and policy (46). In the countries, mHealth interventions for NCDs are being 
implemented and standard mHealth operating procedures are being developed to integrate 
mobile solutions into existing NCD prevention and control activities. The first country in this 
initiative will be Costa Rica, where the government and local partners will employ mHealth for 
smoking cessation (47).
The CADA Project allows older adults with diabetes in rural and urban China to self-manage 
their condition through the use of smart phones (36). The phones will send messages with 
recommendations related to physical activity, blood glucose monitoring, blood pressure 
monitoring, weight and waist measurement, and eating habits. To design the applications 
better for the elderly target population, the members of the project: conducted clinician 
interviews, focus groups and direct observation of diabetic elderly in rural and urban China; 
measured usability; and allowed for iterative design (48). The user-centered approach was 
adopted to account for user needs, desires and limitations. The interface was initially offered 
in a prototype for its smartphone application CADA. The elderly were excited to use this 
application and found it to be simple and straightforward. The elderly expressed their desires 
for CADA to be connected to televisions.
ClickMedix offers mHealth applications that allow healthcare professionals to conduct 
home-care and specialist telemedicine services, including cervical cancer screening, mobile 
teledermatology and mobile teleradiology services, as well as HIV clinical staging and mobile-
based pre/post oral surgery from a distance. In China, home visit care for seniors is offered 
(49). Seniors can be visited at home several times, beginning with the initial assessment 
where a physician collects vitals and other body measurements. Nurses and caregivers pay 
subsequent visits to the seniors. These health workers use forms that have been digitized 
from the original paper-based forms by ClickMedix, as well as diagnostics whose information 
can be wirelessly transmitted with mobile data collection tools.
A non-profit organization called Arogya World has teamed up with Nokia to generate 
awareness for diabetes and encourage healthier behaviors that can prevent a targeted 50,000 
individuals in India (50). In one year, the program enrolled over one million individuals and has 
sent over 45 million text messages for free. The content of the messages were developed for 
cultural relevancy and translated into 12 languages. The partnership is currently developing an 
evaluation that will help inform a model that can be adapted and replicated in other countries.
First created for low-income women with type 2 diabetes to self-manage their conditions, 
a text messaging program leverages peer networks of women who support each other 
in managing NCDs (51). The effort is a collaboration among DPS Health; the University of 
California, Los Angeles; and Women for Peace in South Africa. 
10
Text 
Messaging Be He@lthy,  
mDiabetes,  ClickMedix,  CADA Project,  
for Health, Be Mobile, Multiple 
India Multiple Countries China
South Countries
Africa
NCD-related mHealth Interventions in HICs
APPLICATION 
OR 
IMPLEMENTING 
ORGANIZATIONS, PROJECT DEFINITION
LOCATION 
 IMPLEMENTION
The Center for Technology and Aging at the Public Health Institute has designed a toolkit 
that supports planning, design and implementation stages of programs that leverage health 
technologies (52). For the United States context, the toolkit consists of many resources 
including practical guidelines and lessons learned in remote patient monitoring, medication 
optimization, care transitions and mobile health – all designed to maintain independence for 
the elderly.
Care4Today Mobile Adherence Manager is a combined two-way messaging platform, 
mobile application and website for clients to improve their medication adherence, refill their 
prescriptions and have communication with their health providers when necessary (53). The 
mobile application and website offer opportunities for clients to track their progress. 
The Digital Health Scorecard is a downloadable application that calculates an overall health 
score on a scale from 0 to 100, which can be tracked and sent to a provider (54). The score, 
which reflects how likely one is to develop a chronic condition, is based on responses to seven 
questions related to lifestyle and health indicators (e.g., blood pressure, body mass index, 
physical activity, tobacco and alcohol use).
A healthcare company, WellDoc, Inc. works to improve patient outcomes for heart disease, 
asthma, chronic obstructive pulmonary disease, and oncology by using mobile technologies 
to deliver a set of clinically validated disease management tools (55). Specifically, the WellDoc 
DiabetesManager System enables doctors and individuals with diabetes, including the elderly, 
to collaborate on capturing, storing and transferring in real time blood glucose data and other 
diabetes self-management information in a highly secure environment. On the back end, 
WellDoc’s Automated Expert Analytics System identifies trends, which helps send educational 
and behavioral coaching to patients and decision support to providers. 
TABLE 1. NCD-related mHealth interventions in LMICs and HICs.
11
BJohnson Care4Today 
& Johnson Mobile Health 
WellDoc, Inc., ADOPT Toolkit, 
Digital Health Manager 
United States United Statess
Scorecard, by Janssen, 
United States United States
CREDIT: TÉLÉCOMS SANS FRONTIÈRS
In 2008, Beaglehole et al. published in the Lancet series (e.g., information, protocols, algorithms and checklists); 
“Alma Ata: Rebirth and Revision” on primary health provider-to-provider communication (e.g., user groups, 
care a specific report on improving the prevention consultation); provider work planning and scheduling; 
and management of chronic diseases in LMICs (56). provider training and education; human resource 
The authors reported that certain components of management; supply chain management; and financial 
traditional health service delivery, if enhanced, could transactions and incentives.3  
improve the prevention and control of NCDs in 
LMICs with respect to primary health care (41). These 
components included community resources, health Opportunities in 
systems, self-management support, decision support, 
delivery-system redesign, and clinical information mHealth...can be 
systems to avert NCDs, but lacked specific guidance 
on how to provide these more effectively for older tailored for caregivers 
adults (41). Opportunities in mHealth, as seen in the 
above mHealth interventions, have demonstrated the who take care of older 
capability of working in each of these components, can 
be tailored for caregivers who take care of older adults adults and can create 
and can create an environment for more active aging. 
In fact, a more recently published mHealth framework an environment for 
by Labrique et al. (2013) maps out 12 common 
mHealth solutions that overlap greatly and support 
the logical application of mHealth in the prevention more active aging.
and control of NCDs (57). This framework includes: 
client education and behavior change communication; 
sensors and point-of-care diagnostics; registries/
vital events tracking; data collection and reporting; 
electronic health records; electronic decision support 
3 Financial transactions and incentives may not be an apparent solution for minimizing the NCD burden, but models that encourage healthier behavior changes in individuals 
or incentivize better health services in the health system through financial rewards have been implemented with success (58, 59). The ability to transfer money on mobile 
12 phones makes these efforts simple and holds strong potential for health; however, previous efforts have reported high set-up costs (60).
More knowledge will need 
to be generated, especially 
on how solutions can best be 
tailored for older adults.
CONSIDERATIONS FOR mHEALTH RELEVANT  
TO THE PREVENTION AND CONTROL OF NCDs  
AMONG THE ELDERLY
DESIGNING AND IMPLEMENTING mHEALTH Mobile is a tool that can help deliver effective 
SOLUTIONS FOR THE PREVENTION AND interventions, rather than a stand-alone solution 
CONTROL OF NCDs, IN THE CONTEXT OF for managing NCDs among elderly.  The potential for 
AGING, POSES MANY CHALLENGES. The mobile and wireless technologies can be best met as 
most obvious is the lack of emphasis on older adults part of a larger solution or as a vehicle to communicate 
and aging in funding, research, implementation and or transmit information. Facilitated by an enabling donor 
policy. More knowledge will need to be generated, and policy environment, partnerships implementing 
especially on how solutions can best be tailored for mHealth solutions for NCDs in the context of aging 
older adults. Below are other considerations to take must find the best solution for the end user, which 
into account. may involve combining mHealth with existing agents 
involved in providing treatment (e.g., traditional healers) 
Solutions that can be adapted for multiple diseases or with technology already being used (e.g., radio or 
will match reality better than solutions that focus television, similar to what was suggested by participants 
on single diseases. Nearly half of older adults will in the CADA Project study).
develop at least one NCD, and co-morbidities and 
complex treatments are common (61). mHealth solutions Lessons from other mHealth projects, especially 
offering the flexibility to tackle co-morbidities should implemented in LMICs, are good initial sources of 
be considered when designing solutions for single information. Much mHealth work has been done in 
disease conditions. This does not only apply to NCDs, LMICs; however, most of this work focuses on using 
but efforts must plan for the coexistence of cancer, mobile technologies for HIV/AIDS or maternal and child 
diabetes, and heart diseases with HIV, tuberculosis, health. The experience and lessons learned from these 
and malaria. efforts are still helpful with regard to tackling issues 
13
related to design, training, connectivity, language and effects of text messaging on self-managing chronic 
culture. General processes learned from other mHealth conditions (34). 
interventions can also be useful, such as how the Mobile 
Alliance for Maternal Action (MAMA) project tested More evidence is needed for how the elderly 
different content for text messages with potential interact with technologies to make a measurable 
end users and then made final modifications, such as impact on reducing NCD burden. There is no 
making sure the tone of the content worked with the replacement for formative research and usability 
language and the message was both supportive and testing for understanding how end users will respond 
easily understood for users with low literacy rates and to the content and technology of an mHealth solution. 
education levels (62). However, usability research for mobile technologies 
focuses on younger populations and “considerably 
Existing theoretical and behavioral models can fewer” studies have considered the way older adults 
be applied to strategically leverage technology. interact with technology (67). Blaschke et al. (2009) 
Theoretical and behavioral models have been useful summarize some concerns for older adults using 
for integrating and applying technology into health technology, which include age-related issues (e.g., 
interventions,4  but are not commonly used and do not impaired vision, issues with manual dexterity and 
account for age-related concepts (63). Findings from a mobility, memory and cognition issues), characteristics 
review conducted by Cole-Lewis and Kershaw (2010) of current technology (e.g., small text on screens, 
on behavior change in mHealth suggest that mobile small keypads, poorly built technology), issues related 
content developed from theoretical and behavioral to attitudes (e.g., not feeling perceived benefits, 
models was more successful at achieving intended perception that technology is expensive), training and 
results (45). However, there is debate on the adequacy of support issues (e.g., lack of training opportunities or 
existing health behavior models to explain the effect of adequate support to learn how to use the technology), 
mHealth on behavior change. Other theoretical models and cost (e.g., technology is not considered affordable 
may be applicable, such as the Technology Acceptance for everyone) (68). The authors conclude that, despite 
Model and the Use of Technology Model (64-66). these barriers, there are enough indications that point 
towards the value of developing more capacity for 
mHealth solutions for NCDs in aging will need to information and communication technologies, including 
overcome structural barriers. The barriers that will mobile technologies, in long-term care, within health 
have to be addressed to prevent and reduce the NCD care and among family members who act as caregivers 
burden include regulatory- and policy-related barriers, (68). Additionally, as more of the world’s population 
socio-cultural barriers, as well as intergenerational enters old age, this segment will attribute more value 
patterns and dynamics of mobile phone use within to and also adapt more quickly to technology. Blaschke 
families (29). et al. (2009) states, “the situation is thus very fluid, and 
the evolving research agendas will have to adjust to this 
Gaps in knowledge exist for the effects of mHealth dynamic process” (68).  
on NCDs, but will be filled with coordination and 
sharing of lessons learned. The field is expected to 
move quickly and, thus, monitoring and evaluation and 
sharing knowledge will be critical for efforts to maximize 
their impact. Studies with rigorous evaluation methods 
are needed, particularly in low-income settings (34). At 
this time, data reflecting a study period of more than 
12 months have not been collected to understand the 
4  A published article by Riley et al. (2011) discusses how smoking and weight loss mHealth studies often had a theoretical basis, but most studies on mHealth in medication 
adherence and disease management did not (63).
14
CALL TO ACTION: REALIZING THE mHEALTH POTENTIAL
PRIORITIZING AGING AND NCDS IN POLICY resources, and access to regional and national NCD 
AND BUDGETS, COMBINED WITH ESTAB- alliances.
LISHING EFFECTIVE PARTNERSHIPS, WILL 
BE CRITICAL IN ADVANCING mHEALTH Researchers – Develop the evidence surrounding 
EFFORTS FOR NCDS IN AGING POPULA- mHealth and NCDs among the elderly, especially in 
TIONS. Recommendations from a recent report low-resource settings. In addition to measuring health 
written by Lemaire (2013) and commissioned by the outcomes from mHealth and satisfaction levels of 
Advanced Development for Africa on scaling up using mHealth, it will be important to share challenges, 
mHealth describe how to build, implement and successes and other lessons learned during design and 
sustain partnerships, as well as how to ensure that implementation to expand the knowledge base. This 
partnerships are able to achieve mHealth scale-up will also help investment and policy decisions in the 
(50). One of the characteristics of a good partnership rapidly evolving field of mHealth.
for mHealth includes clear roles and an understood 
vision. Developers and implementers, health care Governments – Prioritize NCD programs in the context 
professionals, organizations, researchers, governments, of aging, beginning with the implementation of existing 
mobile phone and network operators, and donors and NCD guidelines and protocols and integrating the WHO 
development agencies are all called to action with their STEPwise approach5 to NCD surveillance (70), and begin 
roles below in this effort to leverage the full potential of capacity building for NCD health services for elderly by 
mHealth in NCD prevention and control. encouraging institutions to incorporate NCD material in 15
health professional training and curricula (68). In health 
Developers and Implementers – Create, design, and systems, NCD services should be integrated alongside 
implement mHealth solutions centered on the context infectious disease services, particularly at the primary 
and be mindful of accounting for older adults as a health care level, while considering mHealth options to 
user group if they are not the main target population. extend service delivery from facilities into homes, as well as 
The technology alone can’t minimize NCD-related risk creating new services at the community or household level. 
factors or fix medication adherence issues, but can be  
a strong vehicle to carry effective strategies. For this, Mobile phone and network operators – Participate in 
it will also be important to consider the absence or this growing need by joining in partnerships that support 
presence of caregiver. NCDs and the aging population. Handsets, products, 
and networks should be developed to accommodate 
Health care professionals – Participate in the design seamless interaction among older adults, caregivers, 
and help support the link of high-quality mHealth and health professionals while considering privacy and 
strategies for the elderly and their caregivers to data security issues.
community-based health workers, professional health 
workers, formal care support, the health system, as Donors and development agencies – Be active in 
well as other individuals patients seek when they are developing appropriate fiscal space for NCD policies and 
not feeling well, such as traditional and faith healers. programs for older adults. Funding should be earmarked 
not only for projects that aim to improve quality of life 
Organizations – Join networks or alliances with other and access to appropriate NCD care for the elderly, 
organizations involved in aging- and NCD-related work especially in LMICs, but also for training health workers 
to coordinate program and advocacy networks and to respond properly to NCDs. Developing incremental 
tap into knowledge resources that are in line with funding for existing efforts and earmarking funding for 
international recommendations. For example, the NCD building capacity and supporting partnerships to scale 
Alliance offers a global monitoring framework, additional effective projects can encourage sustainability.
5  The WHO STEPwise approach is an approach to obtain “core data on the established risk factors that determine the major disease burden” and allows “each country 
to expand on the core variables and risk factors” (69). The approach offers optional modules related to local or regional interests” and uses three steps: questionnaires, 
physical measurements, and biochemical measurements. 15
CONCLUSION
This paper has described the ways mHealth can help avert risk factors associated with NCDs in the 
context of aging. These include: 
• Enabling and creating new resources in the • Improving decision support by offering guide-
community such as in-community or home lines and protocols on the mobile phones of 
monitoring systems with access to providers health providers or community-based health 
workers
• Strengthening the health system response 
to NCDs by offering flexible ways for health • Formalizing linkages between patients and 
professionals to reach patients remotely, which primary health centers through patient 
can also help alleviate the human resource networks, helplines, appointment reminders, 
crisis in health or simple phone calls from providers to their 
patients
• Allowing the elderly and their caregivers to 
take more control of managing their health • Digitizing monitoring systems for treatment, 
conditions by sending informational messages health records, and disease surveillance 
and encouraging self-management with information that can assist decision making 
telecare options on the policy, patient-provider relationship, or 
individual levels. 
Available resources, such as mobile technologies, can help societies invest in the health of the elderly 
and start to capitalize on their life knowledge and experiences without the fear of NCDs taking a 
devastating human and economic toll. Action must be taken immediately to prevent and control the 
growing disease burden of NCDs among older adults. As the deadline for the MDGs arrives in 2015, 
there is an urgent need on the international level to place aging and NCDs in the post-2015 agenda 
and to set explicit goals and prioritize strategies for aging and reducing risk factors associated with 
NCDs (5, 71). 
Significant challenges in public health, such as pandemics, infectious diseases, and poor sanitation, 
have been overcome with the invention of certain technologies that were accessed, delivered, and 
scaled up rapidly. This paper describes the imminent challenges societies will need to confront as the 
NCD disease burden grows and weighs heavily on the world’s aging population and existing health 
systems. With mobile phone subscriptions set to surpass the world population in 2014, mobile and 
wireless options hold strong potential for providing wider access to better health for individuals who 
may develop or already have developed NCDs. 
16
REFERENCES
1. A. Kwan, “Using mobile technologies for healthier 10. C. Déglise, L. S. Suggs, P. Odermatt, SMS for disease 
aging”  (mHealth Alliance and Pfizer, 2012). control in developing countries: a systematic review of mobile 
health applications. Journal of Telemedicine and Telecare 18, 
2. National Institute on Aging National Institutes of Health 273 (2011).
U.S. Department of Health and Human Services, World 
Health Organization, “Global Health and Aging”  (2011). 11. V. S. Ajay, D. Prabhakaran, The Scope of Cell Phones in 
Diabetes Management in Developing Country Health Care 
3. World Health Organization, World Heart Federation, Settings. Journal of Diabetes Science and Technology 5, 778 
World Stroke Organization, “Global Atlas on cardiovascular (2011).
disease prevention and control”  (World Health Organization, 
Geneva, 2011). 12. J. D. Piette, M. O. Mendoza-Avelares, E. C. Milton, 
I. Lange, R. Fajardo, Access to Mobile Communication 
4. R. Williams, R. Krakauer, in Global Population Ageing: Technology and Willingness to Participate in Automated 
Peril or Promise?, J. Beard et al., Eds. (Harvard Initiative for Telemedicine Calls Among Chronically Ill Patients in Honduras. 
Global Health, 2012). Telemedicine and e-Health 16, 1030 (2010).
5. United Nations Population Fund, HelpAge International, 13. P. J. Dyck et al., The prevalence by staged severity 
“Ageing in the Twenty-First Century: A Celebration and A of various types of diabetic neuropathy, retinopathy, and 
Challenge”  (UNFPA and HelpAge International, New York nephropathy in a population‐based cohort. Neurology 43, 
and London, 2012). 817 (1993).
6. F. Colombo, A. Llena-Nozal, J. Mercier, F. Tjadens, “Help 14. J. Rodríguez-Saldaña et al., Diabetes Mellitus in a 
Wanted? Providing and Paying for Long-Term Care”  (OECD Subgroup of Older Mexicans: Prevalence, Association 
Publishing, 2011). with Cardiovascular Risk Factors, Functional and Cognitive 
7. D. Bloom et al., “Globalisation and the prevention and Impairment, and Mortality. Journal of the American Geriatrics 
control of non-communicable disease: the neglected chronic Society 50, 111 (2002).
diseases of adults”  (World Economic Forum, Geneva, 2011). 15. A. Fontbonne, C. Berr, P. Ducimetiere, A. Alpérovitch, 
8. International Telecommunications Union (ITU), “ICT Changes in Cognitive Abilities Over a 4-Year Period Are 
Facts and Figures: The World in 2013”  (International Unfavorably Affected in Elderly Diabetic Subjects Results of 
Communications Union (ITU), 2013). the Epidemiology of Vascular Aging Study. Diabetes Care 24, 
366 (2001).
9. International Telecommunications Union (ITU). ITU 
releases latest global technology development figures. 16. M. Munshi et al., Cognitive Dysfunction Is Associated 
(2013). Accessed on: Access Year Access Date|. Available With Poor Diabetes Control in Older Adults. Diabetes Care 
rom: URL. 29, 1794 (2006).
17
REFERENCES (continued)
17. D. L. Musselman, D. L. Evans, C. B. Nemeroff, The 27. B. M. Popkin, S. Horton, S. Kim, A. Mahal, J. Shuigao, 
Relationship of Depression to Cardiovascular Disease Trends in diet, nutritional status, and diet-related non-
Epidemiology, Biology, and Treatment. JAMA Psychiatry 55, communicable diseases in China and India: The economic 
580 (1998). costs of the nutrition transition. Nutrition Reviews 59, 379 
(2001).
18. D. Yach, C. Hawkes, L. Gould, K. J. Hofman, The Global 28. United Nations, “The Millennium Development Goals 
Burden of Chronic Diseases Overcoming Impediments to Report 2013”  (United Nations, New York, 2013).
Prevention and Control. JAMA 291, 2616 (2004).
29. GSM Association, “Global views on potential of mobile 
19. Ebrahim, L. Smeeth, Non-communicable diseases in health solutions to address chronic disease challenges” 
low- and middle-income countries: a priority or a distraction? (GSMA, 2012).
International Journal of Epidemiology 34, 961 (2005).
20. K. M. V. Narayan, M. K. Ali, J. P. Koplan, Global Non- 30. PricewaterhouseCoopers LLC, “Emerging mHealth- Paths 
communicable Diseases — Where Worlds Meet. NEJM 363,  for growth”  (2012).
1196 (2010).
31. F. Mirza, T. Norris, R. Stockdale, Mobile technologies 
21. R. Beaglehole et al., Priority actions for the non- and the holistic management of chronic diseases. Health 
communicable disease crisis. The Lancet 377, 1438 (2011). Informatics Journal 14, 309 (2008).
22. World Health Organization, “Assessing national capacity 32. J. C. Smith, B. R. Schatz, in AMIA Annu Symp Proc. 
for the prevention and control of noncommunicable diseases” (AMIA, 2010),  pp. 757-761.
(World Health Organization, Geneva, 2012).
33. S. Clough, C. C. Quinn, in 12th Annual Care Continuum 
23. World Health Organization, “Preventing chronic diseases: 
Alliance Forum and the Integrated Care Summit P. H. 
a vital investment”  (World Health Organization, Geneva, 2005).
Management, Ed. (Washington DC, 2012), vol. 13, pp. 353. 
24. World Health Organization, “Global status report on 
non-communicable diseases”  (World Health Organization, 34. T. de Jongh, I. Gurol-Urganci, V. Vodopivec-Jamsek, 
Geneva, 2011). J. Car, R. Atun, “Mobile phone messaging for facilitating 
self-management of long-term illnesses”  (The Cochrane 
25. J. F. Fries, Aging, natural death, and the compression of Collaboration, 2012).
morbidity. NEJM 303, 130 (1980).
35. B. H. Dobkin, A. Dorsch, The promise of mHealth: Daily 
26. B. M. Popkin, Global nutrition dynamics: the world is activity monitoring and outcome assessments by wearable 
shifting rapidly toward a diet linked with noncommunicable sensors. Neurorehabilitation and Neural Repair 25, 788 
diseases. Am J Clin Nutr 84, 289 (2006). (2011).
18
36. J. H. Flaherty, “Smart Phones” for Older Chinese with 44. W. J. Winkelman, K. J. Leonard, P. G. Rossos, Patient- 
Diabetes. Aging Successfully 18, 17 (2008). Perceived Usefulness of Online Electronic Medical Records: 
Employing Grounded Theory in the Development of Information 
37. M. Zolfaghari, S. A. Mousavifar, S. Pedram, Mobile and Communication Technologies for Use by Patients Living 
Phone Text Messaging and Telephone Follow-Up in Iranian with Chronic Illness. J Am Med Inform Assoc 12, 306 (2005).
Type 2 Diabetic Patients for 3 Months: A Comparative Study. 
Iranian Journal of Diabetes and Obesity 1, 45 (2009). 45. H. Cole-Lewis, T. Kershaw, Text messaging as a 
tool for behavior change in disease prevention and 
38. L. C. Abroms, N. Padmanabhan, L. Thaweethai, T. 
management. Epidemiol Rev 32, 56 (2010).
Phillips, iPhone Apps for Smoking Cessation: A Content 
Analysis. Am J Prev Med 40, 279 (2010).
39. P. Mechael et al., “Barriers and gaps affecting mHealth 
in low and middle income countries: Policy white paper” 
(The Earth Institute Columbia University and the mHealth 
Alliance, 2010).
40. H. Cole-Lewis, T. Kershaw, Text messaging as a tool for 
behavior change in disease prevention and management. 
Epidemiologic Reviews 32, 56 (2010).
41. R. Beaglehole et al., Prevention of chronic diseases: a 
call to action. The Lancet 9605, 2152 (2008).
42. C. Free et al., The Effectiveness of Mobile-Health 
Technology-Based Health Behaviour Change or Disease 
Management Interventions for Health Care Consumers: A 
Systematic Review. PLoS Med 10, e1001362 (2013).
43. J. P.-C. Chau et al., A feasibility study to investigate the 
acceptability and potential effectiveness of a telecare service 
for older people with chronic obstructive pulmonary disease. 
International Journal of Medical Informatics 81, 674 (2012).
19

