  
  
E arly Warning System 
 
B rief Overview 
 
Access to essential medicines and supplies at the last EWS Information Flow
mile (i.e., service delivery points) is fundamental to 
P&S SSDM National 
the good performance of any health care delivery Programmes
system. This calls for, among other things, the 
existence of an operational health supply chain CMS RMS Regional Health Directorate
system with a workable logistics management 
Health Facilities District Health 
information system (LMIS) that routinely and Directorate
systematically churns out data needed for important 
decisionmaking at all levels of the supply chain. 
Routine/paper flow of 
Complementing a functional LMIS with mobile communication
SMS messages
technology can help address some of the health Focus Regions EWS website accessHealth Project
supply chain challenges, which include irregular and 
haphazard requisitions, and late and incomplete reporting of stock status at the last mile that have resulted in 
occasional stock outs of essential health commodities at the service delivery point. 
The mobile phone-based Early Warning System (EWS) began in July 2011 and is currently being piloted in over 
200 health facilities in all 10 regions of Ghana. The USAID-funded Focus Regions Health Project (FRHP) 
supports implementation in all Ghana Health Service health facilities, including hospitals, health centers, and 
community-based services, in three regions with the USAID | DELIVER PROJECT supporting implementation 
in the other seven regions. Participating facilities include all regional hospitals, select district hospitals, select 
health centers, and community-based health planning and services (CHPS). 
  
 Geographic Coverage: 
 Ghana 
 
 Implementation Partners: 
Ghana Health Service | USAID Focus Regions Health Project (JSI Research & 
Training Institute, Inc.) | USAID | DELIVER PROJECT (JSI) 
 
 Funder: 
 USAID, through the Focus Regions Health Project (FRHP) and 
 USAID | DELIVER PROJECT 
 
 For More Information Contact: 
USAID 
 Lindabeth Doby, MIS Advisor;  
1300 Pennsyvania Ave NW Washington, DC 20523; 
Email: ldoby@usaid.gov 
Focus Regions Health Project 
 Adelaide Amoako, Senior Program Officer; 
Tel: +233-24-471-8178; email: adelleei@yahoo.com 
USAID | DELIVER Project  
 Daniel Owusu-Afranie, Senior Program Officer; 
  Tel: +233-27-493-9749; email: daniel.owusu-afranie@jsigh.org 
 
33 
 
 
Data Collection 
 
Early Warning System 
About Early Warning System commodities, including family planning commodities 
In an effort to address some of the challenges during that period. 
confronting the health supply chain in Ghana, two  
USAID funded projects—the Focus Region Health Visibility of Stock Status 
Project (FRHP) and the USAID | DELIVER PROJECT— By clicking on the stock status levels on the EWS 
collaborated with the Ghana Health Service to take website, a manager is able to view the stock levels at the 
advantage of recent advances in mobile technology to regional level and down to the facility level.  
enhance logistics data reporting, visibility, and utilization  
for improved supply chain functioning.  Lessons Learned 
 • The EWS improved the visibility of stock status 
The Early Warning System (EWS) involves the use of for family planning, PMTCT, and malaria 
mobile phones by health facility staff to report stock commodities at the facility and Regional 
levels of 27 tracer commodities (HIV, malaria, and family Medical Stores levels. 
planning) via SMS to a dedicated short code on a weekly • Inventory management practices improved; for 
basis. By logging in to the EWS website through the example, about 81% of facilities maintained tally 
Internet, Regional Medical Stores are also able to input cards for PMTCT commodities and 70% of 
their stock levels for the 27 tracer commodities. Data is such cards were updated. 
then processed and immediately made available to all • Initially, timely reporting rates were not very 
relevant participants on a website accessible to all encouraging in some of the regions; however, 
program managers and participating providers.  reporting improved after supportive 
 supervision to sites. 
This information helps managers to intervene when • Stock-out rates have been erratic as some 
there is problem and determine appropriate commodities have seen declines in stock-outs 
interventions to improve the availability of health while others have seen escalations. Availability 
products. of stocks at service delivery points (SDP) 
 depends on a full pipeline. 
Evaluation and Results • Stakeholders were highly involved at every 
The pilot was assessed after six months of stage of the development process. This 
implementation. Below are some of the major findings involvement sets the stage for a successful 
and conclusions. implementation of the system. 
  
Providing near real-time stock status Conclusion 
With the introduction of the EWS, there is improved The mobile phone-based EWS pilot made key SDP 
visibility of stock status data from facilities through the logistics data available in real time. Given the challenges 
weekly submission of the stock status report. This faced by Ghana’s paper-based logistics data reporting 
provides real time stock status information for system, this pilot demonstrated that mobile technology 
management use. An improvement in the reporting presents a viable solution. 
rates will certainly improve visibility of stock status  
situations of many more facilities.  The system is being upgraded to make it more user 
 friendly and also to ease report generation. Once the 
The proportion of facilities reporting that have stocked necessary upgrades and improvements are completed, 
out of any commodity decreased from 32 percent in July the EWS will make it easier for managers to access and 
2011 to 24% by November 2011.  It is believed that use facility-level stock status information to guide their 
stock-out rates would have been even lower but for the decisions as they work to improve the availability of 
erratic availability at the national level of some program essential medicines and supplies at the last mile. 
34 Information was excerpted from: 
  http://www.jsi.com/JSIInternet/IntlHealth/project/display.cfm?ctid=na&cid=na&tid=40&id=4061 
