S MS and IVR t o Improve Family Planning 
  
S ervices 
 
B rief Overview 
 
Uganda has one of the highest birth rates in 
Africa. More than four out of every ten women 
wish to access modern contraception to plan 
their family but are not able to. Family planning 
alone would reduce the country’s maternal 
mortality ratio by 33 percent. In order to make 
accurate information accessible and address the 
unmet need for family planning, Text to Change 
(TTC) has partnered with the Program for 
Accessible health Communication and Education 
(PACE) to implement a one year pilot program 
using a mobile platform. 
TTC developed a flexible mobile phone platform that is able to use short message service (SMS), multimedia 
message service (MMS), interactive voice response (IVR), and data for spreading and collecting information. 
The pilot aims to tap into the enormous impact of mobile phones in Kampala, Uganda, and the combination of 
mass media campaign, project management, data collection, and monitoring and evaluation to enable PACE to 
get access to a larger group of people and increase real time interaction with its target populations. SMS and 
IVR are used to reach out to women, as well as check with service providers, to find out which women are 
using family planning.  
The goals of the project are to send mobilization messages and to establish a large social network by using the 
power of SMS; facilitate data collection and reporting from community health workers; make it possible for 
users to ask simple questions to health care workers; give technical assistance to providers of technical 
services or community health care workers; and collect and analyze data. 
The pilot began in July 2011 and has been extended to the end of 2012. 
   Geographic Coverage: 
 Kampala, Uganda 
 
 Implementation Partners: 
Text to Change (TTC) is partnering with the Program for Accessible health 
Communication and Education (PACE). 
 
 Funder: 
Program for Accessible health Communication and Education (PACE) 
 
 For More Information Contact: 
PACE  
 Stephen Alege; 
Tel: +256-759-813050; email: salege@pace.org.ug 
TTC  
 Veronica Yow, Programme Manager Uganda, Text to Change; 
Text to Change Africa, Katali Rise, Plot nr. 4a Naguru, P.O. Box 40187, 
Nakawa, Kampala, Uganda; 
 Tel: +256-754-157659; email: vyow@texttochange.com 19 
 
Behavior Change Communication 
  
 SMS and IVR to Improve Family Planning Services 
 
About SMS and IVR to Improve Family Evaluation and Results 
Planning Services Evaluation data is not yet available given the recent start 
Through the use of SMS and IVR, the project aims to: date of the pilot. The first phase of the pilot project has 
• Provide general information on family planning been successfully implemented. IVR was initiated in 
and the two most popular long term methods, February 2012, and text messages are being sent out to 
namely intrauterine device (IUD) and implants; the women and service providers on a monthly basis.  
• Provide information on which clinics can The project has been receiving regular reports from the 
provide the services for these family planning service providers. 
methods; and  
• Send follow up messages to those that have In addition, TTC trained PACE staff to manage the 
received IUDs and implants to encourage and closed used group discussion platform, and PACE is 
remind them about their next appointment currently working on creating the groups and inviting 
dates with the clinic. women to share their experiences of using family 
 planning methods.  
In addition to receiving messages, users are also able to  
text messages asking simple questions such as where to Lessons Learned 
find services or what to do in case of any concerns. • Realizing that illiteracy rates are high, a shift in 
They receive feedback from PACE technical staff. Each the mobile technology used from just SMS to 
group (apart from service providers) is subdivided by IVR was necessary to ensure maximum 
language (English, Luganda, Luo, Runyankole). understanding of disseminated information. 
  
The mobile platform also facilitates data collection and Conclusion 
reporting from community health workers via SMS. For Interactive mobile solutions enable continuous 
example, they receive information including the number engagement with the end users. Ensuring that the right 
of implants and insertions made each month, and contextual necessities for successful programs, simple 
feedback on whether PACE is adequately supporting guidelines, and good content are in place contributes to 
service providers in the mobilization of clients and the operational sustainability. Moreover, the usability of 
provision of services. mobile phone services is user-driven with regard to 
 language settings, user friendly interfaces, and speed of 
The project also enables closed user group discussions the platforms that can be used. Taking into 
via SMS according to geographical areas to encourage consideration the above, various methods were used to 
those that are happy with the services of IUDs and ensure end users can benefit through the dissemination 
implants to share their experiences and lessons learned.  of information and encouragement of discussion among 
This type of dialogue can address the myths and fears the users, as family planning methods are still very much 
held by some users. These groups are also linked to spread through word of mouth. 
PACE’s social media platforms.   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
20 Information was excerpted from:
 
  http://projects.texttochange.org/en/project/532/ 
http://www.texttochange.org/blog/how-access-family-planning-services-sms-and-ivr 
