CHIPATALA CHA PA FONI (HEALTH 
CENTER BY PHONE) 
Linking community members with the health system to improve reproductive, 
maternal, newborn and child health outcomes in Malawi  
SERVICE DELIVERY 
Implementation date: 2013 
In Malawi, a woman has a one in 34 chance of dying during childbirth1 while 71 children die for every 1,000 live births2. Knowing 
where to go for care and when to seek care are integral to reducing maternal and child mortality rates. To this end, VillageReach 
and the Malawi Ministry of Health (MOH) operate Chipatala cha pa Foni (CCPF) or Health Center by Phone, an mHealth 
innovation designed to increase access to timely and appropriate maternal, newborn and child health (MNCH) information, 
advice and care. 
CCPF’s goal is to improve health outcomes through increased uptake of home and facility based care practices among women of 
reproductive age, pregnant women, and caregivers of young children. CCPF is designed to encourage appropriate utilization of the 
health system, save patient time and transportation costs, and provide women and caregivers with greater control and 
opportunity to interact with the health system without having to travel long distances to a health facility.  
A variety of demand generation and community mobilization strategies have been employed to spread awareness of CCPF. 
During the pilot, community volunteers were chosen in each village and given a low-cost phone to provide those without personal 
phones access to the service. In addition, CCPF is promoted through community outreach events, health workers and print media. 
The initiative is currently implemented in four districts in Malawi and serves a population of over 300,000 women and young 
children. 
About Chipatala Cha Pa Foni 
CCPF has two main components. A toll-free hotline The CCPF technology solution has four main applications 
p rovides clients with information and advice on that sit on two different servers: the hotline server and 
reproductive, maternal and child health issues and refers communications server.  The hotline server manages the 
callers displaying “danger signs” for further care at a village client data from the hotline application (developed by 
c linic, health center or hospital.  Secondly, a “tips and Baobob Health Trust) and a notification application 
reminders” mobile messaging service provides regular text (developed by VillageReach).  The communications server 
or voice messages on reproductive, maternal, and newborn manages a Hub application (developed by VillageReach) and 
 
health topics. Messages are tailored to the client’s week of IVR (developed by Yo! Uganda).  
pregnancy or a child’s age. 
 
 
56  |  mHealth Compendium Volume 4 
Evaluation and Results 
In 2013, the Invest in Knowledge Initiative, an 
independent research firm, performed a 
comprehensive external evaluation on the 
CCPF pilot project.  The mixed method 
evaluation included a baseline and endline 
survey in both implementation and comparison 
districts. Data showed that there were 
significant improvements among CCPF users 
for the following indicators: 
 Increased use of antenatal care within the 
first trimester  
 Increased use of a bed net during 
pregnancy and for children under five  
 Early initiation of breastfeeding  
 Increased knowledge of healthy behaviors in pregnancy, including drinking more water and minimizing strenuous lifting  
 Increased knowledge that some traditional medicines can be harmful in pregnancy  
 Increased knowledge of maternal health services including number of recommended antenatal visits 
In addition, CCPF users were highly satisfied with the service, citing the ability to access the service from home (saving time 
and money traveling to the health center) and respectful treatment from hotline workers as major benefits of using CCPF.  
Furthermore, over 75 percent of CCPF’s calls are typically resolved without needing a referral. Therefore, the program 
reduces undue burden on the health system by encouraging uptake of appropriate home-based care.   
Lessons Learned 
 Working with partners supports scale-up; VillageReach has 
worked with partners to create cost-sharing agreements, utilize 
existing programs to implement CCPF in new areas, and to Geographic Coverage: Four districts in Malawi 
generate demand for the service 
Implementation Partners: VillageReach, Malawi 
 Government engagement is critical; VillageReach and the MOH 
Ministry of Health, Baobab Health Trust, Concern 
have a strong partnership achieved through engaging the MOH in 
Worldwide Malawi, Clinton Health Access 
content development, encouraging MOH officials to visit the 
Initiative (CHAI), Support for Service Delivery 
CCPF call center, soliciting and incorporating MOH feedback on Integration, Presidential Initiative on Safe 
implementation, and receiving endorsement from the Motherhood, Airtel   
Reproductive Health Unit 
 The rigorous evaluation of the pilot has helped garner support for Funder: WHO’s Innovation Working Group/UN 
expanding CCPF to new districts, as well as contributed to the Foundation; Concern Worldwide’s Innovations for 
Maternal, Newborn and Child Health   
global evidence base for mHealth 
 Using community volunteers equipped with phones can help Contact Information: 
increase access and generate demand for mHealth services in 
VillageReach | Zachariah Jezman, CCPF Project 
areas with low phone ownership; however, adequate ongoing 
Manager (+265 999 942 663, 
resources need to be allocated to maintain phones and volunteer zachariah.jezman@villagereach.org); Jessica 
motivation in order for the strategy to remain effective over time Crawford, Malawi Country Director 
(jessica.crawford@villagereach.org) 
Conclusion Malawi Ministry of Health | Fannie Kachale, 
CCPF leads to significant improvement in MNCH indicators among its Director, Reproductive Health Unit 
users while reducing undue burden on the health system. Expansion (fankachale@yahoo.co.uk)  
to four more districts by 2016 could lead to a greater impact by the See References on page 89. 
initiative in Malawi. VillageReach is actively working with the MOH 
and other partners to expand CCPF nationally. 
 
mHealth Compendium Volume 4  |  57 
