TC103:	Technology	for	Disaster	Response
Share	this:
 Tweet  Share 0  Share 0
> TC103:	Technology	for	Disaster
All	courses Response
 	$445.00
 	4	weeks
This	four-week	online	professional	development	certificate	course	will	explore	how	new	communication	and
mapping	technologies	are	being	used	to	respond	to	disasters,	create	early	warning	mechanisms,	improve
coordination	efforts,	and	much	more.
Course	Description
This	four-week	online	professional	development	certificate	course	explores	how	new	information-,
communication-	and	mapping	technologies	can	be	practically	used	to	respond	to	disasters,	augment	situational
awareness,	improve	relief	coordination	and	much	more.
The	digital	revolution	is	changing	disaster	response.	From	the	earthquake	in	Haiti	to	Typhoon	Haiyan	in	the
Philippines,	the	Ebola	outbreak	in	West	Africa	and	the	recent	earthquake	in	Nepal,	a	range	of	new	tools	can	help
national	and	international	organizations	respond	faster	and	more	effectively.
Some	of	these	tools	can	help	you	complete	your	work	faster	and	less	mistakes,	some	enable	you	to	summon
remote	support	on	the	fly	in	the	middle	of	a	disaster.	Yet	other	tools	help	you	make	sense	of	the	vast	amount	of
information	that	is	available	and	that	can	threaten	to	overwhelm	you.
This	course	looks	at	a	variety	of	real	world	examples	from	organizations	working	in	the	field	and	analyzes	some	of
the	key	challenges	related	to	access,	implementation,	scale,	and	verification	that	these	new	technologies	can
presents.	The	course	is	designed	to	assist	professionals	in	developing	concrete	strategies	and	technological	skills
to	work	amid	this	rapidly	evolving	landscape.	For	a	more	detailed	syllabus,	please	click	here.
Course	Topics	and	Featured	Tech
Week	1:	Introduction	&	Social	Media	for	Crisis	Response
Week	2:	Mapping	the	Crisis:	New	Techniques	for	Disaster	Response	and	Preparedness
Week	3:	Mobile	Response:	How	Mobile	Technology	is	Changing	Disaster	Response
Week	4:	Looking	Ahead:	Where	New	Technologies	are	Taking	Us
Featured	Technologies:	Twitter,	Facebook,	Tomnod,	OpenStreetMap,	OSM	Tasking	Manager,	Ushahidi,
FieldPapers,	FrontlineSMS,	AIDR	and	more!
Course	Objectives
After	the	course,	participants	will	be	able	to:
Critically	analyze	both	the	opportunities	and	the	pitfalls	that	emerge	when	working	with	technology	to
respond	to	crises
Connect	relevant	development	and	humanitarian	approaches	to	the	technological	strategies	and	tools
discussed	in	the	course
Manage	specific	software	platforms	and	utilize	various	technological	tools	for	responding	to	and	managing
crises
Design	dynamic	and	effective	strategies	for	using	technology	platforms	and	tools	to	respond	to	challenges	in
the	field
Develop	confidence	and	critical	self-awareness	in	working	with	social	media,	maps,	and	mobile	technologies
Course	Methodology
This	course	is	delivered	entirely	online	over	a	period	of	four	weeks.
This	course	features	several	live	interactive	expert	presentations	each	week	with	leading	practitioners,
software	developers,	academics,	and	donors.
Every	live	event	is	recorded	and	archived	for	you	to	watch	later.
This	course	also	features	a	unique	hands-on	learning	environment	with	animated	videos,	technology	demos,
practical	activities,	networking	events,	office	hours,	participant	presentations,	immersive	simulations,	and
more.
TechChange	recommends	budgeting	a	minimum	commitment	of	5-7	hours	per	week	and	scheduling	time	for
the	course	around	your	existing	obligations.
Participants	will	have	access	to	all	course	content	for	at	least	4	months	after	course	completion	so	the
material	can	be	completed	and	revisited	later.
Next	Session
None	upcoming...
Change
Contact:	techsupport	[at]	techchange.org
Terms	of	Use
Privacy	Policy
Policies
©	2012-2019	TechChange

