Figure 1. The mHBB pilot phase focused 
on select training and quality improvement 
indicators (red circles).  
mHBB
IMPLEMENTATION DATE:  January 2013 to June 2014 
Using mobile phones to support Helping Babies Breathe in Kenya 
Intrapartum asphyxia, the inability to breathe at birth, is a leading cause of newborn death, killing an 
estimated 814,000 infants every year. Resource-limited settings bear a disproportionate burden of 
asphyxia-related mortality, with global epicenters located in sub-Saharan Africa and South Asia. Helping 
Babies Breathe (HBB) is a simple, inexpensive, evidence-based, and skills-focused program designed to 
facilitate improvements in knowledge, skills, and performance for neonatal resuscitation (NR) among 
birth attendants in resource-limited areas. HBB has been launched in more than 70 countries since June 
2010, and has been shown to improve the NR knowledge, skills, and performance of birth attendants, 
and reduce newborn mortality. 1–6 However, monitoring and evaluation (M&E) efforts have struggled to 
keep pace with the rapid global roll-out of HBB. Data collection and reporting of key M&E indicators 
are constrained by a cumbersome paper-based data collection system. The resulting gaps, time-lags, and 
bottlenecks in information make it difficult for stakeholders to know when, where, and how HBB is 
being implemented, ascertain its effectiveness, and efficiently allocate resources.
About mHBB
The goal of the mHBB initiative is to develop a collection of HBB training and quality improvement data comprehensive and integrated mobile phone-based data among facility-based birth attendants in Kenya, and qualitative 
collection, reporting, and “just-in-time” refresher training comparison of experiences among end-users regarding paper vs. 
system to support global HBB implementation and scale-up mHBB web-based vs. mHBB open data kit (ODK) app-based 
for a wide variety of end-users, stakeholders, and partners data collection systems. Kenya was selected as the pilot-test 
(Figure 1). Key objectives include creating a system that is location due to high mobile phone penetration, long-term HBB 
simple, affordable, sustainable, feasible, effective, interoperable, efforts, and a strong collaborative relationship between Indiana 
and adaptable within a wide variety of low‐resource settings. and Moi universities. Utilizing funding from the Laerdal Foun-
The mHBB proof-of-concept study was focused on assessment of dation for Acute Medicine, 12 existing HBB paper forms were 
feasibility and acceptability of mobile phone-based methods for  digitized for use on Android mobile phones (Table 1). 
46  n  DATA COLLECTION
mHBB
Table 1. Description of data collection forms, end-users, and when 
forms are filled during HBB implementation in the mHBB pilot study
When is the form filled? system was an often slow and interrupted internet 
Training or Who is end Pre- Post- Clinical connection that caused data loss. Advantages of ODK 
HBB Form Q1 form? user? course course service mHBB include its convenience and simplicity, its ability 
Learner Training Learner X to reduce the rate of data errors and decrease reporting lag 
registration
times, and its improved efficiency, both in time and cost, of 
Course Training Master Trainer X
registration data collection.
MCQ1 Training Learner X X X
BMV checklist2 Training & QI Master Trainer/ X X X Lessons Learned  
QI monitor
OSCE A3 Training & QI Master Trainer/ X X X
QI monitor The most crucial lessons learned were regarding potential 
OSCE B Training & QI Master Trainer/ X X X sustainability and scalability of the mHBB initiative. Key 
QI monitor informant interviews revealed three key suggestions:
Teacher feedback Training Master Trainer X n Preference that an inexpensive Android phone, 
Learner feedback Training Learner X preloaded with the mHBB-ODK app, be provided to 
Delivery QI Master Trainer/ X each health facility and incorporated into the health 
checklist QI monitor
facility infrastructure, rather than a phone be provided 
Resuscitation QI Birth attendant/ X
debriefing QI monitor to individual birth attendants
Perinatal death QI Birth attendant/ X n All facility birth attendants receive an orientation to 
audit QI monitor
the mHBB-designated Android phone, and training on 
QI visit4 QI Master Trainer/ X
QI monitor use of mHBB-ODK 
1MCQ=multiple choice questionnaire; 2BMV=bag-and-mask ventilation; 3OSCE=Observed Structural 
4 n That the mHBB equipment (phone), software, and Clinical Examination; QI=Quality Improvement
data collection training package described above be 
Evaluation and Results integrated as a standard part of the general newborn resuscitation training and commodities package at the 
county and national levels
Convenience sampling was conducted among 253 birth 
attendants at 23 rural community health facilities in western 
Kenya and one large teaching and referral hospital in Eldoret Conclusion
that were participating in a large-scale HBB implementation 
initiative. Participants had varied experience and baseline Implementation research has shown that the mHBB ODK-
levels of comfort with mobile phones and technology. Their app is preferred by end-users and is the most feasible, 
prior experience with HBB paper forms ranged from one to acceptable, efficient, and effective of the three data collection 
three years. Birth attendants from health facilities defined solutions available in Kenya. 
as high-volume (more than 150 deliveries per month), Next steps include performing a limited implementation 
medium-volume (50 to 149 deliveries per month) and low- trial of mHBB in Kenya; assessing the potential feasibility 
volume (less than 50 per month) were included. and acceptability of mHBB in other resource-limited settings 
Five experienced HBB master trainers (MTs) and quality where HBB implementation is ongoing; expanding mHBB 
improvement monitors were provided with Android study to include functions related to motivational messaging, 
phones and prepaid data bundles. Birth attendants who incentives, refresher training, and integration with health 
owned Android-based mobile phones, tablets, or laptops were management information systems; and developing integrat-
encouraged to download the web-based and/or ODK mHBB ed mobile data collection systems for other Helping Babies 
app to their own devices, use as desired, and 27 of these users Survive programs, including Essential Care for Every Baby 
from 12 facilities were subsequently interviewed in-depth. and Essential Care for the Small Baby.  n
The web-based and ODK-based mHBB systems were pilot Geographic Coverage: Western Kenya, 23 health facilities in 
tested simultaneously with a focus on questions related to the Bungoma, Busia, and Kakamega counties; Moi Teaching and 
technical feasibility and acceptability of mobile phone-based Referral Hospital in Eldoret, Kenya  
HBB data collection in the Kenyan context, as compared to Implementation Partners: Indiana University School of Medicine; 
the current paper-based system. Moi University School of Medicine; Indiana University School 
Both the web-based and ODK mHBB systems were found of Informatics and Computing; Clark University 
to be preferred over the existing paper-based HBB data Donor: Laerdal Foundation for Acute Medicine
collection system, with the mHBB ODK app preferred Contact Information: Sherri Bucher, Principal Investigator, Indiana 
overall. The primary disadvantage cited for the web-based University School of Medicine, shbucher@iu.edu 
mHEALTH COMPENDIUM  VOLUME 5  n  47
Neelu Singh
