 
TRANSPORTMYPATIENT: FACILITATING 
ACCESS TO TREATMENT FOR OBSTETRIC 
FISTULAE 
ABOUT TRANSPORTMYPATIENT 
transportMYpatient uses a network of CCBRT’s 
Ambassadors: doctors, nurses, other healthcare 
workers, non-governmental organization staff or 
members of the general public living in the community 
all over Tanzania, who are aware of the services offered 
by CCBRT. The network was established in early 2010 
through a CCBRT outreach team who searched for 
appropriate individuals to serve as case finders/
Ambassadors. 
The transportMYpatient initiative works through the 
following steps: 
 The CCBRT Call Centre Assistant receives phone 
calls from Ambassadors, potential patients or their 
family members. Callers are asked a series of 
screening questions by a CCBRT doctor to confirm 
BRIEF OVERVIEW the diagnosis of obstetric fistula. The Call Centre 
The World Health Organization estimates that Assistant links confirmed obstetric fistula patients to 
approximately two million women live with fistula their closest Ambassador, if they are not in 
worldwide and that an additional 50,000–100,000 communication already. 
women are affected each year.  In Tanzania alone, 
approximately 2,500–3,000 new cases of fistula are  The Ambassador sends details of the transport 
estimated to occur annually. Many girls and women with costs required to send the patient to CCBRT. After 
fistulae must travel more than 500 km to reach one of approval from Program Management, the fare is sent 
the major centers for fistula repair, with some travelling to the Ambassador via mobile phone through 
as far as 1000 km. Vodafone’s M-PESA technology.  The Ambassador 
collects the cash at the nearest M-PESA agent (there 
Comprehensive Community Based Rehabilitation in are over 6000 M-PESA agents in Tanzania), 
Tanzania (CCBRT) set up the   transportMYpatient purchases a bus ticket, and arranges for the patient 
initiative at the end of 2009 in order to tackle a to travel to CCBRT Disability Hospital in Dar es 
significant barrier preventing patients with fistula from Salaam. 
accessing health services: the cost of transport.  Other 
barriers to accessing treatment include the cost of  Once the patient’s journey has begun, the 
medical treatment itself and lodging, which are already Ambassador informs CCBRT of the bus number and 
provided free at the CCBRT Disability Hospital in Dar provides the phone number of the bus conductor to 
es Salaam to obstetric fistula patients.   the Program Team to facilitate tracking of the 
patient during their journey in order to ensure their 
The transportMYpatient initiative mobilizes CCBRT safety. Obstetric fistula patients are met at the bus 
Ambassadors to detect and refer patients with obstetric stand in Dar es Salaam and are accompanied to 
fistulae and utilizes mobile phone technology to transfer CCBRT Disability Hospital. 
funds through Vodafone’s M-PESA service to cover 
transport costs.    Ambassadors receive an incentive of TSH 10,000 for 
each patient that successfully arrives at CCBRT with the 
correct transport receipts.   
46 mHEALTH COMPENDIUM   │    VOLUME 2 
 
 FINANCE 
EVALUATION AND RESULTS presenter of Radio FADECO (a community radio in 
Since 2010, 725 women suffering from fistula were Kagera) became a CCBRT Ambassador. In 2012, 
transported to CCBRT via the transportMYpatient Kagera Region had the highest number of referrals 
initiative. The number of annual surgeries at CCBRT has in the country. 
increased by more than 300% from 162 in 2009 to 501 
in 2012, largely due to the transportMYpatient scheme.  
CONCLUSION 
In 2012, 90% of patients reported that they were dry six CCBRT is now considering ways to expand the 
months after their operation and 96% said that they ambassador network to locate more ‘hard to reach’ 
were fully reintegrated into their communities. This rate individuals living with obstetric fistulae, including asking 
of recovery and reintegration means that patients were successfully treated patients to be ambassadors. CCBRT 
able to take part in activities they enjoyed before is also developing a National Strategic Plan to enable all 
developing obstetric fistula and were able to associate women suffering from fistula to access the life changing 
with their peers as they used to.  surgery. 
 
GEOGRAPHIC COVERAGE 
Tanzania 
IMPLEMENTATION PARTNERS 
Comprehensive Community Based Rehabilitation in 
Tanzania (CCBRT) | The Government of Tanzania  
FUNDER 
The Vodafone Foundation (main funder)  
CONTACT INFORMATION 
The Vodafone Foundation  
 Lucia Hayes, Communications Manager  
Email: lucia.hayes@vodafone.com  
CCBRT  
LESSONS LEARNED  Alexandra Cairns, Communications 
 In 2012, CCBRT observed that recruiting Manager  
community radio presenters as Ambassadors has Tel: + 255 (0) 22 260 2192 
the potential to  tremendously increase the number Email: alexandra.cairns@ccbrt.or.tz  
of patients who come to the hospital for treatment. 
This is evidenced by the increase in the number of 
patients travelling from the Kagera Region after the 
Information was excerpted from: 
CCBRT progress report on the VVF Programme. Vodafone Foundation. January-December 2012. Web. 
Fiander, Alison, and Tom Vanneste. “transportMYpatient: An Initiative to Overcome the Barrier of Transport Costs for  
Patients Accessing Treatment for Obstetric Fist.” Royal College of Obstetricians and Gynecologists. n.d. Web. 
CCBRT. Comprehensive Community Based Rehabilitation in Tanzania. n.d. Web. 
  MHEALTH COMPENDIUM  |  VOLUME 2 47 
 
LOGISTICS 
 
