 
TANZANIA NATIONAL eVOUCHER 
SCHEME 
nets with different features, allowing increased choice to 
those using an eVoucher, while also stimulating uptake 
by consumers paying full price.  This has helped ensure 
widespread distribution of LLINs to pregnant women 
and infant children. Increasingly, through the use SMS 
technology and mobile phones, eVouchers rather than 
paper vouchers are being used for LLIN redemption. 
ABOUT TANZANIA NATIONAL 
eVOUCHER SCHEME 
The eVoucher was designed to both mimic and 
streamline the current processes of the TNVS paper 
voucher. The transition to eVoucher eliminates about 
half of the steps required for the paper voucher. 
Step 1: A clinic worker issues an e-voucher to a 
pregnant woman or an infant’s caregiver via SMS to a 
central server operated by MEDA, the Logistics 
BRIEF OVERVIEW Manager. All SMSs sent to the server are free to the 
Different opinions exist among policy makers, clinic worker and reverse-charged to MEDA, similar to 
practitioners, and health workers regarding optimal dialing a toll-free number.  
approaches to maintain (“keep-up”) universal coverage Step 2: The incoming SMS is validated as having a 
of Long-Lasting Insecticidal Treated Mosquito Nets registered phone number, an authentic voucher 
(LLINs) throughout malaria-endemic regions of the category, and a patient’s clinic card number. It must also 
world. This case study contributes to this dialogue by come from a phone registered with the TNVS program 
describing an innovative mechanism called the on the MEDA-managed eVoucher platform. Once 
“eVoucher,” introduced in Tanzania in 2012. Since 2004, properly identified, the system sends a unique randomly 
Tanzania’s National Malaria Control Program (NMCP) generated voucher ID number to the clinic worker in 
has supported the Tanzania National Voucher Scheme response to the request. 
(TNVS), known to the public as Hati Punguzo (“discount Step 3: The ID number is written on the individual’s 
voucher” in Swahili), through which paper vouchers clinic card, taken to a retailer, and presented together 
were provided to target beneficiaries at Tanzanian with the TZS 500 top-up cash payment.  
health clinics. Vouchers issued to pregnant women and Step 4: The retailer redeems the voucher by sending the 
children are redeemed for LLINs at participating unique number via free SMS to the system. If the 
commercial retail shops, when accompanied by the end- number is valid, the server authorizes redemption and 
user’s cost contribution of TZS 500 (about USD $0.30). the end-user gets a net at an inexpensive cost. The 
retailer profit margin consists of the top-up cash 
Changes are underway to improve the current LLIN 
payment from the beneficiary plus any additional margin 
redemption system. In 2012, electronic vouchers 
negotiated in advance with the respective net supplier. 
(eVouchers) were introduced to transition from a paper 
voucher system to an electronic system based on 
cellular devices. To further boost choice and EVALUATION AND RESULTS 
competition among net suppliers, a second bed net By the end of 2011, evidence suggested that Tanzania 
supplier was authorized as a TNVS supplier in late 2012.  had achieved bed net coverage rates exceeding 80% 
TNVS suppliers are encouraged to introduce multiple nationwide1. This accomplishment was achieved 
44 mHEALTH COMPENDIUM   │    VOLUME 2 
 
 FINANCE 
following two mass LLIN distribution campaigns that eVouchers reveals net uptake rate by clinic, redemption 
together distributed approximately 27 million LLINs, and time lapse, redemption location, date, and population 
the distribution of over 8 million LLINs to pregnant segment (infant and pregnant women).  Data illustrates 
women and infants through TNVS. TNVS is now which clinics have high issuance rates and which retailers 
challenged to sustain that high coverage rate, although achieve high redemption levels.  Data also alerts Hati 
demographic analysis confirms that targeting only Punguzo program staff to abnormalities and changes in 
pregnant women and infant children is not enough.  historical patterns which can signal supply chain 
problems, allowing early detection to quickly remedy 
the problem. 
LESSONS LEARNED 
From its October 2011 launch through the first year of 
 The eVoucher depends on reliable cellular signals to 
operation, 453,486 eVouchers were issued and 257,148 
send the SMS, dependable processing of the 
of them were redeemed for an LLIN.  This number is on 
messages by the local aggregator, and a stable 
pace to double in the second year of the project.  
computer server to act as host. While the majority 
of clinic workers and retailers interviewed reported —————————— 
some initial communication delays, message transfer 1Although no nationwide data exists, smaller surveys consistently 
was accelerated upon introduction of short-code peg ownership of at least one bednet at more than 80%. A 
SMS in early 2012, although some network outages NATNETS (ITN steering committee) presentation in December 
still hamper the system. When signals are delayed, it of 2011 indicated that the Southern Zone had achieved 
is likely that clinic staff will offer a replacement coverage rates of 95%.   
paper voucher. 
 
 eVouchers are valid for 60 days upon issue. They GEOGRAPHIC COVERAGE 
depend on an accurate transcription of the voucher Tanzania 
number to the health card by health workers and 
accurate SMS entry by retailers. Some retailers 
IMPLEMENTATION PARTNERS 
reported receiving incorrect or expired voucher 
Mennonite Economic Development Associates (MEDA), 
numbers, requiring the beneficiary to return to the 
National Malaria Control Program (NMCP)  
clinic for a replacement.   
 Preliminary evidence gleaned from the e-voucher FUNDER 
suggests up to 90% of vouchers are redeemed USAID, DFID  
within 24 hours of issuance. A retailer stock out can 
pose a challenge for the program, but real time 
CONTACT INFORMATION 
reporting gathered from each retailer’s eVoucher 
MEDA 
SMS volume can facilitate prediction of stock outs 
 Mike Sarco, Senior Consultant/Project 
and assist the supplier to take corrective action. 
Manager, Business of Health  
Email: msarco@meda.org  
CONCLUSION USAID 
 Andre Rebold, Health and Population 
Adoption of the eVoucher by clinics and retailers has Office Deputy Team Leader  
been positive. In addition to delivering subsidized Email: arebold@usaid.gov  
bednets to beneficiaries, it has the additional benefit of 
 Liz Tayler, Senior Health Advisor, Africa 
producing considerable electronic data that is easily Region  
analyzed from a public health and a management Email: l-tayler@dfid.gov.uk  
perspective.  Data collected in real-time through the 
  MHEALTH COMPENDIUM  |  VOLUME 2 45 
