GSMA 
mNutrition 
Initiative 
Contents
1. Introduction
2. Product concept framework
3. Partnership model
4. Program activities
About the GSMA
GSMA Mobile for Development brings together our mobile operator members, the wider mobile industry 
and the development community to drive commercial mobile services for underserved people in emerging 
markets. We identify opportunities for social, economic and environmental impact and stimulate the 
development of scalable, life-enhancing mobile services. 
Mobile is the predominant infrastructure in emerging markets. We believe it is the transformative 
technology that enables us to put relevant, impactful services into the hands of underserved people. 
Since the creation of GSMA Mobile for Development we have partnered with 50 mobile operators, rolling 
out 104 initiatives, impacting tens of millions of people across 49 countries. 
GSMA Mobile for Development mHealth
In partnership with
The GSMA Mobile for Development mHealth programme currently operates the mNutrition Initiative in 
Sub-Saharan Africa 
Supporting Millennium Development Goals 4, 5 and 6 and is closely aligned to the UN’s Every Woman 
Every Child Initiative, Scaling Up Nutrition (SUN) and the Global Nutrition for Growth Compact 
Funders Research Partners Content Consortium 
Committed Partners 
Nutrition: problem statement
Child Mortality Stunting Global Productivity
Every day more than 8,000 36% of children in Africa under 5 Undernutrition is responsible 
children die from preventable are born with low birth weight and for the loss of billions of 
undernutrition related causes. as a result of poor nutrition, become dollars in productivity. It is 
Nutrition is the single largest stunted. Getting the right nutrients at estimated that 11% of GDP 
contributor to child mortality the right time is critical, particularly in Africa and Asia is lost to 
worldwide, underlying 3.1 million during the first 1000 days from undernutrition every year.
child deaths a year. pregnancy to the child’s second 
birthday.
Good nutrition is a pre-requisite for physical, mental and social development.
mHealth: problem statement
Due to the ubiquity and reach of mobile services, mHealth is in a position to help alleviate many of the 
challenges in the health system.
However, individual direct integration of each mHealth service with different mobile players result in a 
proliferation of pilots, a fragmented market and a lack of scale.  
This leads to disadvantages for:
Consumer Government Service provider Mobile operator
• Affordability of access • Coordination difficulties • Resource and capital • Resource intensive
• Poor user experience • Frequent overlap of intensive • Lack of scale
• Relevance and trust in services • Silo approach to • Medico-legal risk
content • No scale partnership • Limited revenue growth 
• Lack of clear health and • Lack of clear health and • Limited leverage of mobile 
economic proof points economic proof points money and other platforms
GSMA program objective
The GSMA is working to address this fragmentation in 10 countries in Sub-Saharan Africa, with the 
eventual aim of providing vulnerable pregnant women and women with children under the age of 5 
with free access to a suite of basic health and nutrition services, delivered through a single 
consolidated access point on their mobile phones.
Consumer
Women of reproductive age: include young women, pregnant women, lactating mothers
• Inclusion of nutrition
• More sustainability through revenue
• Trickle down to base of the pyramid 
Focus countries:
Cote d’Ivoire Nigeria Ghana Rwanda Kenya Tanzania Malawi Uganda Mozambique Zambia
GSMA activities
• Operator engagement - brokering of commitments across mobile 
operators in Sub-Saharan Africa at both group and country level
• Ecosystem engagement – brokering of commitments from broader 
industry stakeholders
• Content – sourcing, development and localisation of content with local and 
global nutrition bodies
• Product development and project management support
 
• Research – qualitative and quantitative research on consumers, 
community health workers and mHealth services
• Monitoring and Evaluation – development of country-specific frameworks 
to measure outcomes and impact
• Launch support – technical assistance and activities to generate 
consumer interest
Contents
1. Introduction
2. Product concept framework
3. Partnership model
4. Program activities
Current state
Mobile operator
Mobile operator
mHealth implementer
3. Multiple integration mHealth implementer Medication mHealth implementer
points for mobile reminders
operators launching with 
different implementers Reporting Dial-a-doctor
4. Less scope for sharing 
Less scope for sharing of 1. User experience 
of data points between Consumer
data points overload, multiple entry 
services points
Health messaging service
Health messaging service
Consumers are presented with 
mHealth service overload - limits scale mHealth implementer
mHealth implementer
and sustainability
Mobile operator Mobile operator
2. No scale, working on a 
piecemeal basis
Aggregation concept: consumers
Single point of contact, 
Suite of services can be part 
reduction in integration 
Scale economies and free - part premium to drive 
issues
business model for sustainability
aggregation
Pre-negotiated agreements Valuable cross sharing of 
data between services
• Global content provider
• Local content provider • Health messages (push)
• Health call center provider • Health facts (pull)
• Health survey provider Aggregator(s) • Connect to a Professional
• Drug authentication service • Survey
• Mobile insurance provider • Drug authentication
• Mobile money provider
• • Financial transactionmHealth technology providers
Primary Device:
Mobile operators Basic / feature phone
Centralised profiling of 
consumers
Single user experience, 
mutually reinforcing bundle 
Ability for aggregator to tailor of services
brand experience to One profiling process to drive 
differentiate operators access to all services
Suite of consumer mHealth services*
Aggregating services provides value to consumers at all price points and use cases
• Nutrition health service – target users will be profiled and sent a package of relevant, stage-based messages on 
Nutrition (to be offered free) 
• General health content (push) – users will be able to choose from a selection of health topics to subscribe to, which 
will then be pushed to them on a regular basis via SMS or other channels (to be offered on a freemium basis)
• General health content (pull) – users will be able to browse to specific health topics of interest on demand, when they 
have a specific interest area. This can include either information on health topics, or information regarding accessing 
health e.g. locations of clinics, health policies, etc. (to be offered on a freemium basis).
• Connect to a Professional – users will be able to connect to a healthcare professional who will be able to provide 
bespoke advice (to be offered on a freemium basis)
• Mobile financial services – users will be able to access mobile financial services, health related or otherwise 
(premium offering).
*This product concept will be interpreted in different ways in different countries to respond to local conditions
Core target market 
11.24m pregnant women and women with children under 5
Cote D’
Ivoire Ghana Kenya Malawi Mozambique Nigeria Rwanda Tanzania Uganda Zambia 
0.66M 1.18M 1.39M 0.33M 0.48M 3.80M 0.36M 1.43M 1.02M 0.59M
Source – WHO 2012, World Bank, GSMAi. Total number of  pregnant women and mothers with children under five, adjusted for % of 
unique mobile subscribers, adjusted for % of literacy and adjusted for HIV prevalence.
Illustrative consumer user experience
Dial USSD* shortcode
Do you want free info Profiling**
as a current or (provide gender, pregnancy status SMS Mother gets free Nutrition / 
expectant mother? & EDD / BD of child, intention to confirmation MNCH package 
FREE
subscribe)
Health content Subscription 
Do you need general mHealth provider content menu process as per 
health tips? • Wellness mHealth • HIV etc provider 
functionality
Connect to a Doctor Do you need to speak 
mHealth provider menu FREEMIUM/
to a doctor? • Conference room PREMIUM• 1-1 chat
Call redirect as 
Mobile Financial Insurance provider menu appropriate
Services Do you need help with • Receive info on insurancehealth payments? • Sign up
• Check benefits level
Marketed by: operator 
Branded: at operators discretion
Endorsement and awareness building by: government and health partners 
Technical aggregator / VAS: at operators discretion 
* USSD to start with, but depending on operator commitment and operational realities in country, might extend to SMS or IVR
** USSD to start with, but dependent on operator commitment and operational realities in country, might extend to Call Center-based profiling
Value to end consumer
• Ease of access to aggregated service through a single short code, instead of having to go through 
different access channels for different services
• One-stop utility to a consolidated access to a suite of mHealth services to address a number of health 
use cases as well as health areas
• Trust and relevance. Assured that the services provided have met with the approval of government 
authorities and that the health content complies to local as well as national guidelines.
• Reach to base of pyramid. Free access to a basic suite of health services to promote maximal reach 
to the base of pyramid (the Nutrition health service, as well as aspects of the other health services)
• Long-term sustainability.  Access premium content, allowing service providers and mobile operators 
to continue subsidizing the free component of the service
Contents
1. Introduction
2. Product concept framework
3. Partnership model
4. Program activities
Partnership model
The success of this initiative in reducing fragmentation depends on bringing together a set 
of partners within the mHealth ecosystem, and securing commitments in exchange for 
potential benefits which are relevant to them.
The GSMA has already secured commitments from a number of partners.
Requested contribution
Mobile operator / Opco partner
Contribution: 
• Free dedicated USSD & SMS short code (per opco) for mHealth services for consumers and health workers 
• Free access to channels for basic profiling and subscription of services for pregnant women
• Embedding of localised and approved nutrition content
• Adoption of aggregated consumer health service concept
• Free and premium components within aggregated service, to drive premium up-sell (“freemium”)
• Marketing of subscription services to existing and new customers, to drive adoption
Tangible and intangible benefit:
• Enhanced demand for mHealth services through a customised user experience
• Enhanced demand for core mobile services (voice / data / text)
• Single point of commercial and technical integration for content and service providers through an aggregator
• PR opportunities to drive ecosystem uptake, brand equity and CSR – global, regional and national
• Increased access to existing and new target audiences (rural and underserved market)  
• Cross marketing through integration of new and existing services on one platform 
• Reduction in churn through aggregated user interface and increased value proposition
• Leverage of mobile financial services and other current offerings 
• Broadcast channels for advertising
Partners already committed:
Requested contribution
Mobile content and health service provider
Contribution: 
• Contextual, localised and validated content and services
• Ability to contribute to a freemium business model
• Technical and commercial integration with aggregators 
• Commitment to update content on an ongoing basis where needed
• Sharing of service data 
• Potential ability to replicate across numerous countries and other operators
• Collaboration with partners
Benefit:
• Increased reach of services through reduced cost of delivery
• Increased discoverability of service with direct embed on operators’ mHealth menu
• Partnership with the operator's agreed aggregator(s) with pre-negotiated commercial and technical agreements
• New partnership opportunities with broader industry stakeholders
Partners already committed:
Requested contribution
Aggregator 
Contribution: 
• Technical and commercial integration with operators, aggregators and other stakeholders 
• Integration with multiple health service partners
• Customized user experience by country
• Replicable model across numerous countries 
• Sharing of data with GSMA, evaluation partner and health providers (principally Ministry of Health in each country)
• Strategic and operational commitments to mobile operators and end users
Benefit:
• Increased reach of product/service
• New partnership opportunities with the health industry
• Brand exposure and loyalty
• Maximizes the technical capabilities of existing platforms and services
Partners already committed:
Requested contribution
SIM and handset manufacturer 
Contribution: 
• Technical and commercial integration with operators, aggregators and other stakeholders 
• Direct embed on SIM and/or handset menu
• Replicable model across numerous countries 
• Sharing of data with GSMA, evaluation partner and health providers (principally Ministry of Health in each country)
• Strategic and operational commitments to mobile operators and end users
• Reduction in total cost of SIM / handset ownership – regional discount agreements (incl. distribution and after-sales services) 
to all qualified development sector partners
Benefit:
• Increased reach of product/service
• Pre-negotiated commercial and technical agreements with mobile operators through a single aggregator
• New partnership opportunities with the health industry
• Brand exposure and loyalty
• Maximizes the technical capabilities of existing hardware and SIM cards
Partners already committed:
Requested contribution
Government  and relevant agency 
Contribution: 
• Endorsement of program and initiative
• Identification of priority nutrition indicators
• Adoption and consideration of new interventions 
• Raising awareness at a national level
Benefit:
• Complement existing health campaigns via different mobile channels 
• Increased distribution of health and nutrition knowledge in order to achieve behavioural change 
• Alignment of the mobile ecosystem to national nutrition indicators
• Reduced capex and opex barriers to handset ownership and connectivity
• The starting point to building a secure a health registry of target populations
• Affordable and aggregated health worker services
• Innovative technologies for primary healthcare 
Contents
1. Introduction
2. Product concept framework
3. Partnership model
4. Program activities
GSMA In-country engagement approach
1. Engage government and validate priorities - engage early to align with government priorities 
2. Identify opportunity for mNutrition - quick assessment in country to diagnose key issues / opportunity and 
identify stakeholders to work with (“country feasibility reports”)
3. Conduct research - in-depth research on services which have succeeded / failed, as well as on drivers of 
consumer demand
4. Identify partner model - identify “gives” and “gets” for key players in the mobile and health sector, in both public 
and private sector, for optimal collaboration
5. Validate product concept framework - develop a product concept framework within each country which 
responds to consumer needs, as well as to stakeholder “gives” and “gets”
6. Secure commitments - secure both in-country as well as regional commitments 
7. Develop M&E framework - develop and adapt a measurement framework
8. Develop sustainable business framework - develop a business case for both public and private sector which 
provides for sustainability beyond the usual donor-driven mHealth model
9. Support launch - provide technical assistance before, during and after launch to optimize chances of success
Complementary activities supporting 
in-country engagement
1. Engage government and validate priorities
2. Identify opportunity for mNutrition 
3. Conduct research 
4. Identify partner model 
5. Validate product concept
6. Secure commitments 
7. Develop M&E framework 
8. Develop sustainable business framework 
9. Support launch
Regional business Global and regional 
development: secure mNutrition Content 
group-level development: develop 
advocacy: share best 
commitments within country-specific mobile 
practices and raise 
mobile industry content in Nutrition
awareness of 
mNutrition
mhealth@gsma.com
Thank You http://www.gsma.
com/mobilefordevelopment/pr
ogrammes/mhealthWeb URL
