 
SMS FOR LIFE 
Preventing malaria and other medicine stock-outs at the remote health facility level 
in sub-Saharan Africa 
Malaria is a preventable and treatable mosquito-borne Each week, automatic SMS text messages are sent to 
disease whose main victims are children under five mobile phones at health facilities requesting information 
years of age in Africa. Although highly effective on current stock levels and disease surveillance. 
antimalarial drugs are available, countries continue to Responses are reported via SMS, centrally stored in a 
experience stock-outs due to systematic database and made accessible to key health-care staff via 
shortcomings. It is essential to have adequate supplies the internet and email. The website provides the 
of drugs when and where they are needed. However, following: current and historical data on stock levels of 
this continues to be a major challenge, especially in antimalaria medicines, antibiotics and rapid diagnostic 
remote rural communities tests at the health facility and 
where widespread district level. The system also 
antimalarial stock-outs provides disease surveillance 
frequently prevent patients current and historical 
from receiving treatment.  information, in addition to 
calculated indices such as 
In response, Novartis, percentage of confirmed cases 
utilizing public-private under and over the age of five. 
partnerships, has led the The system also tracks and 
development of the SMS for reports on system usage 
Life system. Leveraging the statistics, such as numbers of 
availability of mobile phones received messages, errors and 
in remote areas, the internet system accesses, and  has a 
and mapping technologies, data extraction function.  
the solution increases the 
visibility of antimalarial stock Reports are created and can 
levels at remote health be delivered by mobile phone, 
facilities, thereby ensuring email or the internet to staff at 
district medical officers have all system levels. District 
the information they need to medical officers can utilize 
adequately manage reporting data for decisions 
antimalarial commodities at about transferring  
each and every facility.  commodities between facilities 
in response to stock-outs or 
Implementation date: make emergency orders to 
2010 replenish stocks that are 
running low. National health 
authorities can view disease 
About  surveillance and various data 
Each country’s system provider, guided by the Ministry such as numbers of patients, testing rates and test 
of Health (MOH), the National Malaria Control Program positivity rates, by facility, District, Region or Country.  
(NMCP) and the SMS for Life Team, configures the SMS 
for Life system to national needs. It can flexibly address Any mobile phone can be used at the health facility level 
the priorities of the local MOH, including better for data reporting, with district managers using smart 
availability of commodities, prevention of stock-outs and phones or internet to access email and web-based 
better forecasting of drug needs, and provide timely information. District medical officers and regional- and 
surveillance information to support best practices in national-level authorized users can use any personal 
disease management. computer with Internet access to view the website.  
46 mHEALTH COMPENDIUM   |   VOLUME 3 
 
SMS FOR LIFE 
Preventing malaria and other medicine stock-outs at the remote health facility level 
in sub-Saharan Africa  LOGISTICS 
Evaluation and Results -------------------------------------------------------- 
SMS for Life has been rolled out nationally in Tanzania Geographic Coverage: Cameroon, Ghana, Kenya, 
and pilots have been completed in Ghana and Kenya. United Republic of Tanzania, Democratic Republic of the 
Both countries have indicated interest in national scale- Congo 
ups. Cameroon has begun nationwide implementation 
and the program has also been implemented in five Implementation Partners and Funders: Novartis, 
provinces in Democratic Republic of the Congo. In Ministry of Health United Republic of Tanzania, Medicine 
addition, the system is being used to track blood for Malaria Ventures (MMV), Swiss Agency for 
supplies in all blood stocking locations in one region of Development and Cooperation, Vodacom Tanzania, IBM, 
Ghana and countrywide scale-up is planned for 2014. Google, Vodafone, Ghana Health Service, Swiss Tropical 
and Public Health Institute, Ministry of Public Health 
Cameroon, Malaria No More, Ministry of Public Health and 
Lessons Learned Sanitation Kenya, Safaricom Kenya, Management Sciences 
 The key to long-term sustainability lies with local for Health, PSI/PMI, Norad 
ministries of health. They should commit at early 
Contact Information: 
stages to taking over the system after successful roll
Novartis: Rene Ziegler, Project Manager, SMS for Life 
-out and to running it for an extended period, until 
(rene.ziegler@novartis.com),  Jim Barrington, Program 
it is integrated into the mainstream health system 
Director, SMS for Life (jim.barrington@novartis.com) 
and can continue to evolve in that context. 
 
 It can be a challenging and time consuming, albeit  References: 
worthwhile process to establish and manage 1. Githinji S, Kigen S, Memusi D, Nyandigisi A, Mbithi AM, et al. 
partnerships between ministries of health and (2013) Reducing Stock-Outs of Life Saving Malaria Commodities 
mobile phone companies. Using Mobile Phone Text-Messaging: SMS for Life Study in 
Kenya. PLoS ONE 8(1): e54066. doi:10.1371/
 An in-country presence would be very helpful and journal.pone.0054066 
early discussion on funding and funding sources is 2. Guidelines for the treatment of malaria, 2nd ed. Geneva, World 
essential. Health Organization, 2010. Web. 
 3. Novartis - SMS for Life (Cameroon, Ghana, Tanzania, Kenya).  It would be beneficial to find evidence-based 
Project Profile. World Health Organization. 2013. 
solutions through publications and pilots, as well as 
4. SMS for Life: a pilot project to improve anti-malarial drug supply 
a cost analysis of necessary full country scale-up 
management in rural Tanzania using standard technology; Jim 
prior to implementing the pilot 
Barrington, Olympia Wereko-Brobby, Peter Ward, Winfred 
Mwafongo, Seif Kungulwe Malaria Journal 2010, 9:298 (27 
October 2010). 
Conclusion 
The improved visibility of medicine stock levels at 
remote health facilities allows better management of 
essential commodities and increased availability and 
access. Sustainability of the SMS for Life intervention is 
increasingly attainable because of productive public-
private partnerships among local authorities and 
telecommunications companies, the system provider, 
major funders and NGOs, and their goal of eliminating 
almost all malaria deaths in Africa by 2015.  
  mHEALTH COMPENDIUM   |   VOLUME 3 47 
