TC011a:	Introduction	to	Excel	for	Data	Visualization
Share	this:
 Tweet  Share 0  Share 0
> TC011a:	Introduction	to	Excel	for	Data
All	courses Visualization
 	$45.00
Measuring	and	communicating	the	impact	of	a	project	or	program	often	relies	on	effective	data	analysis	and
visualization.	In	this	course,	you	will	learn	how	to	effectively	use	Excel	to	create	beautiful	static	and	interactive
visualizations.
Course	Description
Excel	offers	an	interface	most	people	are	familiar	with,	as	well	as	a	valuable	set	of	features	that	can	be	utilized	to
meet	a	wide	range	of	data	analysis	and	visualization	needs.	In	this	course	you	will	learn	the	nuts	and	bolts	of	how
to	use	Excel	functions	and	features	including:	INDEX	MATCH,	PivotTables,	Slicers,	and	more.	In	addition,	you	will
learn	key	data	visualization	principles	that	will	help	you	optimize	your	data	visualizations	to	best	communicate
your	data.
After	exploring	some	case	studies	of	how	other	organizations	have	used	Excel	to	visualize	data,	you	will	get	the
opportunity	to	practice	what	you	have	learned	through	2	scenario-based	exercises.
Please	note	that	alumni,	early	bird,	and	quick	pay	discounts	do	not	apply	for	this	course.
Course	Objectives
Basic	data	cleaning	using	Excel	functions	and	formatting	techniques,	including	column	and	table	formatting,
basic	macros,	and	conditional	formatting
How	to	create	a	static	report	data	using	Excel	functions	and	features,	including	INDEX	MATCH,	VLOOKUP,
COUNTIF,	sparklines,	charts,	and	dot	plots
How	to	create	an	interactive	dashboard	using	PivotTables,	PivotCharts,	and	Slicers
How	to	identify	good	vs.	poor	data	visualizations	using	data	visualization	principles
How	Excel	has	been	used	in	practice	through	2	case	studies
Course	Methodology
This	course	will	feature	animations,	screencasts,	interactive	presentations,	case	studies,	and	scenario-based
exercises.	A	forum	at	the	end	of	the	course	provides	an	opportunity	for	participants	to	interact	and	get	feedback
on	course-related	comments	or	questions.
Acknowledgements
TechChange	would	like	to	thank	D3	Systems,	Inc.	and	John	Snow,	Inc.	for	providing	material	for	the	case	studies
featured	in	this	course.
Price
$45	for	self-paced	course
$0	with	the	purchase	of	the	diploma	track
Group	discount	rates	available.	For	more	details,	please	contact	us	at	social	[at]	techchange.org.	If	you	are	not
happy	with	your	course	experience	for	any	reason,	TechChange	is	happy	to	discuss	refunds.
This	course	is	a	part	of	our	Technology	for	Monitoring	and	Evaluation	diploma	program.	Interested	in	learning
about	more	courses?	Browse	through	our	diploma	catalog	here,	or	check	out	our	main	catalog	and	FAQ	section!
Next	Session
TC011a:	Introduction	to	Excel	for	Data	Visualization
Change
JOIN	COURSE
JOIN	COURSE
Platform	Screenshots

Contact:	techsupport	[at]	techchange.org
Terms	of	Use
Privacy	Policy
Policies
©	2012-2019	TechChange

