Advantages of IVR mLearning system to deliver refresher 
trainings 
 Delivers training to health workers at their post: Fewer 
disruptions to service provision 
 Uses health workers own basic mobile phone: Does not require 
purchase of new phones  
 No Internet connection required: Can reach remote and rural 
health workers  
 Voice-based system: Can be used to train illiterate health 
workers and target health workers speaking non-majority 
languages 
IVR FOR mLEARNING PLATFORM 
Delivering refresher trainings to health care providers in Senegal  
SERVICE DELIVERY 
Implementation date: 2013 
In-service training reinforces and updates health care providers’ knowledge, but it is often expensive and requires providers to 
leave their posts1. When health workers are away from their posts for training, there may be no one else to deliver health 
services in their place. Most mHealth applications to train health workers require smartphones or digital tablets and Internet 
connectivity2,3,4,5 or use short message service (SMS) text systems to provide training, guidance, and updates6,7,8.  
The IntraHealth International-led CapacityPlus Project developed, deployed and assessed an innovative mLearning system that 
used a combination of Interactive Voice Response (IVR) and SMS text-messaging to deliver refresher training to family planning 
providers in Senegal, focusing on management of contraceptive side effects and counseling to dispel misconceptions. The course 
was aligned with Senegal’s national policies and international guidelines9,10,11; it used a spaced education approach, where content 
is spaced and repeated over time12,13,14.   
About IVR for mLearning 
The Project used IVR technology—possible with any type of The training content (in the form of 20 multiple-choice 
p hone—to deliver information via audio recordings and questions and accompanying detailed explanations on family 
allow users to provide feedback by pressing a number key.  planning) was delivered to the trainee’s mobile phone and 
The mLearning system allows for the delivery of more was compatible with all basic phone models. Whenever the 
 
robust information than SMS text but does not require trainee was available and ready—even if hours or days after 
Internet connectivity.15,16 The system used a set of custom the initial reminder—they texted the mLearning system to 
s cripts (“middleware”) that manage interactions between prompt a call. Trainees then responded to audio-recorded 
open source IVR software tools and learning solutions, questions using their phone keypad. The system indicated 
including Gammu, FreeSwitch, and Moodle. The project whether the answer was correct or incorrect and provided 
p rioritized open source technologies because of their low a detailed explanation via audio recording. The same 
cost and ability to easily undergo local adaptation.  questions and explanations were delivered a second time to 
the trainees until all questions were answered correctly 
T he application was piloted among 20 midwives, nurses, 
twice.   
nursing assistants, and health agents, chosen in coordination 
w ith the Ministry of Health, in two districts in the Thiès  
region of Senegal. 
 
68  |  mHealth Compendium Volume 4 
Evaluation and Results 
To assess acceptability, trained data 
collectors visited trainees at their health 
posts within five weeks of course 
completion to administer a post-training 
survey about participants’ opinions and 
experiences. To assess changes in 
knowledge, participants completed a 
written test—comprised of 20 multiple-
choice and true/false questions—at an 
orientation to the system (pre-test), at the 
same time as the post-training survey 
(post-test), and again during a supervision 
visit 10 months after the training.  The 
pilot application was carried out among a 
limited number of participants to allow for 
careful assessment and modifications 
before larger-scale implementation. 
Participants reported that the overall experience of using a mobile phone to complete in-service training was either good (35 
percent) or very good (65 percent). Participants greatly appreciated the convenience and flexibility of the mLearning system: 
60 percent liked the ability to determine the course’s pace and 55 percent liked being able to access the course when 
convenient. The largest criticism (35 percent) was poor network reception.  
Overall, participants’ knowledge of contraceptive side effects and misconceptions was relatively high at baseline and 
significantly increased (p < 0.05) from an average of 12.6 correct questions (out of 20) before the training to 16 out of 20 
after the training. There was a slight decline in average knowledge scores ten months after the post-test (14.8 out of 20), but 
the gains in knowledge were still significantly higher than before the training (p <0.05). 
Lessons Learned 
 An IVR and SMS mLearning system is appropriate, feasible, acceptable, and associated with sustained gains in knowledge 
 Trainees accessed IVR most frequently during non-regular 
working hours and the average call duration was 13 minutes, 
suggesting that the training did not disrupt health workers’ 
service delivery schedules Geographic Coverage: Two districts in Thiès 
region, Senegal 
 Providing pertinent written materials and incorporating different 
interactive exercises enhances learners’ experiences Implementation Partners: IntraHealth 
International (implementers), in coordination with 
 Sufficient time is necessary to pre-paid and post-paid (or the national, regional, and district Ministry of 
contract) mobile phone mechanisms before starting course Health  
delivery 
Funder: USAID-Washington through the 
CapacityPlus project  
Conclusion 
Contact Information: 
The IVR mLearning platform using a spaced education approach has 
the potential to be an effective, efficient, and low-cost means of Intrahealth | Dykki Settle, Director, Health 
providing refresher training and/or updates on National health Workforce Informatics (+1-919-313-9133, 
guidelines, policies, and protocols (see panel). The pilot experience dsettle@intrahealth.org) 
provides compelling evidence that the mLearning system could be 
See References on page 89. 
scaled up to other training topics and geographic areas in Senegal and  
beyond.  
 
mHealth Compendium Volume 4  |  69 
