 
ALIVECOR HEART MONITOR – MOBILE 
ECG 
BRIEF OVERVIEW ABOUT ALIVECOR 
The proliferation of mHealth tools has produced AliveCor’s ECG monitor comes with two electrodes 
several mobile applications available to health embedded in a wireless case that snaps onto the back 
professionals and general users, such as glucose of an iPhone. The device is launched via the free 
monitors that attach to an iPhone, as well as heart AliveECG app, which allows a reading by either 
rate and sleep monitoring applications. Through placing the sensors directly over the chest or from 
iteration, more advanced and easier to use products the finger tips.  Recorded rhythm strips can be of any 
are entering the market. One such product is a low duration, and are stored in the app and securely in 
cost, clinical-grade mobile heart monitor, or the cloud in PDF format for reviewing, analysis, and 
electrocardiogram (ECG) monitor, that fits over the printing through AliveCor’s website.  
back of a smartphone. 
Wireless technologies have enabled the transmission EVALUATION AND RESULTS 
of high quality ECG recordings without the need for a 
AliveCor’s Heart Monitor has been used in several 
conventional 12-Lead ECG. AliveCor’s Heart Monitor 
clinical trials and undergone rigorous testing through 
device is compatible with the iPhone, allowing for 
numerous medical professionals and in many ongoing 
wireless recording of 30-second Lead I single channel 
studies at various institutions. Abstracts were 
rhythm strips. Physicians and patients can record, 
presented in 2012 at three major cardiology meetings, 
display, store, and transfer ECG recordings from the 
demonstrating usability, accuracy, and the ability to 
iPhone.  
use the device for community screening. 
In 2012, the AliveCor Heart Monitor was FDA 
One of the studies included an eight-week study at 
cleared for the US and CE marked for the EU, 
the University of Southern California. Without 
allowing for clinical use to screen and monitor heart 
training, 53 subjects used the Heart Monitor to 
rhythms. Plans are under way for registration and 
record ECGs on themselves, and 61% of them also 
commercialization worldwide.  AliveCor will also be 
used the device on others. Participants transmitted 
expanding the Heart Monitor to additional 
weekly 30-second readings to the cloud. Transmission 
smartphone devices  
interpretation included various data such as normal 
60 mHEALTH COMPENDIUM   │    VOLUME 2 
 
 SERVICE DELIVERY 
sinus rhythm and abnormal electrical activity in the health providers and users the chance to learn about 
heart, or arrhythmias. and characterize heart rate and rhythms, and the 
ability to identify arrhythmias at any time. The 
After using the device, 24% of subjects reached out to technology and optimization of the device will 
their private physicians for a consultation and 16% felt improve public awareness of health metrics and early 
they had discovered a health condition previously diagnosis, as well as increase the availability of 
unknown to them. Also, 78% wanted to continue advanced cardiac monitoring on a global scale. 
using the device after the study had ended. Thirty-
three percent felt they were more health conscious 
after participating and 88% thought it transmitted 
accurate information. GEOGRAPHIC COVERAGE 
Currently United States, United Kingdom, and Ireland 
with worldwide expansion planned  
LESSONS LEARNED 
 Study participants found the device most IMPLEMENTATION PARTNERS 
conducive for use based on its form, portability, AliveCor 
and ease of use 
 The heart monitor can be adopted by patients as FUNDER 
a non-continuous, patient-triggered event Burrill & Company, Khosla Ventures, Qualcomm 
monitor Ventures, Oklahoma Life Science Fund  
 Patients who are more familiar with technology, CONTACT INFORMATION 
at least to the level of operating a bank ATM, are 
AliveCor 
more likely to be successful at operating the 
 Dr. Dave Albert, Founder       
device when they are symptomatic 
Email: marketing@alivecor.com 
 The device may be useful to record daily tracings 
of patients for post-procedure follow-ups who do 
not already have an implanted cardiac device 
 While the device has several potential uses, it 
may not catch the initiation of an arrhythmia, 
which has diagnostic value, or be able to identify 
short arrhythmias 
CONCLUSION 
A clinical quality, low cost heart monitor that can be 
easily and intuitively linked to a smartphone provides 
Information was excerpted from:  
“AliveCor – Heart Monitor.” AliveCor, Inc. 2013. Web. 
Gaglani, Shiv. “AliveCor Takes Heart in Initial Findings of iPhone ECG Study.” Medgadget. 30 March 2012. Web. 
Empson, Rip. “Mobile Health Moves Forward: FDA Approves AliveCor’s Heart Monitor For The iPhone.” TechCrunch. 4 December 2012 . Web. 
Misra, Satish, and Iltifat Husain. “Physician review of the iPhone AliveCor ECG heart monitor, the clinical reality of the device.” iMedicalApps. 12 March 2013. Web. 
  MHEALTH COMPENDIUM  |  VOLUME 2 61 
