 Event	Calendar
WEBINARS
Delivering	mHealth	Education	at	Scale	in	India:				Lessons	Learned
Presented	By:
BBC	MEDIA	ACTION
START: END:
February	26,	2014	at	11:00AM	(US	East) February	26,	2014	at	12:01PM	(US	East)
RECORDING	AVAILABLE
BBC	Media	Action	will	discuss	scaling	mobile	health	education	services	for	hundreds	of	thousands	of	frontline	health	workers
across	the	Indian	states	of	Bihar,	Orissa	and	Uttar	Pradesh	-	in	partnership	with	six	of	the	largest	mobile	operators	in	India:
Airtel,	BSNL,	Idea,	Reliance,	TATA	and	Vodafone.	BBC	Media	Action's	award-winning	mobile	health	education	services	-
Mobile	Kunji	and	Academy	-	have	just	been	approved	for	national	roll	out	by	the	health	ministry	in	India.
	
Presenter
Sara	Chamberlain,	Head	of	ICT,	BBC	Media	Action,	India
	
BBC	Media	Action	works	on	the	Ananya	programme	in	Bihar	with	the	Bill	&	Melinda	Gates	Foundation,	the	state	government,
Pathfinder	International	and	technology	solution	providers:	OnMobile	Global	Ltd,	the	Grameen	Foundation	and	Dimagi.	The
Ananya	programme	involves	a	range	of	partners	including	CARE,	WHP,	IFC,	PCI	and	PSI.	For	background	information	on	the
BBC	Media	Action’s	work	in	mHealth,	see	their	report,	“Health	on	the	Move”		and	their	microsite	their	work	in	Bihar	at
www.rethink1000days.org.
The	webinar	recording	and	slides	will	be	posted	here	after	the	webinar.	
	
Collateral
mHealth_at_scale_BBC_Media_Action_Feb_2014.pdf
Webinar	Recording
https://nethope.webex.com/nethope/lsr.php?RCID=b91043261fb14442888f4bad81e4eea8
RELATED
Connecting	Dollars	to	Outcomes
71%	of	Nonprofits	Struggle	to	Measure	Outcomes:	New	Study	Reveals	Insight	&	Hope
Member-only	Webinar:	Update	on	Microsoft’s	AI	for	Humanitarian	Action	Program
Information	about	5	selected	projects,	lessons	learned,	and	more!
Venezuelan	Migrant	Crisis	-	Humanitarians	in	Action
An	informational	webinar	to	get	an	update	on	NetHope	member	organizations'	and	our	tech	partners	collective	work	and
learn	how	you	can	help.
Tweets	by	@NetHope_org
 VIEW	TAGS
EMAIL	NEWSLETTER
SIGN	UP
    
Website	designed	by
Our	website	uses	Cookies	to	enhance	yourS	eitxepmearpie|ncPeri	vaancdy	Pto	lmicyea|suTererm,	us	nodf	Seerrsvtiacend,	and	improve	our	website.	By	continuing
to	use	this	website	you	agree	to	the	use	of	Cookies.	If	you	do	not	agree,	you	can	decide	to	disable	Cookies	in	your	web
to	use	this	website	you	agree	to	the	use	of	Cookies.	If	you	do	not	agree,	you	can	decide	to	disable	Cookies	in	your	web
browser.	Learn	More	About	Cookies
