Citizens can report 
suspected cases using their 
mobile phones, and can 
access resources to locate 
and ascertain available 
capacities of health clinics.
EBOLATXT
IMPLEMENTATION DATE:  September 2014 to March 2015 (ongoing in Sierra Leone) 
Using SMS for social mobilization and reporting on the Ebola outbreak 
The recent Ebola outbreak resulted in thousands of deaths due to a lack of knowledge and 
misinformation about containing the virus. EbolaTxt was conceived from Text to Change (TTC)’s 
experience in other health-related campaigns. EbolaTxT provides contextualized, personal, accurate, 
and reliable information about Ebola in times of crisis through the use of short message service (SMS), 
an instantaneous, interactive, and cost-effective tool to reach people quickly. The aim of EbolaTxT is 
to prevent the spread of the Ebola virus. Due to the interactivity of EbolaTxT with other platforms in 
mobile phones, it can be used for improving awareness or education. Citizens can report suspected 
cases using their mobile phones, and can access resources to locate and ascertain available capacities 
of health clinics. The scalability of EbolaTxt enables it to be deployed across five countries within four 
months. TTC’s in-house SMS platform Vusion can reach a number of people, primarily also through 
TTC’s connection with different mobile providers in multiple countries.
About EbolaTxt
In the fight against Ebola, mobile phones can save lives. In Mali, EbolaTxt was promoted through flyers that Access to mobile phones enables community members to were distributed in strategic locations across markets, bus 
gain life-saving information, even in some of the poorest stations, schools, health centers, and other busy areas. In 
regions. Leveraging on high mobile penetration, TTC has other countries, TTC has launched a radio and marketing 
launched several large-scale, interactive SMS campaigns since campaign using different radio stations to mobilize people 
September 2014 in Sierra Leone, Mali, Ghana, Uganda, to participate. The right communication mix is necessary 
and Malawi to enable awareness-raising, social mobilization, to tell people about EbolaTxT and let them know that 
and reporting on the Ebola outbreak. The interactivity participation is free of charge. 
of EbolaTxT ensures that community members are truly Participants can opt into an interactive quiz using the 
involved and the contextualized content makes sure that they keyword EBOLA and are then prompted through a set of 
understand important information about Ebola.
16  n  BEHAVIOR CHANGE COMMUNICATION
educational questions on the disease. Participants receive Conclusion 
further informative messages on prevention, control, and 
treatment. As there is currently no known treatment or The most innovative aspect of EbolaTxT is the way it 
vaccine, prevention and control of Ebola is focused on maintained simplicity and the use of technology best fit for 
raising awareness regarding risk factors of Ebola infection. the target population. Communication success is greatly 
An example is shown below as it relates to the use of influenced by context, therefore it is important to know the 
improving hygiene, one of the best ways to fight the virus. target audience to make sure that the right message reaches 
the right people at the right time.
Evaluation and Results However, certain challenges in implementation remain: 
initial hesitation from the Ministry of Health in Mali was 
In EbolaTxt campaigns in Malawi, Ghana, and Mali, TTC a result of ensuring that messaging does not create panic 
has reached and interacted with 30,000 individual partic- among citizens. It took some time to assuage concerns that 
ipants. Since the first case of Ebola was detected in Mali, messages with the right context can dismiss fears instead. In 
there was an increase of over 65 percent of participants Mali, EbolaTxT was also part of a larger distance-learning 
requesting information about Ebola from their own mobile program to inform health professionals nationwide on major 
handsets in just a few days. The campaign in Sierra Leone aspects of the disease as another measure of the national 
aims to reach over 50,000 unique respondents and is on- contingency plan.
going as of March 2015. Follow-up text messages were sent Next steps include dissemination of information regarding 
and TTC’s call centers were to be used for phone interviews reconstruction in actively hit areas in Sierra Leone.  
in Mali to measure the impact of the campaign among the In countries where it was only a threat, the campaign will 
participants by testing their knowledge levels. end as there is no longer a need. EbolaTxT showed that it  
The incoming responses from TTC’s interactive campaign is possible to attain scale during times of emergency if  
are useful for monitoring and reporting so that respondents mobile technology is combined with the appropriate 
can be contacted for additional information. This way, the partners, the contextualized communication mix, and 
results for EbolaTxT are useful for policymaking by local personalized content. n
authorities and human-interest organizations working in the 
affected areas. TTC is currently liaising with governments so 
as to establish a rapid monitoring and reporting system to 
facilitate the health networks in rapidly identifying outbreaks 
and responding to them swiftly and effectively.
Lessons Learned 
n Importance of local context in disseminating mes-
saging: During the outbreak, unfounded fears and rumors 
spread quickly and widely. Due to the sensitivity of the 
messages, their script and format need to be well-designed 
and discussed with all partners, taking into consideration 
cultural beliefs and traditions of certain villages and tribes. 
Together with local experts, colleagues, and partners, TTC 
ensured that citizens received the appropriate information Geographic Coverage: Mali (Bamako and two health districts 
in the appropriate language to protect themselves and pre- bordering Guinea), Sierra Leone, Ghana, Uganda, and Malawi 
vent dangerous misunderstandings.  (nationwide)
Implementation Partners: This awareness campaign is a collabo-
n Interactivity is a win-win situation. Due the interactivity ration of several partners within the Dutch Connect4Change 
of TTC’s campaigns, data gathered was used for compara- consortium, including TTC, MUSO Ladamunen, CERTES, and 
tive analyses, to measure effectiveness of campaigns, current International Institute for Communication and Development 
knowledge levels, prevalence of health-related myths, etc. (IICD); Mali Ministry of Health; UNICEF/Sierra Leone; the 
For example, questions on Ebola enabled TTC’s partners Association of Church-Based Development NGOs (ACDEP) in Ghana
to find out the current knowledge level of Ebola awareness 
among community members. This created opportunity Donor: Dutch Ministry of Foreign Affairs
for partners to improve their understanding of the target Contact Information: Veronica Yow, Program Manager, TTC 
groups and resulted in increased effectiveness of their work. Mobile, vyow@ttcmobile.com
mHEALTH COMPENDIUM  VOLUME 5  n  17
