The use of ICT tools in this 
field-based approach to HIV 
prevention for at-risk youth 
in Kenya has been critical to 
success of efficient service 
delivery and data collection 
both at mobile events and 
during the follow-up period. 
MP3YOUTH
IMPLEMENTATION DATE:  November 2014 to July 2015 
Implementing a smartphone-based biometric system 
for participant identification and tracking
Sub-Saharan Africa remains the region most heavily affected by HIV with nearly 70 percent of the 
34 million people living with the disease globally residing in the region nearly three decades into the 
epidemic.1,2 Youth aged 15 to 24 bear the highest burden of new infections and account for 80 percent 
of the 1.9 million new infections in sub-Saharan Africa each year.3 HIV is a major crisis in Nyanza, 
Kenya, with HIV prevalence of 15.1 percent among those aged 15 to 49 compared to national 
prevalence of 5.6 percent.4 Few Ministry of Health facilities are tailored specifically to the needs of 
youth in this region. MP3-Youth is a pilot study to evaluate the feasibility and acceptability of a gender-
specific combination HIV-prevention package in high-burden settings. MP3-Youth aims to pilot the 
combination package in a mobile health delivery format using an integrated HIV combination/HIV 
prevention services approach in Kenya. Feasibility and acceptability will be determined by examining 
uptake and coverage of the intervention package among youth. 
About MP3 Youth
The MP3-Youth package for all youth includes HIV months to document behaviors/adherence related to selected counseling and testing (HTC) and linkage-to-care for the interventions via unstructured supplementary service data 
HIV infected. For males it also includes condoms and medical (USSD) and short message service (SMS).5
male circumcision (MMC). For females it also includes Study procedures (combination HIV-prevention package) 
contraception (male/female condoms) and family planning. are offered in a mobile event in tents erected for two weeks. 
HIV-uninfected females who meet high-risk criteria and are At enrollment, each participant’s biometrics are collected 
out of school can access pre-exposure prophylaxis (PrEP) or, using Mobiotrics, a smartphone-based system for identifica-
for eligible girls in-school, conditional cash transfer (CCT) to tion and follow-up at the different service delivery points.6 
continue with classes. Youth subcohorts are followed up for 12 Mobiotrics is an offline/field-settings biometric system 
32  n  DATA COLLECTION
Jasmine Buttolph, NYU
running on Android devices. A fingerprint reader attached Consistent with other studies, participants have no objec-
to the device captures participant fingerprints. Mobiotrics tions to follow-up data being collected via mobile phone text 
converts the fingerprint image to an alphanumeric identifier; message survey.5
the image is not stored. Once registered, fingerprint scans 
identify MP3-Youth participants at different service deliv- Lessons Learned 
ery points. Biometric information is stored locally on the 
tablet and synchronized across devices in different tents via 
n Plan for adequate training and troubleshooting of  
a secure Wi-Fi direct connection; this guards against double new technology. 
enrollment and enhances tracking of participants’ access to 
multiple intervention components.7 Via the secure wireless n Use portable backup-batteries that can charge devices 
local area network, the biometric data are available in real in the field without disrupting use. 
time as participants move from tent to tent. Study staff use n Sensitize investigators and ethical review committees 
the software to collect data in each tent, ensuring all staff on new forms of data safety; mistrust around new digital 
know what services the participant has accessed, the results platforms exists, including around SMS security, hosting 
of tests (HIV, pregnancy, etc.), and key responses to behav- data in the cloud, and data sharing across devices, etc. 
ioral questions collected in other tents. Tablets are used to 
n Plan for potentially lengthy biometric registration 
collect data via Open Data Kit (ODK). ODK is an Android because many finger images need to be taken to facilitate 
application used on smartphones/tablets for electronic data re-identification, which is fast. 
collection. In our study, ODK is used for behavioral and 
clinical data collection.8 n Establish a secure Wi-Fi network. All fingerprints and 
data need to be synced and available in real time at all 
service points. Using Bluetooth for the data synchroniza-
Evaluation and Results tion was tested, but was not as efficient as the Wi-Fi  
network. The network does not require airtime or  
The mobile events will be completed in 2015, and evaluation cellular reception as it is a local network.  
will include feasibility, acceptability, and impact measures. 
The aim is to reach n=1,000 youth through 10 to 15 mobile Conclusion
events. In the first five events, 466 youth were screened and 
364 were successfully enrolled in the study using biometrics The use of ICT tools in this field-based approach to HIV 
and electronic data capture. Of those enrolled, 58 percent prevention for at-risk youth in Kenya has been critical to 
(212) were female. All but one participant was able to be success of efficient service delivery and data collection both 
successfully identified at all service points. at mobile events and during the follow-up period. Study staff 
All participants were tested for HIV. A total of 37 partici- has readily used tablets and participants have used phones. 
pants were HIV positive (10-percent HIV prevalence) and all Similar to other studies, our biometric system has allowed 
received a facilitated referral. Most eligible participants en- efficient enrollment in the study and unique identification  
rolled in the HIV-positive cohort (33/37). Of those eligible, of participants once enrolled.7 Participants can be identified 
n=195 women were tested for pregnancy. Of the 36 eligible at all service delivery points during the event as well as off-
males, three consented for and received MMC. CCT uptake site during follow-up. The use of biometrics in the registra-
was high, 56 were screened and 37 were verified eligible. tion and identification of participants is accurate, feasible, 
PrEP reach may be somewhat limited based on our extensive and acceptable for use in field settings. Training on the use 
eligibility criteria; approximately 15 percent of women in our of new technologies, troubleshooting issues immediately, and 
sample are potentially eligible for and willing to take PrEP. maintaining open communication about the system are  
Cohort enrollment recently began and follow-up data is not essential for the success of an information and communica-
yet available. Medication adherence for the HIV-infected tion technology system in field settings. n
youth on antiretroviral therapy and HIV-uninfected youth in 
the PrEP cohort will be measured. The feasibility of CCT to Geographic Coverage: Homabay County, Nyanza Province, Kenya
keep girls in school based on school attendance and cohort Implementation Partners: New York University, University of 
retention will also be evaluated. Nairobi, Impact Research and Development Organization
Donor: National Institute of Health/National Institute of Allergy 
The use of technology in the field has been successful. The and Infectious Diseases NIH/NIAD R01A1094607
research assistants have reported no major challenges. By 
Contact Information: Dr. Ann Kurth, Professor, NYUC Global; 
using portable backup batteries, the devices are powered, Dr. Irene Inwani, Pediatrician, KNH-UoN; Dr. Kawango Agot, 
even when there is no electricity. Youth have not opposed Director, IRDO; Paul Macharia, Data Manager, UoN; Jasmine 
having their biometrics taken as part of registration and they Buttolph, Project Director NYU jb3436@nyu.edu
are comfortable answering questions entered into a tablet. 
mHEALTH COMPENDIUM  VOLUME 5  n  33
