 
MAMA BANGLADESH 
BRIEF OVERVIEW ABOUT MAMA BANGLADESH 
Bangladesh has made significant progress in health care; MAMA Bangladesh is implementing a “freemium” model 
however, maternal, neonatal and child health statistics that provides free basic services to the poorest 20% of 
are still staggering: one woman dies every hour due to mothers. The free services are subsidized by premium 
pregnancy related complications, only 23% of pregnant paid services targeted to higher income market 
women attend more than four antenatal care visits, 27% segments. MAMA Bangladesh has also brokered revenue
of live births are attended by a skilled health personnel, -sharing agreements with the five largest 
and 43% of infants under six months of age exclusively telecommunications operators in the country, an 
breastfeed. Many of these shortcomings are due to the important precursor to achieving scale. By applying 
lack of information and knowledge about maternal commercial strategies to improve MNCH, D.Net 
neonatal and child health (MNCH). generates multiple streams of revenue through low user 
fees, advertisements, corporate partnerships and an 
“Aponjon” (meaning dear one in Bangla) is the Mobile individual giving campaign to sponsor mothers to receive 
Alliance for Maternal Action’s (MAMA) program in their messages, thereby decreasing long term 
Bangladesh aimed at reducing maternal and child dependency on philanthropic capital.  
mortality using the power of mobile communication 
technology. USAID catalyzed a public-private sector Aponjon costs 2 taka (about $0.025 USD) per message. 
coalition to support the scale up of a commercially Messages are delivered twice weekly in either short 
viable mobile phone service that delivers weekly stage- message service (SMS) or interactive voice response 
based messages to pregnant women, new mothers and (IVR) format. The voice messages are entertaining and 
their families. Designed to enable the absorption of educational, formatted as ‘mini-skits’, with actors playing 
multiple sources of revenue, MAMA Bangladesh is one out real-life scenarios as characters, including a pregnant 
of the first mHealth direct-to-consumer services to get woman, doctor, husband and mother-in-law. MAMA 
beyond the pilot by focusing on sustainable impact at Bangladesh has also created a unique service specifically 
scale. for husbands, which reinforces messages provided to 
their wives and encourages their involvement in decision
After a year of user testing, feedback and iteration, -making on pregnancy, birth and infant care.  
MAMA Bangladesh was launched nationally by local 
social enterprise D.Net in partnership with the 
Government of Bangladesh Ministry of Health and EVALUATION AND RESULTS 
Family Welfare in December 2012. 
Prior to the national launch in December 2012, 
MAMA Bangladesh conducted detailed formative 
research in 13 locations across 4 districts (Dhaka, 
Chittagong, Sylhet and Gaibandha) among 
approximately 1,000 subscribers. Results indicated 
that almost 60% of women who subscribed to the 
service had their own phone, with the remaining 
women enrolling in services through gatekeeper or 
family member phones. Messages directed to 
household decision makers enabled improved 
household practices with respect to nutrition, 
antenatal care visits, and preparation for delivery.  
Pilot stage research also indicated that the willingness 
to pay for the service was low, yet poor subscribers 
were willing to pay more than high income 
14 mHEALTH COMPENDIUM   │    VOLUME 2 
 
 BEHAVIOR CHANGE COMMUNICATION 
subscribers.  Additionally, household decision makers  Customization of local content and knowing the 
were willing to pay more for the service than women.  client is key to sustainability and scale 
Seventy-eight percent of users who subscribed to the 
service through community health worker outreach CONCLUSION 
selected to receive messages through IVR, while women Research indicates that the MAMA Bangladesh service is 
living in urban areas or those with high levels of acceptable, useful and valuable to end users.  Subscriber 
education chose to receive the messages through SMS. testimonials show that the information provided often 
fills important gaps in knowledge and leads to women 
Following the national launch, the International Centre seeking care for themselves and their babies that they 
for Diarrhoeal Disease Research, Bangladesh (icddr,b) might not otherwise know to seek.   
began conducting an impact evaluation that will measure 
the effectiveness of the mobile phone based behavior 
change communication messages.  
GEOGRAPHIC COVERAGE 
To date, over 52,000 mothers and guardians have Bangladesh 
subscribed to Aponjon and 1,500 community health 
workers have been trained to register subscribers IMPLEMENTATION PARTNERS 
across the country. MAMA Bangladesh is projected to 
D.Net; The Ministry of Health and Family Welfare is the 
reach two million subscribers in its first three years 
official government partner of MAMA Bangladesh, in 
through voice IVR and SMS messages and achieve 
collaboration with the Government of Bangladesh and the 
sustained improvements in health knowledge, behaviors 
Prime Minister’s Office. Outreach partners: BRAC, Smiling 
and outcomes.  Seventeen percent of subscribers who 
Sun Franchise Program, MaMoni and Info Lady  
live below the poverty line are receiving the service for 
free. 
FUNDER 
USAID, Johnson & Johnson, BabyCenter, the United 
LESSONS LEARNED Nations Foundation and the mHealth Alliance 
 Designing for scale from the beginning is critical to 
the eventual uptake and adoption of the mHealth CONTACT INFORMATION 
program nationwide D.Net  
 Dr. Ananya Raihan, Director, D.Net/
 Strategic partnerships that leverage the unique value MAMA Bangladesh  
-add of outreach, government, nonprofit, technology Email:  Tel: +8802-09606016227,         
and mobile network operator partners strengthen Email: info@aponjon.com.bd  
local ownership and sustainability in the long term MAMA 
 To reach economies of scale, mHealth programs  Brooke Cutler, Senior Program Manager 
may have to consider expansion of services and Tel: 202-650-5353,           
products such as website interface, higher-end Email: bcutler@mobilemamaalliance.org  
clients, and mobile applications USAID 
 Carolyn Florey, Private Sector 
 Household decision-maker input, feedback and Partnerships Specialist, Global Health 
targeted involvement is critical to ensure the Bureau  
mother gets the necessary support and access to Tel: 202-712-4172, Emil: cflorey@usaid.gov 
the information 
  MHEALTH COMPENDIUM  |  VOLUME 2 15 
