Mobile 
Technology 
in Support 
of 
Frontline 
Health 
Workers
A comprehensive overview 
of the landscape, knowledge 
gaps and future directions
Johns Hopkins University 
Global mHealth Initiative 
2016
Authored by:
Smisha Agarwal
Leona Rosenblum
Tamara Goldschmidt
Michelle Carras
Neha Goel
Alain B. Labrique
Acknowledgements:
This report would not have been possible without the input and 
support we received from all across the mHealth Community.  We 
would like to thank all the mHealth implementers and researchers 
who responded to our multiple surveys, taking time out of their busy 
schedules to make this report the valuable resource that we hope it 
will be.  We leaned heavily on the work of the African Strategies for 
Health Project in compiling the five USAID mHealth Compendia, and 
the team at the Center for Health Market Innovations for amassing 
a wealth of projects on their databases.  We would particularly like 
to thank mPowering Frontline Healthworkers for their assistance in 
reaching out to members of their network.  We appreciate that Lesley 
Anne Long, Sara Chamberlain, and Marc Mitchell provided their input 
to shape our recommendations for the way forward.  Lastly, we would 
like to thank the Bill and Melinda Gates Foundation for the funding 
and support that made this investigation possible.
This report was commissioned by the Bill and Melinda Gates 
Foundation.
Cover art:
50 Frontline Health Workers receive Tablets in rural Bangladesh, as 
part of the JHU mCARE Project in collaboration with the Ministry of 
Health and Family Welfare in 2015.
Page 1
Table of Contents
Executive Summary................................................................................. Platform Case studies3
1. Background.............................................................................................. 5 CommCare....................................... 65
2. What mHealth interventions for FHWs work? (part of MOTECH Suite)
     Current state of evidence................................................................ 6
 A. FHWS - Who are they and what is their role?...................... 6 DHIS2................................................. 67
 B. How can mobile technology support FHW?......................... 6
 C. Current state of peer-reviewed evidence............................. 8
 D. Remaining questions and focus of this report.................... 10 Open Data Kit (ODK).................. 70
3. What do current programs tell us?
     Expanding the search for evidence............................................ 12
 A. Methods 12 Appendices.................................................................................................. 
  A.1 Database Search............................................................... 12
  A.2 Expert Survey.................................................................... 14
Appendix A:
  A.3 Literature Review............................................................. 15
Descriptions of pletforms most frequently 
  A.4 Survey of NGO's............................................................... 15
B. Data abstraction, coding and analysis 16 reported as being used to support FHW  .................................... 
programs............................................................. 73
4. Current trends in the use of mobile devices
     (phones/tablets) by FHW................................................................ 17
 Appendix B:A. How are FHW using mobile phones/tablets?...................... 17
Key costs and cost drivers of mHealth 
  A.1 Geographic distribution of projects........................... 17
programs.............................................................
  A.2 Type of FHWs using ICT................................................. 18 75
  A.3 Disease areas being addressed by programs........ 19
  A.4 mHealth approaches employed.................................. 20 Appendix C:
  Program Case Study: CStock............................................. 21
Summary of key costs considered by 
 B. Types of digital devices used by FHWs................................... 22
costing studies..................................................
  Key considerations in device selection........................... 24 78
 C. Technical Platforms used by FHW............................................ 25
  C.1 Considerations in platform selection........................ 26 Appendix D:
  C.2 Platform functionality for FHW supported
Inactive USAID Compedia projects 
         interventions...................................................................... 29
overview..............................................................
 D. Cost Assessment for ICT-supported FHW interventions.......... 32 79
  D.1 Costs/Cost Drivers projects supporting FHWs.... 33
  D.2 Challenges in assessing cost-effectivenes............ 35 Appendix E:
  D.3 High Initial Costs, Cost-Savings in the Long Run?........ 36
Expert Survey Questions..............................
  D.4 Framework for Costs and Savings of mHealth 80
         Interventions for FHW's................................................. 38
  D.5 Cost of scaling programs.............................................. 40
 E. Scale and Complexity of Current FHW Projects................ 42
 F. Profiles: India, Kenya, Tanzania, and Scaled Programs.. 44
  F.1 India Country Profile......................................................... 45
  F.2 Kenya Country Profile...................................................... 47 
  F.3 Tanzania Country Profile.......................................................... 48
  F.4 Projects with >1000 Active Users............................... 49
 G. Performance of Existing Programs.......................................... 50
5. Summary of Findings and Future Directions.......................... 55
 A. Framework Based on Findings.................................................... 55
 B. Limitations in Identifying Credible Data and Findings.... 57
 C. Gaps and Way Forward................................................................... 58
Page 2
Executive Summary
Mobile health (mHealth) interventions are rapidly gaining popularity Key Findings
for their potential to improve public health, and many developing 
countries see them as an important resource for frontline health Regionally, the surveys captured 92 
workers (FHW). However, best practices for implementing and projects from Africa and 43 from Asia. 
evaluating the effectiveness of programs and projects is lacking.  India, Kenya or Tanzania have the 
This report summarizes current data from over 140 FHW-supported highest number of reported projects 
mHealth projects from developing countries to describe the (20-25 projects each). Projects primarily 
emergent trends and best practices in the use of mobile phones, support community health workers and 
tablets, and technical platforms by FHWs over the last decade, facility staff through facilitating electronic 
understand the key considerations in choosing the type pf phone decision support or data collection 
and platform and associated programmatic costs, present the activities. The large majority of the 
evidence on the effectiveness of mobile approaches, and establish programs recorded in the database 
a framework for systematically deploying such tools. The report that use mobile tools and employ FHWs 
draws on self-reported data on relevant programs identified through focus on reproductive health (including 
a review of the USAID Compendia and Center for Health Market family planning), maternal health and 
Innovations (CHMI) databases, a survey of projects reported by child health, and infectious and vector-
international NGOs, updated information collected through personal borne diseases. Nearly 20% of the 
communication with project leadership, and a review of the literature. projects report using mobile tools for 
The findings of the report should assist donors in understanding data collection. Electronic decision 
high-impact best practices and emerging approaches in this space, support (17%), provider training and 
and provide implementers and researchers with practical actionable education (12%), and provider to provider 
understanding of key considerations in developing such programs. communication (11%) are the other most 
commonly used functions.  Most projects 
employed only one signal function (56%) 
at the core of their projects. Remaining 
Over the last decade, increasing use of smartphones and 46% of the projects reported using 
tablets over feature phones has been reported. Based on a mobile phones for two or more signal 
review of the current projects, facility-based FHW are more functions simultaneously.
likely to use smartphones and tablets, and more Community 
Health Workers (CHW) use smartphones. The most frequently 
mentioned considerations in the selection of type of mobile INDIA
device included cost of the device, a long battery life to 
allow for frequent use and intermittent access to electricity for 
charging, screen size and attributes appropriate for task (e.g. a 21 PROJECTS
simple phone is not practical for extensive data entry but 
could be used for voice calls or rapid reporting) and local 
availability of the device and its service centers. Based on a 
survey of experts, 74% (N=52) of the respondents stated that 
mobile devices were provided to FHW’s by the projects, and 
26% (N=18) said that FHW’s use their personal mobile phones.
23 PROJECTS KENYA
Several popular platforms are used to support a range of 
functions. Just over 10% of the projects recorded in the 
database used some custom-made or proprietary software. 
The commonly appearing feature requests or functional 
requirements for a platform included SMS functionality, ability 
to work in a low bandwidth or offline environment, ability to 
create reports and dashboards, and the ability to design TANZANIA 22 PROJECTS
workflows. Other broad requirements included open source 
platforms, ease of use, low costs, interoperability and ease 
of customization. Interoperability remains a challenge for 
mHealth interventions, and there is little data on the use of Page 3
standards for data architecture and interoperability for interventions. Most scaled projects address a single 
function, while more complex multi-function projects are limited to fewer users. The evidence on costs 
associated with FHW-supported mHealth interventions, and cost-effectiveness of such interventions compared 
to alternate approaches is fairly nascent. Initial costs comprising of the cost of and development and testing of 
the technical system, and training FHWs in the use of the system are typically the largest cost drivers. 
Early evidence suggests that there is potential for cost-savings in the long-run resulting from increasing system 
efficiency. Opportunities for cost savings may result from use of open source technical platforms and content, 
discounts bulk purchases of equipment and phone services (e.g. minutes, SMS, data plant etc.). Currently, there 
is no standardization for how costs are reported and which costs are included when demonstrating cost-
effectiveness. This presents challenges to understanding cost-effectiveness of mHealth interventions. It calls 
into question the reliability of cost analysis of individual mHealth interventions because completeness of the 
data is unclear. It also limits comparisons between interventions, and inhibits the aggregation of data to provide 
a macro level understanding of cost-effectiveness.
The strength of the findings to support the use of mobile interventions over alternate strategies is still limited; 
however there is more support for some strategies than others. Mobile phones have been widely used for data 
collection, and there is some low quality evidence to suggest that this can improve the overall efficiency and 
responsiveness of the health system. The evidence to support the use of decision support tools to help FHWs 
deliver a wide range of health services is fairly robust and growing. Several specific mobile sensors and 
diagnostic tools have strong support in their favor based on randomized trials. The overall effectiveness of each 
of these tools should be meta-analyzed to generate stronger recommendations for use, where appropriate. The 
specific application of mobile tools to support supply chain management has been quite varied; however, most 
of the operational research of the use of mobile tools for reporting stock-outs has suggested improvements 
in the system resulting from greater data visibility. cStock- one of the most successful programs for reducing 
stock-outs- emphasizes the value of a team and management approach to support the use of mobile 
interventions for them to be effective. Several large programs are exploring the use of mobile messages to 
support behavior change-however, we do not know if such interventions can result in sustained gains in 
knowledge and behavior. Given the resources that have already been invested in such programs worldwide, 
it is critical that its long-term effects are robustly studied.
{Going forward, this report recommends the use of a systematic framework in the development, implementation and evaluation of mHealth projects that can fill in these critical research gaps. This framework will ensure that considerations from the simple but overlooked (e.g., electricity infrastructure) to the complex but vital (e.g. intersection of platform cost, phone type and skills of FHW) are systematically incorporated into newly developed projects, allowing future mHealth developers to capitalize on prior knowledge and experiences. A rigorous approach to development and evaluation of future projects will ensure that scarce public health resources in developing countries are targeted to projects that will deliver the most improvement in outcomes with increasing cost-effectiveness as further bes}t 
practices are identified. 
Page 4
Background
Frontline health workers (FHW) deliver much-needed primary health 
care at the community level (Frontline Health Workers Coalition, nd). 
Unfortunately, they often shoulder this burden alone, with insufficient 
training and organizational support, and this limits their ability to 
provide high quality care (Rednick, et. al, 2014; WHO, 2010).  As 
the availability of mobile technology has spread throughout the 
developing world, public health practitioners have turned their 
attention to its potential to support FHW and thereby improve This report is structured 
health outcomes.  into three parts:
Several recent reviews of the academic literature have been The first section describes the 
conducted to examine the effectiveness of the range of mobile current state of evidence on the 
based interventions for FHWs. (Agarwal, 2015; Braun, 2013; effectiveness of mobile-based 
DeRenzi, 2011; Free, 2010; Kallendar 2013).  However, the interventions in the hands of 
implementation of mHealth interventions is moving at a faster 1 CHW’s based on a review of pace than the generation of evidence. Reviews that focus peer-reviewed literature and 
solely on evidence published in peer-reviewed publications identifies the areas where 
provide an incomplete picture of the range of mobile health evidence is inadequate.
interventions currently being implemented to support FHWs. 
They also present an incomplete picture of the interventions 
themselves, with insufficient details about the type of 
technology being used and its adaptations to the specific The second part of the report 
health program area. Specifically, “what” the mobile health expands on this to include projects 
intervention is composed of in terms of hardware, technology documented in the grey literature 
type, software platform, and how it relates to its ability to scale which may not be captured in the 
is often a missed detail. To address this gap, this report academic literature. Based on this, 
examines currently active programs that use mobile phones the report provides a detailed 
and tablets to support FHWs, in order to provide a framework analysis of the current trends 
for understanding the existing mHealth ecosystem for in mobile phone applications in 
FHWs. The findings of the report should assist donors in 2 FHW-supported healthcare 
understanding high-impact best practices and emerging interventions, including the range 
approaches in this space, and provide implementers and of technologies used (such as 
researchers with practical actionable understanding of key types of mobile phones, and 
considerations in developing such programs. technical platforms), and the 
associated costs of such 
interventions.
Finally, in the last section, we 
3 summarize our findings and identify future directions for investments in, and 
development of this space.
Left: A Bangladeshi woman 
with her mobile phone Page 5
2. What mHealth interventions for FHWs work?
Current state of evidence
Frontline health workers (FHWs) are those who deliver health care and 
services to communities on the frontlines (FHW Coalition, nd).  FHWs 
FHWs - Who are they typically work and live within the communities they serve, often in remote, 
and what is their role? rural areas (FHW Coalition, nd). Often, they may be the only healthcare 
providers available in the areas where they serve. As such, they are under 
great pressure to perform complex tasks that require a wide breadth of 
knowledge and skills, often well beyond the level of their training. We define 
A FHW as outlined by the Frontline Health Worker Coalition, to focus on all cadres of FHW providing primary health care at the community level in the developing world. FHW may include community health workers (CHWs), 
midwives, nurses, doctors, or pharmacists who are providing the first link to 
the health system for people who need it the most (Frontline Health 
Workers Coalition, nd).
Several developing countries are currently facing a severe shortage of all 
professional cadres of health workers, which will only be exacerbated by 
projected population growth (Every Mother Counts, nd; UNICEF, 2006).  
Globally, the WHO projects a shortfall of 12.9 million healthcare workers 
by 2035 (WHO, 2013). Clustering of health personnel in capital cities and 
other urban areas, and out migration to high-income countries further 
diminishes the numbers of healthcare providers available in rural areas 
(Dussault, et. al 2006). The lack of trained healthcare workers available at 
the community level has led to a push to focus on strategies for retention of 
community-level providers (Lehman et. al, 2008; WHO; 2007; WHO, 2010).  
The shortage has also prompted policy makers to explore shifting key tasks 
from higher to lower cadres of health workers (Baker et. al, 2007, WHO 
2008).  The recent years have seen an increased emphasis on the potential 
of FHW such as CHWs to fill these critical gaps in the healthcare system. 
While task shifting has shown great promise, there are still questions about 
the actual effectiveness of lower level cadres who are asked to perform 
tasks above their training level (Callaghan, et. al, 2010; Lehman, 2007).  This 
recognition has resulted in a renewed focus on strategies to provide 
ongoing support these workers on the frontline.
The persistent challenges with poor performance and retention of FHWs in 
the health workforce has led global health practitioners to explore mobile 
How can mobile technologies as potential tools to support FHWs in their work.  As mobile 
technology support phone subscriber penetration continues to grow across the developing 
FHW? world, and the cost of phones and tablets drops lower, the increased ability to rapidly scale mobile-based solutions, makes them ever more appealing 
(GSMA, 2013).  The advent and increasing ubiquity of smartphones and 
tablets has expanded the capabilities now available, and more importantly, 
B affordable, in handheld devices.  Where before, in most low income settings, only basic features such as voice calls and short message service (SMS) were commonplace, the pace of mobile technology growth 
increasingly allows low-cost access to the internet, high quality cameras 
for still and video footage, multimedia messaging service, applications 
stored on-device, pre-loaded audio or video clips and images, global 
positioning service (GPS), and the potential to connect additional 
sensors and devices – even in low resource settings. Page 6
2. Current state of peer-reviewed evidence
In early days of this digital ‘revolution’, mobile devices owned by health 
workers themselves began to be used to address work challenges. 
How can mobile Besides the complex, “computing” functions these miniature devices are 
technology support now capable of, early research into mHealth for FHWs documented how 
simple phone calls allowing workers to communicate with each other and 
FHW? with their supervisors was innately transformative to health programs 
(Kaonga 2013). This ecosystem shift was arguably driven by individuals 
purchasing phones for their own family use, but is now increasingly being 
B institutionalized as programs appreciate the clear benefits associated with mobile use. 
Mobile technology is being used within health programs and health 
systems in both developed and developing countries to support patient 
care, manage information and change behaviors of both patients and 
providers. Within these broader categories, twelve “signal functions” of 
mobile health (mHealth) tools for health systems strengthening have been 
identified (Labrique, 2013).  These are: 1) client education and behavior 
change, 2) sensors and point of care diagnostics, 3) registries/vital events 
tracking, 4) data collection and reporting, 5) electronic health records, 
6) electronic decision support, 7) provider-provider communication, 
8) provider work planning and scheduling, 9) provider training and 
education, 10) Human resource management, 11) supply chain 
management, 12) financial transactions and incentives (Labrique 2013).   
While many mobile health interventions, particularly in developed countries, 
focus on instantaneous and ubiquitous mobile phone access as a way to 
Figure 1: How can mobile target the population and patients directly, in developing countries mobile 
technologies support Fronline 
Health Workers? phones or tablets are often the only electronic tool in the hands of the 
health worker.
From Agarwal, S. et al (2015)
Page 7
2. What mHealth interventions for FHWs work?
Current state of evidence (continued)
Prior reviews of the use of mobile technologies to support FHWs and health 
care delivery processes have identified the use of mobile technology to 
How can mobile support providers through medical education/training, clinical diagnosis 
technology support management, and facilitating communication between providers (Free, 
2013).  For CHWs in particular, there has been an emphasis on the use of 
FHW? mobile phones to support data collection, decision support, alerts and 
reminders, and information access tools in the published literature across 
low resource settings (Braun et. al, 2013).  The most recent review that 
B specifically focused on mHealth tools for FHWs additionally identified mobile phones being used to facilitate emergency referrals (Agarwal, 2015).
As the field of mobile health has emerged over the last two decades, 
academic research has sought to measure the feasibility, usability, and 
Current state of impact of mobile technology on health across contexts, user groups, and 
peer-reviewed for a variety of purposes. By the end of the last decade, there were enough 
papers published for the first systematic reviews to appear.  These were 
evidence generally focused on high-resource settings, and primarily examined the 
effectiveness of the use of SMS reminders for patients and health care 
workers (Krishna, 2009).  In the 2000’s academic research on mobile health 
C tended to follow particular devices or features (i.e. PDAs), but was still often limited to high-resource contexts as the technology was not yet widely available in low-resource settings (Kho, 2006). 
The first groups of literature reviews on the 
effectiveness of mHealth in developing countries were 
published in 2012-2013.  Kallendar, et al examined 
Kallander's 3 Axes Framework the use of mobile technologies to support CHWs, and 
1 categorized these projects by communication type (1-way, 2-way, and multiway), as well as by six themes 
Communication Type (education and awareness, data access, monitoring and 
1 way, 2 way, 3way compliance, disease and emergency tracking, health 
information systems, and diagnosis and consultation) 
2 (Kallendar, 2012). They also identified key considerations 
for the success of mHealth projects, including: 
Themes collaboration; costs and sustainable financing; literature 
Education and awareness, data access, and cultural specificity; health worker partnerships, 
monitoring and compliance, disease and 
emergency tracking, health information engagement, training and compliance; and technical 
systems, diagnosis and consultation considerations. Kallendar et al’s three axes 
(communication type, intervention theme, and 
considerations for success) laid out a helpful 
3 framework for understanding the use of mHealth in 
Considerations for Success low resource settings, identifying that mobile tools are 
Collaboration, costs and sustainable primarily used for messaging and phone reminders for 
financing, literacy and cultural specificity, appointments, for promoting healthy behaviors, and for 
health worker partnership, engagement, data gathering. They found a limited number of 
training, compliance, technical evaluation studies on mHealth projects specifically 
considerations targeting CHWs; most projects focused on improving 
data submission, and diagnostics, but none of the 
associated studies assessed the impact of 
these interventions. Page 8
2. What mHealth interventions for FHWs work?
Current state of evidence (continued)
While it was helpful that the Kallendar review included non-peer-reviewed 
projects, this portion was mainly designed to provide illustrative examples 
Current state of of each intervention type. Since the non-peer-reviewed portion of the 
peer-reviewed Kallendar data collection took place in 2010, the range of possible projects 
for inclusion was limited to those that were already active at this point 
evidence (which explains why there was such a large emphasis on SMS-based 
intervention within their review).  Though the authors label the peer-
reviewed phase of their work systematic, because they do not provide a 
C description or diagram of the literature search strategy, it is difficult to ascertain how many records were reviewed in 2010/2012, and how many met the inclusion criteria (Kallendar, 2012).
Braun et al’s paper (published in 2013) fills this gap, providing a 
systematic review of the use of mHealth specifically by CHWs in the 
academic literature (Braun, 2013). Of the 25 studies that met their 
criteria for inclusion, the majority were conducted in rural areas, and in 
Sub-Saharan Africa, with a strong focus on reproductive health, maternal 
and child health, and HIV/AIDS health program areas. Braun classified the 
technology purposes into four categories: data collection; decision 
support; alerts and reminders; and information on demand, with sixteen 
of the papers falling in the data collection category. Braun uses the 
strategies for improving organizational performance and their 
measurement outlined by the World Bank in Improving the Delivery of 
Health Services: A Guide to Choosing Strategies to determine the 
framework for analysis.  Projects are therefore categorized according to 
how they seek to improve CHW provision of health services: process 
improvement and technology development (96%); standards and 
guidelines (32%); education and training (28%); and leadership and 
management (25%), and then again by how they seek to measure 
improved outcomes related to CHW performance: quality of care (71%), 
efficiency of services, learning by CHWs (32%), and utilization of services.  
Since many of the projects focused on improving adherence to standards 
and guidelines, improved quality of care (defined as improved adherence 
to treatment protocols) was one of the most common impact measures 
(Braun, 2013). Braun’s sample of CHW specific peer reviewed literature, 
though small, shows a marked increase in academic papers published on 
the topic in the limited time between this systematic review and the review 
by Kallander et al(Braun, 2013; Kallenar, 2012).  Not only are there more 
CHW-specific articles, but some of these papers do go beyond feasibility 
studies to include some measures of impact. It is noted that they are mainly 
pilot studies which provide little information about how these types of 
programs would operate at scale.  
Page 9
2. What mHealth interventions for FHWs work?
Current state of evidence (continued)
Most authors have found that the heterogeneity of study designs and 
contexts, combined with the lack of outcome and impact measures in the 
Current state of published literature prevented the conduct of a formal meta-analysis, Most 
peer-reviewed recently, in 2015, Agarwal et al published a systematic review of both the 
feasibility and effectiveness of the use of mHealth to support FHWs in the 
evidence developing country context (Agarwal, 2015).  That paper takes the most 
similar approach to this report, focusing on the same cadre (FHWs) in 
the same context (low-resource settings).  The literature was reviewed in 
C December 2013, and 42 articles were included in the final analysis.  Though Agarwal’s exclusion criteria were stricter than Braun’s (data had to be collected by FHW themselves, not by specially hired enumerators), in the 
intervening year the number of papers published on this topic had 
nearly doubled. Fourteen of the papers examined the feasibility of the use 
of mHealth tools by FHWs, and the overwhelming consensus found that this 
was a feasible context for the use of mobile technology to support health 
service delivery.  Agarwal, et al found that interventions focused on five key 
functions: data collection and reporting, decision-support tools and 
training, emergency referrals, alerts and reminders, and supervision. (See 
Figure 1).  The review provides some evidence to support the use of mobile 
tools for data collection, for training of FHWs and for use as decision 
support systems.  In particular, there is evidence to support the use of 
mobile devices to improve accuracy, speed and completeness of data 
collection.  There is also evidence from two robust studies that points to 
the effectiveness of SMS or decision-support system based tools to 
improve adherence to treatment protocols.   Given the same dearth of 
impact evaluations noted in the prior reviews, the systematic review 
concludes with a call for further research (Agarwal, 2015).
As discussed above, the literature reviews conducted in the last five years 
provide a thorough description of the state of the academic literature on 
Remaining questions effectiveness of FHW-supported mHealth interventions.  They show that 
and focus of this there is strong evidence for the feasibility of incorporating mobile 
technologies into the work of FHWs, and evidence that FHWs welcome the 
report addition of this new technology into their work streams.  There are positive 
trends to support the effectiveness of mobile tools in improving data
collection and adherence to treatment algorithms. The reviews discussed 
D above present the state of the evidence on mHealth, and identify significant gaps in what we know about the implementation and effectiveness of mHealth interventions.  Systematic reviews have 
limitations of their own- primarily, the temporal lag in peer-reviewed 
literature results in an assessment of the landscape which, by the time 
the manuscript is published, is already largely outdated.
Page 10
2. What mHealth interventions for FHWs work?
Current state of evidence (continued)
Research vs Practice
Though it is important to review the academic literature, this provides 
Remaining questions limited information about the ways in which mHealth is currently being 
and focus of this used in practice. The use of mobile technology to support FHWs in various aspects of their work has become widespread over the last ten years, but 
report much of it is only captured in grey literature (if at all). Very few projects 
that incorporate a mobile technology component do so as part of a 
rigorous research study.  These mHealth projects are completely absent 
D from the academic literature, even if they reach considerable scale.  Depending purely on the academic literature to understand the current state of the field places an overemphasis on pilots (which are often 
rigorously studied but never designed to continue or scale after the study 
is completed).  The pace of rigorous academic research is also much slower 
than the pace of technological innovation.  Systematic reviews can only 
review that which has already been published, and grant, research and 
publication cycles that take several years means that even the most 
recent systematic review is limited to projects that began when the 
mobile landscape in developing countries was significantly different 
from what it is today.
Clarity and specificity of interventions
Academic papers have space limitations, and tend to focus on outlining 
research methods and outcome findings.  These pieces are important, 
but in the literature on mHealth this tends to come at the expense of 
describing the actual intervention.  For any type of mHealth intervention, 
there are many permutations of software, hardware, and system design. 
These specifics are often glossed over in the peer-reviewed literature, 
particularly in outcomes-focused papers.  Even if a study shows evidence 
that an intervention works, when there is insufficient specificity as to what 
the intervention is, this evidence is not actionable or replicable.  Without a 
clear understanding of the components of successful interventions, 
practitioners are left without guidance on what exactly they 
should implement.
Need for further research
While the research highlighted above supports some intervention 
approaches over others, the heterogeneity of interventions, study design, 
and outcome measures precludes clear consensus on the effectiveness 
of these tools.  The issues related to clarity and specificity in the 
explanation of various interventions makes it difficult to compare the 
results of one paper to another, even if they purportedly examine similar 
programs.  Outcome measures are as diverse as the interventions. Though 
progress has been made, the field is still nascent and there is still work to 
be done to develop standardized measures of effectiveness.  There is a 
need for more studies to not only determine what works, but define the 
standards by which we determine effectiveness.
Page 11
2. What mHealth interventions for FHWs work?
Current state of evidence (continued)
This report
In preparing this report, the emphasis was placed on conducting a 
Remaining questions thorough and extensive review of the non-academic literature, and on 
and focus of this ensuring that the information presented here was as up-to-date as possible.  This report does not seek to give an overview of all the mobile 
report interventions that have been attempted and tested over the last decade 
but instead provides a snapshot of how mHealth is supporting FHWs 
right now. To that end, grey-literature sources and program documents 
D describing projects that are still currently active have been included. By identifying how mHealth is being used, and clarifying in what contexts and for what purposes it has been able to reach significant scale, we can 
complement the rigorous academic evidence and provide a more robust 
picture for where things could and should be moving.  
3. What do current programs tell us?
Expanding the search for evidence
A varied number of data sources were used for the development of this 
report, and we used several separate approaches to ensure that a 
Methods comprehensive and representative sample of existing FHW projects 
employing mobile tools are captured. Figure 2, on page 13, presents a 
snapshot of the 4-part search process and data sources, described in 
more detail here (A.1-A.4).
A
 A number of databases were searched to identify relevant projects. These 
included the USAID mHealth Compendia 1-5, Center for Health Market 
Database search Innovations (CHMI) database, NetHope and WHO eHealth Observatory. 
Projects were included if they involved the use a mobile device by a FHW. 
FHW was defined as workers involved in the direct provision of health 
services at the primary healthcare level and included doctors, CHWs, 
A.1 nurses, local pharmacists, midwives and others kind of health workers on the frontlines. 
USAID mHealth Compendia: These compendia served as a major data source for this report. A total of 
157 case studies were reviewed for inclusion from all the five mHealth Compendia. Of these, 97 projects 
involved the use of mobile tools by FHWs and were included. It was noted that several of these projects, 
especially those included in the earlier Compendia, were either no longer operational or did not have up 
to date information on the program approaches and reach. Therefore, a follow up online survey was 
conducted to identify if the project was active and update project activity information, particularly current 
scale. All the project contacts listed in the USAID Compendia were given two weeks to respond to the 
survey. If the contact did not respond within the allotted time, they were contacted individually and 
encouraged to update their project information. 69% (67/97) of the project contacts responded to the 
survey and updated their project information. Only 65% (43 projects) of the 67 projects who responded 
are currently active. 
Page 12
3. What do current programs tell us?
Expanding the search for evidence (continued)
CHMI database: Relevant projects from the CHMI database, 
Database search which were in the post-pilot stages were identified using three 
key themes- Nurses and midwives (N=103), CHWs (N=53), 
Informal Provider (N=53); and using the “technology” filter 
which included phones (N=399), PDA/Tablets (65), and remote 
A.1 diagnostic tool (61). After removing duplicate projects, 409 projects were reviewed in depth to identify those that meet all the inclusion criteria (phone was used by FHW, project was past pilot 
stage). Projects which met the criteria but did not have any 
relevant information available were dropped. 63 projects were 
finally included in the analysis. Survey follow-up was not 
conducted for CHMI projects with incomplete data.
Key data points about the projects were abstracted from 
the databases if available, this included:
Program 
characteristics:
Type of FHW, health area being 
addressed by the project, and the 
signal function being served by 
the mHealth tool.
1
Technology Performance
 characteristics: characteristics:
Technocal platform, channel (e.g. Program scale measured in 
SMS), content format (e.g. text, number of users, data on 
audio), hardware (e.g. SIM card, performance and costs 
sensors), functions, and type of (if availalbe).
phone used.
2 3
Page 13
3. What do current programs tell us?
Expanding the search for evidence (continued)
A brief 10-question survey (Appendix E) was administered to all major 
known mHealth communities of practice to capture perspectives from 
Expert Survey mHealth program implementers/policy makers who may not have 
published information about their mHealth programs in the peer-review 
or grey literature. Results from the expert survey depict more current 
trends in use. 
A.2 The survey was widely publicized across several communities of practice 
including the mHealth Working Group, Global Health Delivery online Health 
IT Group, United Nations Innovation Working Group, Information and 
Communication Technologies for Development (ICT4D), Information and 
Communication Technologies for Community Health Workers (ICT4CHW), 
mPowering FHWs, Health Information for All (HIFA) and other networks 
over a period of 3 three weeks in October 2015. A total of 74 responses 
were received. 
The purpose of the survey was threefold:
a.) Identify any scaled projects that may not have an active web presence.
b.) Understand the key knowledge gaps/concerns of the mHealth 
      community when choosing a technical platform to develop a mHealth 
      intervention and type of mobile phones for the interventions.
c.) Identify key strategies that are being employed to improve health service 
      by using mobile devices.
Figure 2: Overview of data sources 
and methods used for the report
Page 14
3. What do current programs tell us?
Expanding the search for evidence (continued)
 In addition to the review of systematic reviews on the effectiveness of 
FHW-supported mHealth interventions presented in Section 2, a review of 
Literature Review peer-review and grey-literature was undertaken to address the following 
questions: 
a.) What is the evidence in support of mHealth strategies identified through 
A.3 the database search and expert surveys? 
b.) How do the functionalities of the existing technical platforms for 
mHealth align with the priorities and considerations of the mHealth 
community in choosing a platform? 
c.) What is currently known about the costs associated with 
implementation of mHealth programs? What are the key cost drivers? 
What is the evidence on the cost-effectiveness of mHealth interventions?
The review and analysis of pertinent literature for each of these questions 
yielded an understanding of the critical knowledge gaps and future 
direction. 
Lastly, we recognized that the multiple mHealth databases and mHealth 
community surveys did not capture several of the widely known projects. 
Survey of NGO's To address this gap, a brief survey was sent out to Ieading NGO’s that are 
implementing multiple mHealth projects under their umbrella. Surveys 
were individually addressed to the ICT/mHealth leads of MSH, FHI360, 
Intrahealth, CRS, Pathfinder, Palladium Group, Jhpiego, IPAS, and Center 
A.4 for Communication Programs (CCP), and JSI. The survey had questions on the purpose of the mHealth project, mHealth strategies being used, the 
scale of the project, technical platform and type of phone/tablet being used 
for the project, and the evidence on costs and effectiveness of the project. 
After removal of duplicate entries (i.e. projects that were also abstracted 
from the USAID and CHMI databases), an additional 34 projects were 
added to the database.
Page 15
3. What do current programs tell us?
Expanding the search for evidence (continued)
Results from the database searches (i.e. USAID compendia and CHMI 
compendia) were combined with the survey responses received from 
Data abstraction, NGOs. All the data were imported in Stata for cleaning, coding and 
coding and analysis analysis. We abstracted information on several variables from text and numerically-coded data, including countries where projects were deployed, 
technology platforms and mobile device types, functions of the project, 
type of frontline health worker, health domains and subdomains and 
B number of users.  We verified this process by comparing the original text variables with their coded equivalents. We created indicator variables for these variables and created additional categorical variables, collapsing 
across categories such as smartphone (which includes Android, iOS and 
Windows types) and facility staff (which includes doctors, nurses, dentists, 
pharmacists and other professional staff) to create meaningful groupings 
that were more easily describable in analyses.  We created count variables 
such as the total number of functions a single project had and the number 
of countries where a project was deployed. We then concatenated the 
three databases into a single database and did additional validation.
As our performance question was a free text response, we did a qualitative 
analysis to determine how respondents reported performance for their 
projects, using only the USAID database, since that had the most up-
to-date information on performance. One researcher (SA) read each of 
the entries several times to ascertain major domains of reporting. Once 
themes converged, she created text codes to describe performance 
reporting such as “sensors and diagnostics”, and “training of health 
workers”. The codes were applied to all of the entries. These codes were 
then discussed with another author (MC), who then independently 
coded 3 (7%) of the entries. Results were discussed and codes refined, 
with each entry being recoded with new codes as necessary. This 
process was repeated until high inter-rater reliability was achieved.
We performed exploratory analysis by reporting numbers and frequencies 
of individual variables of interest and cross-tabulated with other relevant 
variables. We report here a narrative that includes our quantitative analysis 
of several variables, a qualitative analysis of themes surrounding 
performance, and comparisons of quantitative and performance indicators.
Right: In-country 
infrastructure assists 
in data capture and 
accuracy checking
Page 16
4. Current trends in the use of mobile phones/tablets by FHW
Figure 3 shows the distribution of projects by country and by geographic 
Geographic region.  Of the reported projects, India, Kenya and Tanzania had the 
distribution highest number of projects (20-25 projects). Other countries with the highest number of projects include- Uganda (12), Ghana (11), Nigeria (10), 
of projects Malawi (10), Ethiopia (8), Pakistan (7), and Philippines (7).  Section 4-F 
presents profiles of the state of mHealth for FHWs in India, Kenya and 
Tanzania. Regionally, 92 projects were reported from Africa, 43 from Asia 
and less than 5 each from other regions. Our surveys and data sources may 
A.1 not have captured a representative sample of projects from non-English speaking regions. 
10 countries with the highest number of projects reported
Kenya 23 Nigeria 10
Tanzania 22 Malawi 10
India 21  Ethiopia 8
Uganda 12 Pakistan 7
Ghana 11 Philippines 7
Projects by Region
Figure 3: Geographic distribution of projects
Africa  91
Asia  43
Europe  1
Central America 3
Carribean 4
North America 2
South America 2
Page 17
4. Current trends in the use of mobile phones/tablets by FHW
(continued)
A review of the projects suggested that mobile tools are being used by a 
range of community-based and facility-based health workers, and often 
Type of FHWs with two or more types of workers at the same time (Figure 4). Over 50% 
using ICT of all FHWs were CHWs. These include all country-specific variations of CHWs such as Health Activist, Community Health Extension Workers 
(CHEWs), Accredited Social Health Activits (ASHAs) etc. The keys 
functions for which mobile tools were used by CHWs include electronic 
A.2 decision support (34%), data collection (33%), and client education (19%). About 5% of the interventions employed midwives/traditional birth attendants for maternity care. The data included only a few midwifes (N=7), 
and no clear pattern for specific uses of mobile phones were observed. 
Over 40% of FHWs were based in facilities and included doctors, nurses, 
and other hospital staff. For facility-level providers, a majority of the mobile 
tools are being used for electronic decision support (31%), data collection 
(29%), provider training and education (26%), provider to provider 
communication (19%).
Nearly 60% of the phones used by CHWs were smartphones, followed by 
feature phones (14%). Comparatively, facility-based staff are more likely to 
Figure 4: How do be armed with smartphones (44%), as well as by tablets (32%), with mini-
the type of mHealth mal use of feature phones. 
function and phone 
vary by FHW
(includes CHWs, ASHA, CHEWs Smartphone
COMMUNITY  & other variations of CHWs)
N=73
HEALTH Feature Phone
WORKERS Electronic decision support (34%)
Data collection (33%)  
Client education(19%)
32% 44% 60% 14%
HEALTH FACILITY 
STAFF (including doctors, nurses, first respondents 
& other hospital staff)
Tablet Smartphone
Electronic decision support (31%)
58 Data collection (29%)N= Provider training and education (26%)
Provider to provider communication (19%) MIDWIVES/TBA’s N=7
(no clean trends since N is small)
Page 18
4. Current trends in the use of mobile phones/tablets by FHW
(continued)
The large majority of the programs that use mobile tools and employ FHWs 
focus on reproductive health (including family planning) and maternal 
What disease areas health and child health (Figure 5). Nearly 20% (N=22) projects focus on 
are these programs family planning and reproductive health, 28% (N=32) on maternal health, and 23% (N=27) on child health. Of the 20 projects that addressed two or 
addressing? more health domains, most were focused on the continuum of care 
involving components of family planning, maternal health, and child health 
(including immunizations). A quarter of all projects focused on infectious 
A.3 (including HIV/AIDS), parasitic and vector-borne diseases. Only a few (N=1-2) projects focused on non-communicable disease, nutrition, mental health, and violence. 
Figure 5: Key health domains 
Maternal Health  24% (32) being addressed
Infectious, Parasitic & Vector-Borne Disease  22% (29)
Child Health  20% (27)
Family Planning & Reproductive Health  17% (22)
Other Health Problems  17% (18)
Health domains Nutrition 2% (1)
addressed by Non-Communicable Disease 1% (1)
projects Mental Health  1% (1) N=133
Violence  1% (1)
1
58% (n=82)
Number of health 
domains addressed by a 
N=141 given project
4
Unknown 1% (n=1)
24% (n=34) 2
13% (n=19)
5+ 3
2% (n=3) 1% (n=2) Page 19
Elect Dro aPro n
ta
v ic
 C
P i
 D od lle
r e e co rv  i T
c t
d r
is
a io
io
e in n
n
r t in
 S
o g
u
p  a pr n po ov did  E
rt
e dr uc co am tim onunication
4. Current trends in the use of mobile phones/tablets by FHW
(continued)
mHealth approaches employed by independent projects were 
characterized into 12 signal functions recommended by Labrique et 
What mHealth al(Labrique, 2013a). Figure 6a shows the distribution of the signal 
approaches are functions- nearly 20% of the projects report using mobile tools for data 
being employed? collection. Electronic decision support (17%), provider training and 
education (12%), and provider-to provider communication (11%) are the 
other most important functions.  Most projects employed only one signal 
A.4 function (56%). Nearly 45% of the projects reported using mobile phones for two or more signal functions. 9 projects (6%) report using 4 signal 
functions (Figure 6b).  
Figure 6a: Key signal functions 
employed-based on database results
N=248
Signal Functions 
among all projects
Page 99
Elect D
P ro
a
n taro  Cv icid  D
o
e lP e lc ec
C ro rv  is
t
li i
T
d ra ie o
ion
n e in nt   Se r t io ng udu  
pp
c  p a oa rt o
nd r
i to vn id
 E
 a e
d
n rE  
u
c cd o a tb le m ioe ct nha r
mu
S v
o
i ne o i
n
c i
n r c  
c
h at
s eo ha a
io
r la t
n
h
n n  d g re ep  co o
co
i rn mm dt s-o
S f
u
- nF icin u
ca a
a pn p
re tio
ci ly
 di n a
P ar lo  
c g
t h n
v ra
a
n in
os
ide s
 m tic
r ac a s w to i
n
o ag
rk n s
em
Re p
 a
l n eg d ni an  in tstr nie in
c
g es a  a
nt
n nd d
ives
H  v
 s
u it
c
a hma l 
ed
n e v
u
e lr n ine gso tsu  tr rc ae c m kinan gagement
4. Current trends in the use of mobile phones/tablets by FHW
(continued)
The results from the survey of experts represent the more current trends 
in use which may yet not have been documented. Only a small percent of 
What mHealth experts reported using single signal functions (12%) in the existing projects. 
approaches are Over 50% of the respondents reported using 4 or more signal functions as 
being employed? part of their combined mHealth interventions. It should be noted that the 
expert respondents may be reporting on their cumulative experience in 
employing different signal functions, as opposed to their experience with 
a single project. The responses on types of signal functions being most 
A.4 frequently used are recorded in Figure 6c and suggest a slightly different landscape from the one described above. It suggests that mobile tools are 
most widely being used for registries and vital events tracking, followed 
by client education and behavior change communication, and electronic 
decision support for FHW’s. 
Human Resource
5 Management  2% (2) Registries & VitalsNumber of total Signal 6 4% (4)Financial Transaction
56% (n=79) 56% (n=79) & Incentives  4% (4) EHR’s  6% (6)
Functions mHealth Client Edu. &Behavior Change
8% (9)
strategy uses 4 Sensor & Point6% (n=9) of Care Diag.9% (10)
3 Supply Chain141 ManagementN= 13% (n=19) 10% (11)
Electronic
Decision Support
2 1
17% (19)
Provider to
56% (n=79) Provider Comm.
18% (20)
21% (n=30)
Provider Training
& Education
23% (25)
Signal Function details for the top 77% Data Collection
27% (29)
Figure 6b (pie chart): Number of simultaneous signal 
functions used by each project based on database 
results
Figure 6c (vertical bar):
Key signal functions employed-based on expert survey
Page 20
4. Current trends in the use of mobile phones/tablets by FHW
(continued)
What does the program do? 
cStock is an text message based supply chain management system for 
Program Cast Study: community health workers in Malawi.
cStock
What health domains it address? 
Child Health, Infectious, Parasitic and Vector-Borne Diseases
Signal functions? 
Supply Chain Management
Phone Requirements
Any phone 
Platform
cStock is a platform built on RapidSMS by Dimagi.  Some of the functions 
of CommCare Supply were designed to incorporate cStock functionality. 
However, CommCare Supply has undergone several new additions since 
cStock was implemented in Malawi.
Number of Users
3000+ 
About
Community health workers in Malawi, known locally as Health Surveillance 
Assistants (HSAs), are supposed to provide Integrated Community Case 
Management (iCCM)for a range of  childhood illnesses and other 
infectious diseases. In order to do so, they manage up to 19 health 
commodities. However, when the Supply Chains for Community Case 
Management (SC4CCM) project ran a baseline assessment in 2010, only 
27% of HSAs were fully supplied. cStock was developed to improve 
reporting and resupply for the HSAs, and provide data visibility into 
community level supply chains for decision makers at the facility, district 
and national level.  HSAs send a monthly text message with their current 
stock on hand for the commodities they manage.  The cStock system then 
sends a message to their health facility, alerting them to the order.  The 
facility packs the order and sends a message to the cStock system 
indicating it is ready (or indicates a stock out if appropriate).  cStock then 
sends a message to the HSA that the order is ready for pickup.  In this way, 
the burden of reporting is dramatically reduced for the HSA, and the 
calculation of the appropriate resupply quantities is shifted to the 
cloud-based logistic management information system.  
All 3000+ HSAs across all districts in Malawi who are responsible for 
iCCM are trained and registered on the cStock system.  District Product 
Availability Teams use cStock data to regularly monitor supply chain 
indicators and inform their decisions.  More information about the 
successful implementation of the cStock approach in Malawi is available 
in the article “Strengthening community health supply chain performance 
through an integrated approach: Using mHealth technology and multilevel 
teams in Malawi” and in the fifth edition of the USAID mHealth 
Compendium. Page 21
4. Current trends in the use of mobile phones/tablets by FHW
(continued)
Experts were asked about the type of mobile devices that are currently 
being used by FHW's. 35% reported the use of only one type of device 
Type of digital devices (e.g. feature phone only) and 65% reported the use of two or more type 
used by FHWs of devices being used by different types of providers within the same 
project (e.g. CHW use feature phones to report to their supervisors, and 
supervisors use tablets to monitor all CHW activities as part of the same 
intervention). This (and the results presented in 4.A.2) might suggest how 
B within the health system, type of devices are being tailored to the type of user and their expertise, as well as the unique needs of the procedures 
that are conducted at that level of the health system. Figure 7a presents 
combined results from the database repositories and the expert surveys. 
It shows that smart phones are now the leading type of mobile devices 
that are being used for FHW-supported programs, followed by tablets. 
Simple phones (i.e. SMS and call functions only) and feature phones are 
less frequently used at 7% (data repositories) and 27% (expert survey). 
The category of “any phone” was coded for projects that were phone 
agnostic and the mobile application could function on any type of phone 
including feature phones and smart phones. 
The results from the expert survey corroborate well with the results from 
the current project database. Similar to the expert survey results, the 
projects in the database suggest that smartphones are being used most 
widely (40% of the total projects).  Additionally, figure 7b suggests that the 
widespread use of smart phones and tablets is a recent trend. Based on the 
projects reported, less than a quarter of projects that started before 2005 
used smartphones. Comparatively, nearly 50% projects that started from 
2011-2015 use smartphones. The use of tablets has been a fairly recent 
trend with nearly a quarter of all projects reporting their use. The use of 
feature phones declined from 17% before 2005 to 9% in 2011-2015.
Right: FHW training 
session with solar 
chargers
Page 22
36% RESULTS BASED ON DATA REPOSITORIES
16% 14%
8%
N=141
26%
Figure 7a: Type of 
mobile devices being used 
by FHW's, as poreted by 
two data sources - mobile 
project repositories and DEVICE ?
Expert Surveys. Unknown
TYPE
Note the high degree of 
correlation between the 
two sources. USED
N=173
34%
27%
21% 18%
RESULTS BASED ON EXPERT SURVEYS
Page 23
4. Current trends in the use of mobile phones/tablets by FHW
(continued)
Key considerations for selection of a type of phone are presented here 
based on the expert survey (Appendix E). The most frequently mentioned 
Key considerations considerations in the selection of type of mobile device included cost of the 
in selecting type device, a long battery life to allow for frequent use and intermittent access 
of phones to electricity for charging, screen size and attributes appropriate for task 
(e.g. a simple phone is not practical for extensive data entry but could be 
used for voice calls or rapid reporting) and local availability of the device 
and its service centers.  Other less frequently stated considerations 
B included internet connectivity, ease of use, 3G connectivity, multimedia capability, compatibility with other platforms and ease of typing in the 
local language.
Free mobile devices for FHWs?
Based on the expert survey, 74% (N=52) of the respondents stated that 
mobile devices were provided to FHW’s by the projects, and 26% (N=18) 
said that FHW’s use their personal mobile phones (sometimes referred to 
as a ‘BYOP’ or ‘Bring Your Own Phone’ model).  Several cost and use 
considerations should be evaluated when deciding whether the project 
{should give CHWs phones. The advantages of giving phones are several. Arming CHWs with project-selected phones would ensure that all critical members of the health team can participate in the intervention, and standardized tools optimized to the specific phone can be made available. (The wide variability in phone functionality, even within the “smartphone” category is an important consideration. Application performance, power management and Android version compatibility – not to mention GPS precision, screen responsiveness, system stability – are all variables which may dramatically affect FHW application performance if devices are not standardized.) However, giving mobile phones to FHW’s also has significant cost considerations. It has been suggested that when phones are provided to FHW’s, they are more likely to be lost or broken compared to }
the use of personal phones.  Local governments may not have the ability to 
financially support the loss and ongoing maintenance of existing phones. 
BYOP models are often considered more sustainable as they do not require 
the project or ministry to manage a mobile device supply chain. If FHWs use 
their own phones, they have also already found solutions to allow them to 
keep the device charged, which is often a sticking point on mHealth projects 
which provide devices.
Page 24
4. Current trends in the use of mobile phones/tablets by FHW
(continued)
The need for easy and rapid development of mobile applications for FHWs using 
best practices and evidence-based tools has led to the development of “platforms” 
Technical Platforms for addressing key health system constraints. The use of existing software tools is 
used by FHW an alternative to developing custom software for mHealth programs. In this section 
of the report, key characteristics of the commonly used platforms in mHealth are 
summarized. Software applications that have been developed for a specific project 
or for internal use by an organization that are not accessible to other organizations 
C or projects to adopt, customize and extend have been excluded. Also, platforms that are not directly used by a frontline health worker (eg: research platforms like RedCap, data visualization platforms such as Tableau) have not been reviewed.
Platforms allow for technology developed by one organization to 
MOTECH Suite be shared with other projects that require software applications 
with similar functionalities. Platforms to support FHW’s may be 
As development programs mature, there is a developed by a parent company that distributes it as proprietary 
growing need for mHealth approaches that cut 
across geographies as well as use cases, software or as open source projects heralded by a parent 
including patient tracking, supply tracking, developing organization with groups of implementers and 
surveillance, service delivery of content, etc. developers that contribute to the overall development of the 
There is a need for countries to develop a technology, expanding its functionality beyond what a single 
foundation or platform to enable multiple, organization or project could have achieved. Over 10% of all projects 
integrated mHealth projects at scale, rather 
than focus on scaling a single project or recorded in the database used some custom-made or proprietary 
use case. software. Commcare was the most frequently used platform (N=17), 
followed by MOTECH (N=6), and Mangologic (N=5). Often, a 
MOTECH Suite is an industry-leading suite platform was not explicitly specified but the described functionality 
of mobile and cloud-based technologies, leads us to believe that this number is actually higher. The survey of 
starting with the components CommCare 
and MOTECH. Led by Dimagi with support from experts suggested a broader range of platforms that are being 
the Grameen Foundation, MOTECH Suite was widely used. This includes Commcare (N=27), ODK (N=11), DHIS2 
formed to combine the power of frontline (N=11), OpenMRS (N=9), Mangologic (N=8), OpenSRP (N=5), 
} mobile applications with integration and MOTECH (N=5), and Magpi (N=5). It should be noted that as per the orchestration of data across an entire latest development, CommCare and MOTECH form the key ecosystem. Components of MOTECH Suite already support a wide range of frontline components of MOTECH SUITE, where CommCare primarily programs, including many at national scale. For supports the front-end involving collection of data, and MOTECH example, BBC Media Action is using MOTECH supports the backend involving data storage, analytics and use. The Suite to deliver maternal and child health correct terminology for the type of platform used by independent mobile phone content in 35 states in India programs is still evolving, and the survey respondents may not have (already in 6 states with 1 million users).  The MOTECH SuIte has also been used by the made this distinction between the use of a prior version of NGO TulaSalud to efficiently deploy numerous CommCare or MOTECH versus MOTECH Suite (refer to box on left). mHealth use cases on a single platform in Guatemala. In Tanzania and Ghana, MOTECH Appendix A presents a brief description of the platforms use by Suite has been utilized to deploy national-scale FHW-supported health programs reported in our study. Of the 30 
last-mile logistics solutions. World Vision 
has been able to leverage similar health and different platforms recorded from the database, more than half 
nutrition content across 13 different countries open-source and the source code is freely available to download and 
with deployments on MOTECH Suite. MOTECH use. Such platforms are usually supported by strong developer 
Suite is supporting the Ebola vaccine trial in communities (eg: MOTECH, OpenMRS, DHIS2). Open-source 
Sierra Leone in conjunction with Johnson & platforms while being freely available, require a team of 
Johnson, World Vision, and the London School 
of Health and Tropical Medicine. programmers to be able to implement, adapt and customize the 
platform to meet project needs. Another common software model 
The breadth of use cases that MOTECH Suite being used is Software as a service (SaaS) where the database 
is able to support at scale is at the forefront of and application being hosted in the cloud and a standalone 
the change happening in the mHealth industry application being installed on the health worker’s phone. The 
in general, as it transitions from deploying 
individual projects to multi-faceted programs software is available to use at a per-user or per month fee, often the 
at national scale. platform is available for use free of cost up to a number of users or 
with limited functionality (eg: Magpi). 
Page 25
4. Current trends in the use of mobile phones/tablets by FHW
(continued)
The survey of experts and review of literature aimed to identify the key 
considerations that go into the selection of an mHealth platform. The 
Consideratoins in choice of the appropriate software platform depends on: A.) Alignment 
selection of a between the platform’s features and the project’s requirements; B.) The 
technical platform total cost of ownership (TCO) of the software (Grevendonk, 2013). 
to support FHWs
We categorize these project requirements into two groups: functionality 
specific and broad requirements (Grevendonk, 2013). (Table 1) 
Functionality-specific requirements are what the system must do. These 
C.1 are usually project specific and are tied to the tasks that the users in the system have to perform, for example, it must be able to send text messages to clients or must be able to generate a specific report. Broad requirements 
are the salient abilities such as ease of use, interoperability or the ability to 
address technical and environmental constraints. 
The key considerations in platform selection from the survey of experts 
show a high degree of overlap with the ICT4D Principles for Digital 
Development (“Principles for digital development,” 2008). In particular, 
adherence to the principle of the use of Open Standards, Open Data, 
Open Source and Open Innovation emerged as the most important 
consideration in platform selection. The top five considerations that 
emerged from the survey responses were all broad features (e.g. ease of 
use). The commonly appearing feature requests or functional requirements 
for a platform included SMS functionality, ability to work in a low bandwidth 
or offline environment, ability to create reports and dashboards, ability to 
design workflows. 
Table 1:
Functionality-specific 
considerations and 
broad features 
identified as useful 
for platform selection
Page 26
4. Current trends in the use of mobile phones/tablets by FHW
(continued)
The most common considerations reported as important in platform 
selection and their implications are discussed below: 
Consideratoins in 
selection of a Open source
technical platform 44% of respondents to the expert survey listed open source as a key 
consideration in platform selection. In an open source platform, the source code 
to support FHWs is freely available to download, extend and customize. Successful open source 
projects have a strong and active developer community and rich resources for 
implementers and developers. It was observed that the adoption of an open source 
C.1 platform requires a technical team and has a significant learning curve associated with adoption. The steepness of the learning curve depends on the availability of learning resources for new implementers and programmers while getting started 
with the platform and the completeness and comprehensiveness of user 
documentation. Up-to-date documentation is a key focus for open source software 
platforms. Creating an active community of contributors and having a core team 
for coordinating platform development are crucial to the success of the platform.
Open source does not necessarily mean free. Open source platforms are free to 
download and use, which appears to bring down the total cost of development but 
have other costs associated with them such as developer time for customization, 
deployment and set up. More data is required to be able to assess whether the use 
of open source software brings down the total cost of ownership of the platform. 
One of the most successful open source platforms widely used in mHealth is 
OpenMRS, a patient-centric medical record platform developed in 2004 by 
partnering institutions the Regenstrief Institute, Partners in Health and AMPATH 
(Academic Model Providing Access to Healthcare). Though it was originally not 
intended to be an open source platform, it is now being used in over 169 countries 
(OpenMRS, 2011).
Ease of use
The over whelming majority of respondents for which this was a key consideration 
were project implementers. Ease of use refers to how easy it is for health care 
workers and low literacy users to interact with the platform. It refers to a simple 
user interface and an effortless user experience. The WHO Planning an Information 
Systems toolkit provides a number of “usability metrics” to evaluate the perfor-
mance of a platform. For example, some of the usability metrics include (Greven-
donk, 2013):
• Transmit information in a language (script or voice) that is understood by 
the user population
• Emphasize ease of use and learnability to reduce training costs
• Allow users to find features in two clicks or less
• Easy end-user interactions
Ease of use can refer to use by the end user (the FHW), but can also refer to use 
by the data users and the project managers.  It is not just the interface for entering 
data that must be simple and seamless. Reports need to be configured in a way 
that decision makers see the data that they need access to, in visually clear and 
compelling ways. Project managers also need easy-to-use systems that allow them 
to quickly and painlessly register or modify users, and monitor the system.
Page 27
4. Current trends in the use of mobile phones/tablets by FHW
(continued)
Cost
A number of different factors contribute to the overall cost of the software 
Consideratoins in but can be broadly categorized into – the cost of development, cost of 
selection of a deployment or implementation and cost to sustain and maintain. These 
technical platform costs typically vary at different stages of the project cycle with the 
to support FHWs development costs being high in the pilot phase, the cost of deployment 
being higher during scale up and the maintenance costs being high once 
the project has reached it goal for sustainability (Grevendonk, 2013). A 
complete understanding of the costs is addressed in section 4D of this 
C.1 report.Interoperability
Interoperability refers to the ability to share data with other health 
information systems – at the local, regional and national level. It may also 
refer to the ability to integrate and share data between different software 
systems within the same project. Interoperability requires the use of data 
standards for communication. More information is needed for assessing the 
need for developing end-to-end interoperable systems and the impetus to 
do so. Lack of data standards and complexity of making systems 
interoperable makes this a challenging requirement to operationalize 
despite the growing need for interoperable systems.
Ease of customization
Ease of customization may refer to the ability to customize the user 
interface and the way data is presented to the end user, the ability to 
customize workflows based on the tasks of the user, availability of custom 
developed reports and dashboards, the ability to create custom forms with 
embedded electronic decision support & complex logic. Customizability 
is high in platforms that follow a modular approach and allow project 
implementers and programmers to extend the core functionalities of the 
platform to suit their needs by adding or removing modules. The use of 
graphical user interfaces for customization that allow non-programmers to 
custom develop forms, and modify what is displayed to the user is a large 
value proposition for platforms. For example, CommCare users can create 
custom forms with complex logic using their web application 
CommCare HQ. 
Right: Chat Salud participants 
demonstrate Paper prototyping
Page 28
4. Current trends in the use of mobile phones/tablets by FHW
(continued)
Platforms are being used to address a variety of health system 
constraints. Few platforms are developed to fulfil a single function, most 
Platform functionality are multifunctional. The platforms that are developed for a single 
for FHW supported function are typically those for provider training and education 
interventions (OppiaMobile, MediaWiki) or for supply chain management (Mango, 
CommCare Supply). Using the 12 common signal functions framework 
presented by Labrique et al (Labrique, 2013), Table 2 presents some 
commonly used platforms and the signal functions they are most optimized 
C.2 for. It should be noted that though the platforms may have a broad range of functionality, mapping the actual use of the platforms (as used by the 
projects) against these functionalities suggested a narrower range of use. 
This might suggest that though the functionality is feasible, it may be in 
initial stages of development, have limited deployment, or is not considered 
as easy-to-use by users. 
Table 2: Core platform functionality
X
X
X
X
X
Page 29
4. Current trends in the use of mobile phones/tablets by FHW
(continued)
Over the last five years, a gradual transition has been observed from sim-
ple/feature phone to the use of smart phones.  Table 3 describes the mo-
Platform functionality bile compatibility of some of the most frequently reported platforms. Web 
for FHW supported interfaces for the platform allow for managing data and other server-side 
interventions operations. They can also be used for application building such as in the 
case of CommCare, ODK and MagPi. Oppia Mobile’s web interface allows 
users to develop the training course and upload content for FLW learning. 
C.2
Table 3: Mobile compatibility for commonly used platforms.
Page 30
4. Current trends in the use of mobile phones/tablets by FHW
(continued)
Table 4 reviews the commonly used platforms to evaluate their non-
functional capabilities. Ease of use refers to the user experience and user 
Platform functionality interface for an FHW. Platforms were ranked as high, low or neutral. While 
for FHW supported the use of a platform does limit the extent of customization as compared 
interventions to a custom built application, the platforms were evaluated on the ease of 
customizing workflows, data collection forms, content and generation of 
reports. They were categorized as high, low and neutral. Information about 
scale was drawn from the projects reviewed the USAID compendium. 
C.2 Updated information about the project status and scale in terms of number of users was collected by a survey disseminated to the projects that were 
reviewed. Platforms that were used by fewer than 100 FHW users were 
categorized as low, between 100 – 1000 users as moderate and over 1000 
users as high.
Table 4: Evaluation of non-functional capabilities of commonly used platforms
# Subject to reviewers 
interpretation
*Information not available
Page 31
4. Current trends in the use of mobile phones/tablets by FHW
(continued)
Given the limited resources for funding interventions for FHWs and 
competing priorities within health systems targeted for digital strategies, 
Cost Assessment for it is important to looks at the costs and evidence of cost-effectiveness 
ICT-supported FHW in support of mHealth interventions.  When determining the cost-
interventions effectiveness of solutions, not only the costs of the intervention should be 
considered compared to the non-mHealth alternative, or status quo, but 
also the savings generated from improvements in process and health. 
Typically, innovations in global health are compared by estimating the 
D financial investment required to produce a specific health benefit. ICT innovations have the capacity to not only improve the delivery of 
interventions (thus improving efficacy), but also to improve the process 
by reducing inefficiencies inherent to paper-based systems. 
The landscape of technologies for FHWs is dynamic, as new 
technology is developed and software and hardware evolve. There is a 
need for a systematic understanding of the long-term costs and savings 
attributable to mHealth interventions.  This is a difficult task, given the 
ever-changing technology environment which makes projecting future 
costs challenging. Although the signal functions targeted by the systems 
may remain fairly consistent, the underlying technology layer will almost 
certainly change over time.  This will impact the costs of hardware, 
airtime and software. If anything, this tends to have a positive effect on the 
cost-utility / cost-benefit ratio over time. In just the past decade, as an 
example, the cost of 7”-10” tablets has dropped dramatically from $500-
600 to now just over $100 in most settings, with a much wider range of 
offerings at the lower end of the spectrum. The massive market demand 
continues to drive and keep prices low, particularly for wifi-only tablets, 
rivaling those of robust smartphones in LMIC settings. 
This section provides an overview of costs for mHealth interventions based 
on a comprehensive review of peer-reviewed literature, as well as grey 
literature, including reports and program documents. First, we describe the 
key cost-drivers. That is followed by a review of the literature on mHealth 
costs to provide an understanding of the challenges around assessing the 
cost-effectiveness of mHealth interventions, as well as synthesize the 
evidence that savings from mHealth are possible in the long-term.  Then, 
we will present a framework for mHealth costs and savings that 
demonstrates increasing cost-effectiveness in the long-term. Finally, 
we will discuss the implications of the research for scaling mHealth 
interventions for FHWs.
Page 32
4. Current trends in the use of mobile phones/tablets by FHW
(continued)
The key categories of costs of mHealth interventions for FHWs, based a 
review of the literature are: 
Costs/Cost Drivers  1) Initial costs, which includes fixed costs, 
for mHealth projects 2) Ongoing/operational costs, 
supporting FHWs 3) Management and human resources, 
4) Training, and 
5) Governance. 
For each of these categories, we identify the main costs and the cost 
D.1 drivers that contribute to the total cost of an intervention Appendix B. 
The initial costs are the startup costs of the project, which include the 
development and the deployment of the mHealth software system and 
intervention, the development of materials and processes for training and 
technical support, as well as initial training. Reflected in Appendix B, the 
principal drivers of initial costs include the requirements and specifications 
of the system (i.e. the level of customization and software development), 
training, and volume of equipment required. While discrete costing data 
was not provided, OppiaMobile, an open source mobile learning platform 
being implemented in 6 countries across Africa and Asia, reported that 
the project takes into consideration the initial development of the 
technical platform and content development. It notes that additional 
implementations of the platform will reduce costs by leveraging the 
existing technical and content development.
Costs associated with purchasing hardware and equipment depends on 
the number of phones or other devices needed for the intervention, which 
could vary significantly depending on whether the intervention will 
distribute phones to end users or expect them to use their own phones, and 
the level of technology required, such as smart phone or feature phone. 
The cost of deployment can also vary based on the state of existing 
infrastructure, both physical and the level of internet connectivity. 
Poor internet connectivity may slow down the testing, training, or
implementation process, requiring additional work and resources while 
delaying the deployment.   In addition, the required scale of the deployment 
and the security requirements will drive the costs of getting the system up 
and running. To support more users, more extensive server system setup 
and testing requirements may be necessary to ensure the system is sound.
Ongoing, or operational costs continue throughout the implementation 
period and the duration of the intervention. These costs may vary 
depending on the number of users and time period. As referenced in 
Appendix B, the cost category of operational costs includes data and 
communication, hardware maintenance and replacement, server/ 
software/ hosting management and maintenance, system administration 
and customer support, as well as project management and human 
resources. 
Page 33
4. Current trends in the use of mobile phones/tablets by FHW
(continued)
The costs associated with data, voice, and SMS are driven by the 
telecommunication plans available (or rates negotiated), and the level 
Costs/Cost Drivers of usage, ie number of minutes, volume of text messages, or data usage.  
for mHealth projects Asiimwe et al demonstrates the breakdown of operational costs in their 
supporting FHWs cost effectiveness evaluation of an SMS based reporting system for disease 
surveillance in Uganda. The study accounts for the cost per message, the 
number of messages per week per user, and the number of users, as well 
as fees for telecom services, data hosting, and connectivity into its cost 
D.1 analysis. (Asiimwe et al., 2011) 
Included in operational costs are hardware maintenance and upgrades, and 
additional expenditures for damaged, lost or, stolen hardware. The costs 
drivers are the cost of replacing and maintaining the equipment, and 
hardware requirements. For example, if end users are expected to use 
their own phones, the costs will be significantly lower. Also included in 
operational costs, are costs associated with day-to-day operations such 
as system administration and customer support, which are necessary for 
the sustainability of an intervention. The costs are driven by level of 
support offered, call volume, the frequency of maintenance including 
system updates, and staff HR turnover. Both the size of the project and 
usability of the intervention will impact the number of customer support 
calls. Thus, the number of users, and the level of support being offered will 
all contribute to the amount of dedicated staff needed for an intervention. 
 
The human resources and management costs cover the staff and 
leadership required to both initiate and maintain the project, including both 
international and domestic staff and program leadership. Those costs are 
driven by number of staff, level of technical specialty required, salaries, 
and travel. A higher level of technical complexity of the software requires a 
greater degree of technical expertise. Cost will vary based on the location 
of the staff and their ability to work remotely. Limiting travel and leveraging 
local expertise reduces costs. The level of staff turnover impacts costs 
by requiring additional training and transition of knowledge and 
responsibilities, as well as potentially extending the project timeline. 
 
Training costs are ongoing, but highest at the initiation of an intervention. 
The initial costs include the development of the training curriculum and 
any training tools that will be utilized, as well as the delivering the training 
to FHWs and other end-users. Incorporated into the cost of delivering the 
training is materials, facility fees, per diems and transportation. The cost 
depends on the # people being trained, duration of the training, and 
travel requirements. Ongoing costs include refresher trainings, new-
features training, and training new end-users to the project. The training 
delivery method is another cost driver and varies depending whether the 
training given in-person, via eLearnings, or a through blended approach. 
Typically interventions rely on in-person training, but several studies and 
reports make an argument for the cost-effectiveness of a blended 
approach of in-person and digital, remote training. (Dalberg Global 
Development Advisors, 2012; Diedhiou et al., 2015; University Research & 
Quality Assurance Project Organization(s), 2009) 
 Page 34
4. Current trends in the use of mobile phones/tablets by FHW
(continued)
Governance costs include any costs associated with decision-making 
and oversight by the government. It also includes costs associated with 
Costs/Cost Drivers policy development, which is particularly relevant when considering costs 
for mHealth projects to scale. The governance costs are driven by the number of meetings, trips, 
supporting FHWs and time allocated by government officials to the intervention. For 
example, in the costing data provided for the USAID compendium, the 
Ma Sante project included the formation of a board of directors in its 
implementation costs.
D.1
Currently, there is no standardization for how costs are reported and which 
costs are included when demonstrating cost-effectiveness. This presents 
Challenges in assessing challenges to understanding cost-effectiveness of mHealth interventions. 
cost-effectiveness of The first is that it calls into question the reliability of cost analysis of 
mHealth programs individual mHealth interventions because completeness of the data is 
unclear. It also limits comparisons between interventions, and inhibits the 
aggregation of data to provide a macro level understanding of 
D.2 cost-effectiveness.At the individual project level, it does not appear that any of the 
studies on cost-effectiveness of mHealth interventions include a fully 
comprehensive list of all the costs, as reflected in Appendix C. It is possible 
that some of the costs that are not explicitly included are nested under 
other listed costs. The problem is that we do not know. Most notably, 
training costs were only mentioned 3 of the 10 studies, (Asiimwe et al., 2011; 
Chang et al., 2013; Diedhiou et al., 2015) despite being one of the biggest 
cost drivers. Meanwhile, development of training materials was only 
factored into 2 out of the 10 studies. (Asiimwe et al., 2011; Diedhiou et al., 
2015)Human resources for design, deployment and implementation were 
included in only 2 of the 10 studies. (Thriemer et al., 2012; Zurovac, Larson, 
Sudoi, & Snow, 2012) In certain cases, the study explained why certain 
costs were excluded. For example, Chang et al. noted that supervisory 
costs were excluded from the total costs because of the assumption 
that supervisory costs would vary based on who implemented the 
intervention. (Chang et al., 2013). The most readily available cost data is on 
phone service fees and phones, or other devices All relevant include phone 
service fees which covers the cost of SMS, phone contracts, SIM cards, 
data, and phone numbers. (Asiimwe et al., 2011; Chang et al., 2013; 
Diedhiou et al., 2015; Hunchangsith, Barendregt, Vos, & Bertram, 2012; 
Lemay, Sullivan, Jumbe, & Perry, 2012; Lester et al., 2010; Mahmud, 
Rodriguez, & Nesbit, 2010; Njuguna et al., 2014; Thriemer et al., 2012; 
Zurovac et al., 2012) Equipment costs are noted in 9/10 of the studies. 
(Asiimwe et al., 2011; Chang et al., 2013; Diedhiou et al., 2015; Hunchangsith 
et al., 2012; Lester et al., 2010; Mahmud et al., 2010; Njuguna et al., 2014; 
Thriemer et al., 2012; Zurovac et al., 2012)
Page 35
4. Current trends in the use of mobile phones/tablets by FHW
(continued)
The inconsistency between the costs included in the cost analysis of 
mHealth interventions for FHWs limits the ability to compare the cost-
Challenges in assessing effectiveness of different interventions. This makes it difficult to compare 
cost-effectiveness of projects and analyze how cost-effectiveness could be improved. For 
mHealth programs example, both Njuguna et al and Asiimwe et al. studies include mHealth 
data collection tools for FHWs. However, the studies include only 3 of the 
same costs out of the 8 costs reported. (Asiimwe et al., 2011; Njuguna et al., 
D.2 2014) Consequently, any comparison between the two would be looking at a different set of costs.
Further complicating the ability to compare mHealth interventions is the 
lack of standardization of cost-effectiveness metrics. The variety of metrics 
found in the studies includes the cost or savings per FHW, per patient, per 
facility, per system, per number of visits, per number of reports submitted, 
and per outcome metrics, such as a DALYs averted or number of cases 
prevented of future switches to second-line ART. (Asiimwe et al., 2011; 
Chang et al., 2013; Diedhiou et al., 2015; Hunchangsith et al., 2012; Lemay 
et al., 2012; Lester et al., 2010; Mahmud et al., 2010; Njuguna et al., 2014; 
Thriemer et al., 2012; Zurovac et al., 2012) Additional metrics used by the 
projects in the USAID compendium include per implementation, per preg-
nant woman, and per project. Because the FHW interventions vary in their 
design and objectives, metrics cannot be fully standardized. However, the 
establishment of normative metrics, such as cost per patient, per FHW, 
or per outcome or impact measure, allow for more effective comparisons 
between different interventions. It also enables aggregating the outcomes, 
which is necessary to make an argument for the overall cost-effectiveness 
of mHealth interventions for FHWs and scaling those interventions. While 
the results seem promising on an individual basis, further research should 
be completed that compares and evaluates interventions using a standard 
set of costs and cost indicators. 
Some studies have demonstrated that while the initial costs are often 
higher for mHealth interventions than the non-technical comparators, or 
High Initial Costs, the status quo, cost savings are possible in the long-run. (Asiimwe et al., 
Cost-Savings in the 2011; Diedhiou et al., 2015; Njuguna et al., 2014; Thriemer et al., 2012). The 
Long Run savings can be further increased through opportunities for savings at 
scale, such as bulk phone purchases and discounted phone and data 
plans. (Asiimwe et al., 2011; Moore, Long, & Keith, 2014; Qiang, Yamamichi, 
Hausman, & Altman, 2011) An essential element of costing is its 
D.3 relationship with efficiency. For the purposes of this report, we will use Palmer and Togerson’s break down of efficiency into technical efficiency, 
productive efficiency, and allocative efficiency. Technical efficiency is the 
relationship between resources and outcomes. Productive efficiency is the 
relationship between outcomes and cost. Allocative efficiency looks at the 
distribution of outcomes across the community, in terms of maximizing the 
community-wide impact. (Palmer & Torgerson, 1999)
Page 36
4. Current trends in the use of mobile phones/tablets by FHW
(continued)
Cost savings in interventions focused on data collection for disease 
surveillance were demonstrated in studies in Zanzibar (Thriemer et al., 
High Initial Costs, 2012) and Kenya (Njuguna et al., 2014). Thriemer et. Al found that direct 
Cost-Savings in the electronic data collection using PDAs to implement a stepwise approach 
Long Run to disease surveillance not only reduced costs, but also improved efficiency 
in terms of the timeliness, accuracy, and completeness of data collection. 
Data entry time per patient decreased by 50%, and turn around time for 
data input into the central surveillance system decreased from 5-7 days 
D.3 to less than 24 hours, up to an 86% reduction. Errors and data omissions decreased by 6%. The total cost savings of the direct electronic data entry 
over the 1.5 year study is $5790 (from $23,500- $17,710), or a 25% 
reduction in cost from the paper system (Thriemer et al., 2012)
 
In Kenya, Njuguna et al determined that the initial costs for implementing 
a smart phone-based data collection tool, as compared to the existing 
paper data collection system for influenza surveillance were higher, 17,500 
v. 15,999. However, the yearly operating costs of the smartphone system 
were less than the paper system, $16,350 as compared to $19,001. By the 
second year, the cost-savings were distributed and the smartphone system 
cost 7% less than the paper system, taking the initial costs into account. 
Njuguna et al similarly found improvement in the timeliness, accuracy and 
completeness of data. Data input into the central system of data 
collected with smartphones versus paper data collection was 66% faster. 
The median duration of reporting decreased from 21 to 7 days, reduced 
errors by 7%, and increased completeness by 10%. (Njuguna et al., 2014).
Cost savings was demonstrated in task shifting and improving 
communication between providers and CHWs in Malawi in two different 
studies. The mHealth intervention implemented by Mahmuda et al, which 
used task-shifting to CHWs to triage and treat patients, created net
savings of $2750 for 77 users including 75 CHW, 1 HBC nurse, 1 TB 
coordinator, and 1 ART coordinator over 6 months. It also improved 
technical, productive, and allocative efficiency. A total of 2048 hours were 
saved in triaging and travel. The coverage of TB patients doubled and the 
number of ART reports increased from 25-67 per month. (Mahmud et al., 
2010) Lemay et al. analyzed the cost-effectiveness of using SMS for CHWs 
to report events to their supervisors and receive feedback. While the study 
was unclear about the discrete cost line items that were factored into the 
cost analysis, it found the SMS is four times less expensive and 134 times 
more efficient than non-SMS event reporting, ands resulted in more events 
reported. The average cost per event-reported per SMS report decreased 
from $2.70 to $0.67 for standard reporting methods that require the CHWs 
to travel to the supervisor site. They also found that the average time was 
reduced from 1445 minutes to 9 minutes on average per event reported, 
and that the average number of contacts with the supervisor increased 
from 4 to 5. (Lemay et al., 2012).
Page 37
4. Current trends in the use of mobile phones/tablets by FHW
(continued)
When considering the costs savings, the savings to the patient, health 
providers, and health system should be incorporated into cost analyses. 
High Initial Costs, While the body of literature on mHealth cost-effectiveness is limited, there 
Cost-Savings in the is substantial research on the outputs and outcomes of mHealth 
Long Run interventions, all of which need to be accounted for when considering the 
overall savings of mHealth programs. In order to calculate savings, 
Schweitzer and Synowiec provide a set of indicators that convert outcome 
measures into monetary units. For example, from the patient or health 
D.3 system perspective, improved adherence to treatment protocols has an impact of QALYs and that can be converted into a monetary value by 
calculating the “value of a statistical life-year from the value of a 
statistical life.” (Schweitzer & Synowiec, 2012) Avoided hospital admission 
can be calculated as the cost per day of hospital admission multiplied by 
the average duration of a hospital admission. Improved diagnosis and 
treatment capacity in primary health care decreases the utilization of 
higher-level health services. The savings can be calculated by calculating 
the average costs of health services that the patient would have received. 
(Schweitzer & Synowiec, 2012)
This framework (Figure 8) demonstrates the relationship between costs 
and savings of mHealth interventions for frontline health workers, and the 
Framework for distribution of costs and savings as the scale an intervention increases. The 
Costs and Savings of costs are represented by cost/unit, which could be per patient, per frontline 
mHealth Interventions health worker, per provider, or per facility, or per other stakeholder. While 
for FHWs the overall costs of mHealth interventions increase as the coverage and 
utilization of health services increases, the cost per unit decreases. The 
savings represents the overall savings from the intervention. As the impact 
of the intervention expands the savings will grow. Savings extend beyond 
D.4 the direct savings, to indirect, and health systems savings as a result of improved outcomes. At each level, the savings are distributed amongst 
the patients, health providers, and health system. This framework takes 
into account cost-savings evidence from the mHealth literature on FHW 
interventions, but also assumes indirect and system-level savings based 
on an understanding of the economic benefits of improved health systems 
outcomes. 
 
The cost per unit of the intervention decreases over time because the 
incremental cost decreases. The higher initial costs, which include fixed 
costs such as development, deployment, and in this case, training costs, are 
distributed over each additional unit. Since the initial costs precede the ex-
ecution of the intervention, there are no savings associated with the initial 
costs. Ongoing and operational costs may also decrease through partner-
ships, cost-sharing, and discounts for scale.
Page 38
4. Current trends in the use of mobile phones/tablets by FHW
(continued)
The magnitude of the savings extends beyond the direct savings, to 
indirect and ultimately health system savings, like a snowball effect on 
Framework for savings. The direct savings typically include savings from improved process 
Costs and Savings of outputs and outcomes such as reduced travel costs, improved efficiency 
mHealth Interventions of human resources, and streamlined workflows. The outcomes that result 
for FHWs from those process improvements create greater health savings, such as 
resources saved from fewer hospitalizations, or fewer wages lost for sick 
days. Greater savings can result from less disease, but also from more 
effective use of data and greater accountability of health system actors. 
D.4 These savings are extended to the health system on a greater scale, allowing for more expansion of the programs and the redistribution of 
resources to other health issues. 
Figure 8: Framework for costs and savings of mHealth programs for FHWs
Page 39
4. Current trends in the use of mobile phones/tablets by FHW
(continued)
There have not been many studies around the costs of going to scale. 
The cost analysis of an intervention at scale requires different cost 
Cost of scaling considerations than a research study. Oftentimes, the assumption is 
programs made that if a study is cost-effective, then the costing numbers can be 
multiplied by the number of additional users or patients to demonstrate the 
cost-effectiveness on a larger scale. However, additional requirements are 
D.5 necessary to support interventions at scale such as infrastructure and maintenance, all of which generate additional costs. While the cost analysis literature reviewed does not provide evidence for scaling 
mHealth interventions for FHWs, it does provide projections for scaling 
interventions and suggests opportunities for improving the cost-
effectiveness for interventions at scale through public-private 
partnerships, collaboration between donor and government agencies, 
as well as standardizing and leveraging existing content and technology.
When evaluating the cost-effectiveness of an mHealth intervention at 
Opportunities for Cost Savings scale, consideration should be given to the additional costs that are 
necessary to support an intervention from a technical and programmatic 
Discounts for Bulk Purchases of perspective, as the coverage of the intervention expands. Primarily, those 
Equipment & Phone Services costs include additional hardware, support and maintenance, training, and 
(Minutes, SMS, Phone Plan, human resources. From a technical perspective additional hardware and 
Data Plan) server systems infrastructure is needed to support the increased volume 
of users and security measures. The technical maintenance of the system 
Government & Private Sector 
Partnerships requires technicians, as well as support system for issues reporting and 
management. Training program expansion may be necessary to account for 
Cost-Sharing between donors, new user training, staff turnover, and refresher training for existing users, as 
NGOs, government, well as the dissemination of information about updates and upgrades. 
and private enterprise Additional oversight, technical and programmatic support, and software 
development may also expand the need for additional human resources. 
Interoperability
One way to reduce costs is by developing partnerships between the 
Open Source content governments, donors, NGOs, and private enterprise, as opposed to relying 
on exclusively donor-funding. (Qiang et al., 2011) Partnerships offer 
Utilizing existing tech platforms
opportunities for cost-sharing between multiple beneficiaries for one 
Utilizing existing content project. (Qiang et al., 2011) For example, public-private partnerships, 
especially with telecommunications companies, create opportunities to 
Standardization of content generate revenues through advertising and information management. 
(Moore et al., 2014) The government also has better access to certain kinds 
Open Source technology of data that could benefit the mHealth interventions for FHWs. Zurovac 
platforms et al projected that a partnership with the Minitry of Health would reduce 
implementation costs by 20%, the cost associated with collecting CHW 
phone numbers, since the government maintains records of those phone 
numbers. (Zurovac et al., 2012) A greater level of government involvement 
and ownership could contribute to decreasing costs through the 
development of policies and guidelines that promote the dissemination of 
mHealth interventions and increasing access to affordable mobile services. 
(Schweitzer & Synowiec, 2012) For example, in the case of Kenya, 90% of 
the costs of mHealth interventions go to the telecommunication 
companies. The government introduced policies that limit spending and 
promote the sustainability of mHealth interventions. (Qiang et al., 2011)
Page 40
4. Current trends in the use of mobile phones/tablets by FHW
(continued)
Collaboration and standardization between different mHealth 
interventions and the mHealth platforms that support those interventions 
Cost of scaling creates an opportunity to decrease costs associated with technical and 
programs content development. The utilization of OpenSource software platforms 
saves costs on software development by leveraging existing technical 
development and facilitates interoperability. (Qiang et al., 2011) Improving 
D.5 the interoperability between mHealth platforms and other information management platforms decreases costs associated with system and information management. (Moore et al., 2014) While the initial cost of 
integrating the software is higher, (Moore et al., 2014) savings stem from 
the decreasing duplicate data collection, data entry, and content creation, 
by introducing opportunities for data and information sharing. Meanwhile, 
collaboration between interventions on content creation and content 
sharing as well as the standardization of content for similar interventions 
decreases the need to reproduce content for every intervention. (Dalberg 
Global Development Advisors, 2012) Dalberg projected that at digital 
content creation and content sharing could decrease the cost for training 
1,000,000 CHWs, across 41 countries in Sub-Saharan Africa from $65 to 
$15 per CHW. However, it is important to note that this estimation is based 
on a number of assumptions and does not take into account equipment, 
training, materials, or per diems into account. (Dalberg Global Development 
Advisors, 2012)
Below: A kiosk where health workers 
can exchange mobile money incentives
Page 41
4. Current trends in the use of mobile phones/tablets by FHW
(continued)
Scale was measured based on the number of FHW’s who are actively 
using mobile devices for healthcare delivery. It must be noted that we did 
Scale and Complexity not have information on scale for nearly two-thirds of the project sample. 
of Current FHW From the projects for which information on number of users was available, 
projects about 35% (N=19)of the projects had less than 100 active FHWs using 
mobile tools to deliver services, suggesting these projects are fairly early 
pilot stages (Figure 9a). Another 35% (N=18) projects reported employing 
between 100-500 FHW. 17 of these projects are based in Africa, with 
E maximum concentration in Kenya. About 28%% projects (N=15) currently have 500 or more FHWs actively using mobile devices. 10 of these projects 
are based in Africa and 4 are based in Asia.  
Figure 9a: Scale of mHealth Programs
35% (18)
101-500
 (8)
15% 100 5
8
0 % (
51- 1-1 40 )00
N=52
Number of FHWs employed 
by project size
Page 42
10% (5)
<1 10 2% 1 (1 6- )501%
 (11)2
1001+
4. Current trends in the use of mobile phones/tablets by FHW
(continued)
In analyzing the projects by degree of scale, it becomes rapidly apparent 
that the majority of FHW-centric projects at substantial scale are simple, 
Scale and Complexity single-function strategies with data collection as the most frequently used 
of Current FHW function (Figure 9b). The more complex, multi-function projects are limited 
projects to small-scale pilots or deployments with fewer than 100 users. As projects 
grow in size, there seems to be a clear tendency towards parsimony of 
purpose. Interestingly, few projects (N=3) were reported in the 501-1000 
user category, suggesting that there may be a transitional challenge 
E involved in moving from the sub-500 user level to the 1000+  user level. This has been posited by others to be a “tipping” point between pilots and 
programs at “scale”, where costs begin to escalate dramatically, or where 
the technology/program faces challenges in absorbing a larger number 
of users.
For projects in the 101-500 category, the most commonly used signal 
functions were electronic decision support (N=11), client education and 
behavior chance communication (7), and data collection (5). For users 
in the 501-1000 category, data collection (N=4), and electronic decision 
support (N=2) were most used functions. Lastly, in the >1000 category, the 
most used functions were electronic decision support (N=3), supply chain 
management (N=3), and data collection (N=3). 
Figure 9b: How does scale change with number of functions addressed?
Number of Signal Functions
9
1 2 3 4 5 6
8
7 Scale 
of projects 
6
by the number of 
5 Signal Functions 
4 employed
3
2
1
0
<10 11 - 50 51 - 100 101 - 500 501 - 1000 1000+
Page 43
4. Current trends in the use of mobile phones/tablets by FHW
(continued)
This section provides a trends in the applications and use of mobile phones 
for FHWs in the three countries with the maximum number of reported 
Profiles: mHealth programs: India, Kenya and Tanzania. In addition, we also present 
India, Kenya, Tanzania details of projects that reported as having greater than 1000 active FHWs. 
and Scaled Programs
F
NUMBER OF PROJECTS BY PROGRAM COMPLEXITY
13 INDIA KENYA
12
Provider to Provider 12 11
Communication 11
10 10
Provider Training & 9
Education 9
8 8
Electronic Decision 7 7
Support 6 6
5
Data Collection 5
4 4
Electronic Health 3 3
Records 2 2
Client Education & 1 1
Behavior Change Comm 1                    2                  3                   4   1 2                    3                    4                    5
Sensor & Point-of-Care
Diagnostics 10 TANZANIA
Supply Chain 9
Management
8
Financial Transaction &
Incentives 7
Registries & Vital Events 6
Tracking 5
Provider Workplanning
& Schedule 4
3
Human Resource
Management 2
1
1     2         3             4                 5                     6
Page 44
Number of concurrent Signal Functions 
INDIA when “this” Signal Function is employed1 2 3 4 5 6
COUNTRY OVERVIEW
22% (8) 17% (6)
21 PROJECTS*
HEALTH DOMAINS 
ADDRESSED F.1
No. of Projects Electronic Decision Provider Training 
Support
Maternal Health  4 & Education
Child Health  3
Infectious, Parasitic & Vector Borne Disease  2
Family Planning & Reproductive Health  2
Nutrition  1
Mental Health  1
Violence  1 17% (6) 14% (5)
Provider to Provider
Communication Data Collection
* Number of projects do not reflect that actual number 
of projects in the country but the number that was 
reported in our database
14% (5) 8% (3)
TYPE OF FHW
1 2                    3                    4                    5
15 CHWs (includes ASHA, CHEWs Client Education 
 & other variations of CHWs) Electronic Health & Behavior Change 
Records Communication
5 Health Facility Staff (includes 
doctors, nurses, first respon-
dents & other hospital staff)
Ranges not represented did not have 8% (3)
any current reported projects.
TYPE OF PHONE SCALE OF PROJECTS
2 2 2 Sensor & 
Point of Care 
9 Smartphone Diagnostics
4 Tablet 1
1 Feature Phone
Page 45
11 - 50
51 - 100
101 - 500
1000+
India - Featured Projects
In addition to the projects captured through the systematic surveys, India 
has a number of projects that are currently being scaled:
Projects at scale
Mobile Academy is an IVR-based training course for Accredited Social 
Health Activist (ASHA) designed to refresh their knowledge of life-saving 
preventative maternal and child health behaviors and to improve their 
interpersonal communications skills. The program is live in Bihar, Odisha, 
Jharkhand, Madhya Pradesh, Rajasthan, Uttarakhand and Uttar 
Pradesh- 145,764 ASHAs have begun the course, and 72,339 have 
successfully graduated.
 
Mobile Kunji is an audio-visual job aid, involving a printed deck of 
illustrated cards on a ring, each with a unique shortcode printed at the 
bottom, which the ASHA can call to play related audio content. The job aid 
is also focused on live-saving preventative health behaviours.46,523 ASHAs 
are using Mobile Kunji across three states (Bihar, Odisha and UP) every 
month. Both Mobile Kunji, and Mobile Academy are built on the MOTECH 
platform and are led by BBC Media Action. 
 
The Society for the Elimination of Rural Poverty (SERP) based in 
Telengana, currently has 2,650 health activists using feature phones to 
coordinate and improve nutrition services for pregnant women and 
children under-five. SERP uses a proprietary software application.
 
mSehat is currently being rolled-out in  all sixty-five blocks of the five 
Districts of Uttar Pradesh (Mirzapur, Faizabad, Sitapur, Bareilly, and 
Kannauj) covering a total of 10,500 ASHAs and 2,000 Auxiliary nurse 
Midwives (ANM’s).  ASHAs are given smartphones and ANMs are provided 
with tablets to effectively plan, manage and perform their day-to-day work, 
with the aim to improve maternal and child health service delivery. mSEHAT 
uses a proprietary software application and is implemented by the State 
Innovation in Family Planning Services Project Agency (SIFPSA) of the 
Government of Uttar Pradesh.
Page 46
Number of concurrent Signal 
Functions when “this” Signal KENYA
Function is employed COUNTRY OVERVIEW
1 2 3 4 5 6 23 PROJECTS* HEALTH DOMAINS ADDRESSED
24% (10) 17% (7) F.2 No. of Projects
Infectious, Parasitic & Vector Borne Disease  7
Maternal Health  5
Child Health  4
Family Planning & Reproductive Health  2
Electronic Decision
Data Collection Support
12% (5) 12% (5) 10% (4) * Number of projects do not reflect that actual number of projects in the country but the number that was 
reported in our database
Sensor & 10
Electronic Health Point of Care Supply Chain TYPE OF FHW
Records Diagnostics Management
Health Facility Staff (includes 
doctors, nurses, first respon- 9
dents & other hospital staff)
CHWs (includes ASHA, CHEWs 
 & other variations of CHWs)
2
7% (3) 7% (3) 5% (2) Midwives/TBA’s
TYPE OF PHONE
Registries & 15
Provider Training Provider to Provider Vital Events Smartphone
& Education Communication Tracking 6
Tablet
Any Phone 4
2% (1) 2% (1) 2% (1)
SCALE OF PROJECTS 3 3
2
Ranges not represented did 
Client Education Financial not have any current reported 
& Behavior Change Transactions & Human Resource projects.
Communication Incentives Management
<10 11 - 50 101 - 500
Page 47
TANZANIA TYPE OF FHW14 CHWs (includes ASHA, CHEWs  & other variations of CHWs)8
COUNTRY OVERVIEW - 22 PROJECTS* Health Facility Staff (includes doctors, nurses, first respon-
* Number of projects do not reflect that actual number dents & other hospital staff)F.3 of projects in the country but the number that was 2
reported in our database Midwives/TBA’s
TYPE OF PHONE
HEALTH DOMAINS ADDRESSED 15 Smartphone
No. of Projects 4 Any Phone
Maternal Health  7 3 Tablet
Infectious, Parasitic & Vector Borne Disease  5
Family Planning & Reproductive Health  6 1 Feature Phone
Child Health  3
7
20% (10) SCALE OF PROJECTS
Ranges not represented did 
not have any current reported 
3 projects.
Electronic Decision 2
Support Number of concurrent Signal Functions 
when “this” Signal Function is employed 11 - 50 51 - 100 101 - 500
1 2 3 4 5 6
16% (8) 14% (7) 10% (5) 8% (4) 6% (3)
Client Education Sensor & Financial
Data Collection & Behavior Change Electronic Health Point of Care Transactions &
Communication Records Diagnostics Incentives
6% (3) 6% (3) 4% (2) 4% (2) 4% (2)
Provider to Provider Provider Registries &Provider Training Supply Chain
Communication Workplanning Vital Events
& Scheduling & Education Management Tracking
Page 48
Early Warning System
PROJECTS Hang Up & Track Country:Ghana Year Started: 2011Country: Democratic Republic of the Congo Platform: CommTrack/CommCare Supply
Year Started: 2014 Type of Health Worker: Health Facility Staff
AT SCALE Platform: ODK Health Domain: Open to all domainsType of Health Worker: Any CHWHealth Domain: Infectious, Parasitic & Early Warning System 
Vector-borne Disease (EWS) involves the use of mobile 
(1001+ users) F.4 phones by health facility staff to report 
Community health stock levels of 27 tracer commodities (HIV, ma-
workers (CHWs) do not just laria, and family planning) via SMS to a dedicated 
distribute LLINs, they also installed short code on a weekly basis. By logging in to the 
MomConnect and hung them up in each household. EWS website through the Internet, Regional Medical  They then recorded household regis- Stores are also able to input their stock levels for 
Country: South Africa tration data using smart phones, took the 27 tracer commodities. Data is then processed 
Year Started: 2014 GPS coordinates, and took a photo and immediately made available to all rele-
Platform: MAMA/Vumi of the installed mosquito net to vant participants on a website accessible 
Type of Health Worker: Health Facility Staff ensure accountability and to all program managers and 
Health Domain: Maternal & Child Health accuracy. participating providers.
MomConnect has three 
main objectives: 1) Register each 
pregnancy at a government health 
facility; 2) Send stagebased, personalized SIJARIEMAS
short message service (SMS) texts to each mom mSAKHI The Referral Exchange System 
in the registry; and 3) Allow women to engage Country: India Country: Indonesia
with the health system through help desk tools Year Started: 2012 Year Started: 2011
and feedback services. The services are free to Platform: N/A Platform: Not Specified
the user, and messages are currently avail- Type of Health Worker: ASHA Type of Health Worker: Midwives
able in six languages and will shortly be Health Domain: Maternal & Child Health Health Domain: Open to all domains
available in all 11 official South 
African languages. mSakhi, (‘a friend’ ? System was devel-in Hindi) is an interactive oped to address challenges audio/video-guided application of the current referral system by 
that provides support to ASHAs 
mHealth for Integrated facilitating timely communication in conducting routine activities 
Community Case Management and improved coordination within an across the continuum of agreed upon referral network (public 
Country: Malawi MNCH care. and private facilities and health 
Year Started: 2012 providers) using SMS, internet 
Platform: Not Specified and phone calls.
Type of Health Worker: HSAs, Nurses
Health Domain: Maternal & Child Health
? Improving the quality of child health care at the primary cStock Supply Chainslevel through integrated decision- for Community Case Management
support tools. These tools include clinical Country: Malawi
protocols for infant care, registration of eligible Year Started: 2011
children and treatment management, supervision Platform: N/A
tools to gather KPIs for HSA performance, tool Client Education & Behavior Type of Health Worker: HSAs
for improved logistics management to improve Change Communication Health Domain: Maternal & Child Health &
the availabilityof needed drugs at the rural Infectious, Parasitic & Vector-borne Disease
clinics where HSAs see patients. Data Collection
cStock uses mobile technology 
to increase community access to 
Supply Chain Management life-saving medicines needed to treat all 
three targeted childhood illnesses (malar-
Bring your 
Electronic Decision Support ia, pneumonia, and diarrhea) for improved own phone community case management  to reduce U5 
mortality. cStock was introduced as an integral 
Provider to Provider 
Smartphone component of two broader intervention Communication strategies – Enhanced Management 
? Unspecified Registries & Vital Events (EM) and Efficient Product Tracking Transport (EPT). Page 49
4. Current trends in the use of mobile phones/tablets by FHW
(continued)
As highlighted in Section 2 of this report, evidence on the performance of 
these FHW programs continues to be limited. Section 2 summarizes the 
Performance of evidence based on a review of peer-reviewed literature. However, it should 
Existing Programs be noted that most projects reported on in the peer-reviewed literature 
operated at a small scale under “efficacy” (i.e. ideal) settings. A number of 
projects reported on in the peer reviewed literature ceased to operate 
once the study ended, or after the funding cycle ended. To capture the 
G performance of current projects, several of which are operational at a larger scale, we reached out to the implementing organizations to share 
any available data on performance, which may not have been available in 
published form. Evidence on the performance of these projects is 
summarized below based on the primary function served by the programs. 
Please note that specific references for most of the data presented below 
was through personal communication with the project leadership. 
Supply-chain management: Zidi, a health management information 
system, reported that’s its implementing clinics experienced a 40-70% 
increase in revenues within the first month of use, possibly due to reduced 
pilferage of medicine. A different approach to Zidi, Sightsavers used 
SMS for Life to collect weekly data on drugs for neglected tropical 
diseases (NTDs) in Cameroon. The project reports that districts where 
mobile reporting was implemented had 90% data availability, compared 
to 40% data availability in comparison districts. The number of treatments 
for NTDs increased by 10.5% in intervention districts compared to a 3.5% 
increase in comparison districts. A RCT, in partnership with Tulane 
University, is underway to assess the impact of data monitoring for supply 
chain management. eLMIS in Bangladesh facilitates mobile reporting of 
family planning commodities and stock-outs. Improved visibility of logistics 
data has reduced stock-outs at the facility level from 69% in 2009 to 0.7% 
in 2014. cStock, currently being scaled in Malawi, aims to reduce 
stock-outs of life saving medicines for treating childhood illnesses 
(malaria, pneumonia, diarrhea). cStock was introduced as an integral 
component of two strategies- Enhanced Management, and Efficient 
Product Transport (EPT). The program reports that EM was significantly 
more effective than EPT in reducing stock-outs, and had a mean drug 
resupply duration of 12.8 days compared to 26.4 days for EPT. These 
findings suggest that the implementation of a mobile-based intervention 
to reduce stock-outs is more effective with an accountable management 
structure.(Shieshia et al., 2014)
Page 50
4. Current trends in the use of mobile phones/tablets by FHW
(continued)
Improved coverage of interventions: Coverage of interventions might 
improve if the mobile intervention is helping to improve the demand for the 
Performance of service (e.g. through education), supporting continued use of the service 
Existing Programs (e.g. through reminders), creating incentives for improved use of services 
(e.g. financial reimbursements) or resulting in improved quality of health-
care delivery. Wired Mothers sends pregnant women appointment 
reminders, educational information, and a mobile phone voucher which 
G can be used to contact their provider in case of emergencies. The project reported improved and sustained use of antenatal care was observed in the 
intervention group, and that 60% women who were receiving this 
intervention versus 47% in the control group delivered with a skilled 
attendant (OR- 5.73, 95% CI -1.51-21.81). No significant difference was 
observed in the outcomes among rural women. mCare in Bangladesh used 
a multi-functional approach with community-level pregnancies and birth 
registration,  follow up with pregnant clients, and facilitation of referrals for 
mother and newborns. Pilot data suggest that the intervention resulted in 
tripling number of antenatal visits, and doubling postnatal visits in the 
intervention groups as compared to the control groups. 
TulaSalud in Guatemala trained 125 community facilitators (CFs) to use 
mobile phones to consult with medical staff, call for emergency 
transfer of pregnant women with a complication, capture data on pregnant 
and post-partum women in real-time, and receive continuous training on 
promotional and prevention activities through teleconferences. The study 
reported that over the 5-year implementation period, the CFs conducted 
116,275 medical consultations, monitored 6,783 pregnant women, and 
coordinated 2,014 emergency transfers.(Martinez-Fernandez, Lobos-
Medina, Diaz-Molina, Chen-Cruz, & Prieto-Egido, 2015) The project claims 
a significant decline on maternal and infant mortality attributable to the 
intervention, however the study methods used are inadequate and this 
claim is not well substantiated in data. A recent impact evaluation, 
compared the effectiveness of a mobile phone based intervention 
added onto an existing maternal and child health program in Bihar, with 
the core program.(Borkum et al., 2015)  The Ananya program in Bihar aims 
to improve maternal and infant health outcomes through a series of FHW 
interventions at the community level. The Information and Communication 
Technology (ICT) Continuum of Care Services (CCS) intervention 
provided ASHA’s and Aganwadi workers (AWWs) with mobile phones to 
aid with pregnancy registration, schedule home visits, and use guided 
audiovisual job-aids for counselling clients. Auxiliary midwives (ANMs) and 
lady supervisors (LSs) were provided ICT-enabled phones to improve 
oversight and supervision of ASHA’s and AWW’s. Though technical and 
logistical challenges were reported by the project, it has a significant 
2-year impact on several coverage indicators. The intervention 
significantly improved the frequency of FHW- client interactions 
especially during the final trimester.  50% of the women in the ICT-CS 
group had atleast 3 antenatal care visits, compared to 29% women in the 
comparison group. 
Page 51
4. Current trends in the use of mobile phones/tablets by FHW
(continued)
Similar improvements were seen for immediate breastfeeding (76 percent 
in treatment group versus 62 percent in the comparison group), 
Performance of introduction of complementary feeding (41 percent versus 32 percent, 
Existing Programs and introduction of solid/semi-solid foods for children over 6 months (64 
percent versus 55 percent). No significant improvements were seen on 
measures of birth preparedness, and facility deliveries.
G Retention of clients in care: Ongoing retention of clients in care is important to the success of a number of chronic disease management 
programs, including HIV/AIDS programs. TXT-Alert in South Africa 
reported that sending HIV-positive pregnant women reminders about 
upcoming appointments, and their CD4 count test results by SMS, helped 
reduce drop-out rates. TXT-Alert has less than 10 active users currently. It 
should be noted that there is no evidence on the effect of mobile reminders 
on long-term (>1 year) retention in care in developing countries. 
Training of FHW: Training of FHW using mobile devices was reported a 
one of the most common program goals, often built in as sub-component of 
a more comprehensive intervention. The Safe Delivery App, which can be 
downloaded free of charge, is designed to train traditional birth attendants 
in the management of normal and complicated deliveries. The program 
reported (based on a cluster randomized trial)  that the intervention health 
workers skill scores increased significantly compared to control at both 6 
months (mean 6·04 (4·26-7·82)) and 12 months from baseline (mean 8·79 
(7·14-10·45)). Knowledge scores also improved more in the intervention 
compared to the control group; 1·67 (1·02-2·32) at 6 months, and 1·54 (0·98-
2·09) at 12 months. This resulted in a lower (but not statistically significant) 
perinatal mortality in interventions groups (14 per 1,000 births) compared to 
23 per 1,000 births in control clusters (OR 0·76, 95% CI 0·32-1·81). 
BBC Media Action piloted Mobile Academy, a program to reinforce health 
worker’s knowledge about pregnancy and aid in counselling.  mSAKHI, also 
in India, aims to support CHWs (i.e. ASHA in India) through an interactive 
audio-visual app that guides the CHWs in conducting activities across the 
MNCH continuum. Some qualitative evidence to suggest that the CHWs 
perceived this to be useful has been reported. No studies on the 
effectiveness of these programs were identified. 
Provider-to-provider communication is another feature that is 
typically built into a broader programs. The direct benefits of facilitating 
direct communication between providers is challenging to quantify. The 
mHero platform allows rapid communication via SMS, IVR and direct calls 
among health workers, government authorities, and other stakeholders to 
strengthen communication among health authorities. It was widely 
adopted and used by agencies to improve coordinated response to 
the Ebola epidemic. 
Page 52
4. Current trends in the use of mobile phones/tablets by FHW
(continued)
Sensors and diagnostics: Specific mobile apps and clip-on hardware that 
serve a range of diagnostic functions are being tested for use by FHWs in 
Performance of the community. A study to assess the effectiveness of training CHWs to use 
Existing Programs a mobile phone cardiovascular disease (CVD) risk assessment application 
to screen clients for CVD reported that the mean screening time using a 
paper based system was 36 minutes, compared to 21 minutes using the 
mobile phone application.(Surka et al., 2014) The study also reported that 
G the paper-based system resulted in significantly more incorrect calculations for blood pressure and basal metabolic rate.  “PIERS on the 
Move" integrates the miniPIERS (Pre-eclampsia Integrated Estimate of 
RiSk) predictive model, which can accurately stratify pregnant women into 
risk categories up to one week before complications arise and without 
laboratory tests with a Phone Oximeter, a cellphone based pulse oximeter 
(a non-invasive device which can measure blood oxygen saturation levels). 
The mobile phone application assists community health workers to provide 
local, rapid and accurate risk assessment, referral, and treatment advice 
for pre-eclampsia, and transmits information to referral centers for 
coordination of triage, transportation and treatment. Some data on 
coverage of this service is available, but no information on the accuracy and 
effective is available. Another mobile app for android phones called Peek 
Vision, can run a range of tests, including visualization of the back of the 
eye.  The test has shown to have a sensitivity of >80% and specificity of 
>90% for detecting retinopathies. The acuity was shown to be comparable 
to the gold-standard.(Bastawrous et al., 2015) A mobile phone microscope 
has been evaluated in Tanzania, had 69% sensitivity and 62% 
specificity in detecting soil transmitted parasitic infections, with robust 
results in peer-review publications.(Ephraim et al., 2015) DekiReader, a 
mobile-based invitro diagnostic device interprets commercially available 
rapid diagnostic tests for malaria, HIV, syphilis, hepatitis, and dengue. 
Quality issues are still being addressed and data on effectiveness 
is unavailable. 
Real-time data capture and monitoring: Mobile data collection for a 
variety of healthcare domains was reported as one of the most commonly 
functions.  In some cases, mobile data collection may be a standalone 
activity for real time monitoring of health data. In programs targeted at 
reaching clients for ongoing engagement with healthcare, FHWs may be 
involved with activities to register clients. For example, MomConnect in 
South Africa employs CHWs to register pregnant women in health 
facilities to receive pregnancy-related information on their mobile phones. 
The service covers nearly 86% of the government facilities in the country, 
and evaluation studies are underway. Ma Sante in Mali and Senegal uses 
mobile phones for data collection on malaria and other critical child health 
indicators, and subsequently, improves communication and response to 
addresses problems. The project reports that rapid detection of suspected 
malaria cases increased house calls by CHWs by 20%, and resulted in a 
25% increase in the number of children receiving malaria treatment within 
24 hours. No comparison group was reported. 
Page 53
4. Current trends in the use of mobile phones/tablets by FHW
(continued)
Electronic decision support system and EHRs: Decision support tools 
have been used to serve a number of critical health functions. The mHealth 
Performance of for Safe Deliveries project in Zanzibar has developed a clinical algorithm 
Existing Programs that takes TBA’s step-by-step through the process of screening pregnant 
women, counselling them, identifying danger signs, and contacting the 
emergency driver, if needed. Some primary data on impact is currently 
in publication.  The program reports that over 200 TBAs and CHWs have 
G registered over 7000 women using the tool. The intervention areas report a high rate of facility deliveries (75%), compared to the 35% rate in Zanzibar. 
A similar mobile application based decision support system in Tanzania 
guides CHWs to systematically guide clients through their contraceptive 
choices based on their fertility intentions. The mobile application includes 
reminders to CHWs to follow up on their clients for contraceptive refills and 
to confirm completion of referral to the health facility for long acting 
contraceptives. Pathfinder implemented a pre/post study to assess the 
effect of using a decision support system for ANC by CHEWs on quality of 
ANC, in Abuja. 150 CHEWs were trained in the use of the application, and 
266 clients were counselled using it. Quality was assessed based on 25 
indicators covering technical and counselling elements of ANC. The study 
reports that the quality score improved from 13.3 at baseline to 17.2 at 
endline.(Mcnabb, Chukwu, Ojo, & Shekhar, 2015)
Below: Mother and child arrive for 
check-up appointment
Page 54
5. Summary of Findings and Future Directions
We note that few programs have achieved scale- section 4E shows how 
the number of reported projects drops sharply at 500 users. This might 
Framework based on suggest that a number of  programs that are operating at a smaller scale 
findings do not have the built-in capacity to scale beyond a certain point due to 
infrastructural, managerial, organizational, political and technical 
limitations. Figure 10 presents a framework to highlight some critical 
considerations for FHW-supported mHealth programs to move beyond the 
A pilot stage. We posit that several functional, infrastructural/environmental, and cost considerations must be considered when selecting a platform 
and phone for developing programs to support activities of FHWs. 
Appropriateness of the chosen intervention approaches to the skills and 
context of the FHW is foundational to the success of the program. As the 
number of users increases, the fine balance between platform selection, 
phone selection and cost becomes even more critical. 
Figure 10: Considerations for scaling mHealth programs for FHW
Page 55
5. Summary of Findings and Future Directions
(continued)
Insight: The "Enterprise Chasm"?
One interesting observation with the above distribution of projects brings 
Framework based on to mind a distribution much like the well-known Gartner Hype Cycle for 
findings technologies (Figure 9c). On the left hand side, we have 41 projects with 
fewer than 500 users, in the middle only 4 projects with 500-1000 users, 
and at the extreme level of “scale”, a mere 11 projects with over 1000 users. 
Of course, a number of caveats prevent definitive conclusions to be drawn 
A from this dataset with any degree of certainty, but a few interesting hypotheses may be proposed. A major differentiator between projects on 
the left and right sides of this possible “Enterprise Chasm” is complexity. 
Digital FHW projects that have emerged as leaders in scale surprisingly are 
parsimonious, with primarily a single function (usually decision support).
One might speculate that a combination of both intrinsic and external fac-
tors contribute to challenges in making it across this Chasm, not least being 
the necessary ecosystem required to support programs with over 1000 
users. At smaller scale, with under 500 users, a limited number of technical 
support personnel may be able to support operational and technical issues 
which arise in the implementation of the project. However, the need for 
human resources, technical supply chains and system redundancy planning 
becomes more pronounced at larger scale. Funding and institutionalization 
may also play a contributory role to the chasm.  Smaller mHealth projects 
can be designed and implemented within the confines of a five-year proj-
ect.  In order to grow larger, they often have to make the leap from the 
project-life cycle into a new funding mechanism.  This is a complex under-
taking, requiring that the mHealth project had achieved enough success 
and institutional buy-in before the end of the umbrella project that it was 
able to interest other funders and partners.  This process has been unique 
to each of the larger deployments.
Page 56
5. Summary of Findings and Future Directions
(continued)
Interestingly, when technology solutions are deployed at 1000+ users, 
implying their being a requisite part of the FHW’s workflow, there must be a 
Framework based on certain guarantee of functional redundancy in the event of a system failure. 
findings One can imagine how intolerant a health system would be of a defective 
or dysfunctional device preventing a FHW from performing her daily work. 
Also intriguing is the apparent simplicity of systems which make it across 
the Chasm, into large scale deployment – perhaps a combination of 
A technical functionality and stability and political acceptability of simpler systems. It remains unclear, given the present state of available data, which 
precise intrinsic and external factors may be contributing to limiting the 
number of projects which we have documented operating at scale. 
Further implementation science research is required to better characterize 
the technical, social, political and enabling ecosystem components which 
are needed to allow digital FHW projects to scale. It is also unclear in this 
early stage of mHealth system evolution whether complexity can increase 
once projects integrate themselves successfully into the health system 
at a larger scale. This is also an opportunity to emphasize a global sea 
change in the mHealth landscape away from complex monolithic systems 
towards an encouragement of parsimonious systems which are 
interoperable with others, especially integrating with larger national 
health information systems. 
This report highlights the need for more accurate documentation of the 
implementation, challenges and effectiveness of mHealth. Given the recent 
Limitations in explosion of support for mHealth programs, there is a large amount of 
Identifying Credible churn- where programs operate for a small period of time only. Reporting, 
Data and Findings and updating of data on programs can be very useful in decision-making. 
As reported in Section 3 of the report, 45% of the programs (who 
responded to our surveys) recorded in the USAID compendia are no longer 
operational.  We provide a description of these projects in Appendix D . 
B An additional 35% of the programs did not respond to our requests for follow-up. The information available on the operations, implementation and 
effectiveness of such programs in the public domain is limited. Most 
programs, including those operating at scale, have limited data on the 
effectiveness of their approaches. The fact that these programs have 
scaled, represents the enthusiasm of the stakeholders and intuitive 
perceived benefits of such programs.
The results of this report help push the envelope beyond what is known 
about the trends and effectiveness of mHealth programs from peer-
reviewed literature. We draw on multiple sources of information from 
mHealth databases, organizations doing mHealth work, peer-review 
literature and mHealth experts. The database developed to report these 
findings is a unique contribution to the space, and possibly the only current 
database that compiles this information. It however, has several limitations. 
First- results from the analysis of the database should be cautiously 
interpreted as the sample of included projects is self-selective.
Page 57
5. Summary of Findings and Future Directions
(continued)
We recognize that we may have missed projects, especially those in 
non-English speaking locales, led by non-English-speaking managers, or 
Limitations in programs that are not connected to the mHealth community in any way. 
Identifying Credible Second- the quality of information collected for the database is of 
Data and Findings variable quality, with several missing items. For example, less than 50% 
of the respondents had any information on the number of users. We 
hypothesize that these programs are likely to be operating at a small scale 
resulting in some systematic errors in our conclusions. We individually 
B contacted every project in the USAID compendia, but when some projects did not respond to repeated requests for follow-up we were not able to 
include them in this review. We were not able to conduct the same type of 
follow up for the projects in the CHMI compendia so it is likely that some 
of this information is outdated. In seeking to ensure that we conducted our 
data collection in a systematic way, we had to strike a balance between 
trying to ensure that any project we included came through our data 
collection channels, while not ignoring projects we know to be substantial 
but which are not properly captured even in the grey literature.
To encourage participation, our surveys had room for free text. While 
attempts were made to code this text accurately, sometimes the 
information was incoherent, and we had to use our best judgement 
in coding it.
In addition to identifying gaps and directions for future progress based on 
the finding of our research, we also present additional insights from 
Gaps and Way Forward leaders in the field (Lesley Anne Long, Sara Chamberlain, and Marc 
Mitchell) in boxes below. For complete transparency, the initials of the 
expert are listed after each quote. 
C Mobile technology based interventions have benefited from the enthusiastic, and often unquestioning support of implementing and 
governmental agencies, corporates, and donors. However, there has also 
been a recent recognition of the lack of evidence to support the blanket 
use of such technologies. The emergent landscape of multiple small scale 
programs with different applications of existing and proprietary platforms, 
and types of phones to varied healthcare functions, has thrown 
decision-makers for a loop about ways to move forward constructively. This 
report helps to shed light on some of the emergent trends and summarizes 
knowledge and insights from practitioners; however it is still limited in its 
recommendations moving forward due to the limitations in evidence on 
what works. Two factors that should be simultaneously taken into account 
when supporting a specific mobile-based intervention approach- 1.) What 
function does the intervention serve?; 2.) What level of evidence (and 
quality of evidence) is needed to support the intervention?
Page 58
5. Summary of Findings and Future Directions
(continued)
It is critical to note that not all interventions need the same amount and 
quality of evidence in order to be supported. For example, several options 
Gaps and Way Forward alternate to the use of mobile phones might be available to train FHW in 
the delivery of healthcare. In order to support the use of mobile phones 
instead of an alternative, we need to answer questions such as- Is training 
C FHWs using mobile phones more effective than an alternate strategy ? Is this impact sustained over time? Is it more cost-effective than an alternate strategy? Interventions that directly influence delivery of services and 
outcomes need this robust level of evidence that is based on comparison 
with alternate strategies, in order to have enough support for their 
continuation. However, interventions that are targeted at improving the 
process in some way may not need as robust evidence. For example, using 
mobile tools for data collection has benefits that are more intuitive, and 
may need evidence on best practices to make it work to move forward.
Expert opinion: What kinds of challenges are we all facing?
• Reporting: Lack of feedback and data entry duplication
 Reporting systems are too top-down - data gets sent up to district/ 
 region/ministry level, but FLHWs don't get to realize/are not told  
 about the value of decisions based on the data they send…FLHWs  
 don’t feel engaged in the data (or don’t see its relation to their day 
 to day jobs) this probably impacts on the quality and integrity of the  
 data. (LA)
 Most technology innovations for FLHWs (esp. with data and visit  
 recording) have been small scale (perhaps not comprehensive   
 across even a small district), so HWs are still required to complete  
 paper records/reports. This adds a burden to their workload as they  
 essentially need to report the same data twice.  (LA)
• Electricity and charging
 “Feedback from the recent HEW workshops in Ethiopia was that  
 power/electricity access is the very top item on the health 
 workers’ list of barriers/challenges in mHealth interventions 
 (especially those using smartphones, with shorter battery life).  Solar  
 chargers etc. can help with this issue, but the very small/persoal 
 solar devices aren't really a good substitute over mains/grid supply  
 for regular/consistent recharging (larger solar/wind systems may be  
 but these come with their own technical maintenance challenges).”  
 (LA)
Page 59
5. Summary of Findings and Future Directions
(continued)
Most technical platforms have not been deployed and tested at scale and 
there is little evidence to suggest how they may function at scale. The 
Gaps and Way Forward paucity of complex, multi-faceted systems which are operating at scale 
suggests either that the current state of the ecosystem is still in its early 
growth phase, or that in these early days of mHealth Systems at large scale, 
C parsimonious systems are easier to expand. This may be attributable to a combination of technical, human and political factors. More complex systems architecture are challenging to oversee and manage, requiring dedicated 
staff and resources to ensure functionality and constant debugging / 
troubleshooting. Groups like Dimagi (responsible for CommCare), although 
clearly successful in the ‘scale-by-replication’ model have admittedly found it 
difficult to keep pace, from a technical support perspective, with the rapid 
expansion of projects using its platform. Like with any complex system, the 
more moving parts, the greater the innate risk of the system malfunctioning 
or breaking down, especially when the number of users reaches a certain 
threshold. 
Similarly, the support network required to troubleshoot, repair and replace 
hardware when the population of users meets a certain level is substantial. 
In our experience, one supervisor can usually manage a team of 20-35 
individuals most efficiently. When this ratio is extended by an order of 
magnitude (200-350), a reflection of the technical support end user ratio in 
many mHealth deployments, if not less, the dependability of these systems 
for daily function is compromised. Systems required for everyday FHW 
functions must therefore integrate multiple layers of redundancy (hardware 
and software) to avoid crippling fieldwork due to technical dysfunction. This is 
especially true during the early stages of a project implementation, when user 
expectations are high and the risk of disenchantment equally so.
Finally, from a political perspective, our experience and those of colleagues 
leading platforms included in this report suggests that the first response to the 
expansion of digital tools for FHWs by large NGOs or governments to be either 
skepticism or cautious enthusiasm. In this context, parsimonious systems with 
clear functions that fit cleanly into existing workflows may face less resistance. 
Uncertainties around the true cost of scaling and sustaining these systems 
have also been reported as barriers to scale-up.
Important gaps still persist in our understanding of the ecosystem, support 
infrastructure and human capacity required to introduce, scale and sustain 
digital tools for FHWs. There are ample technical systems which can be 
mapped to the core signal functions of FHWs in most settings. From basic 
enumeration and surveillance, to communications and protocol adherence – 
commercial and open-source systems have emerged and have 
demonstrated stability with a large number of users. A clear trend suggests 
simplicity of purpose to be associated with scalability – although it is not clear 
whether this is, in fact, a causal association. There is limited information on 
data security protocols and compliance with national regulations. Most 
countries where these projects are operational may not have any national 
regulations on data security imposed. However, as community data are 
integrated with facility base patient records, this will need to be addressed. 
Our results suggest that demand is high for systems that are compatible with 
low bandwidth and intermittent connectivity environments, however, limited 
options exist for users in such environments. Page 60
5. Summary of Findings and Future Directions
(continued)
Globally, there is increased discussion around interoperability – developing 
systems which can share information and leverage specific functions to improve 
Gaps and Way Forward efficiencies. “Backbone” services, such as shared health records and unique 
individual identifiers, are required essential investments before large-scale 
interoperability can truly be harnessed.  Once in place, though, such frameworks 
may allow simple FHW-targeted systems to work together on a common platform 
C (eg. like multiple, interconnected “apps” on a mobile device), as well as contribute to national health information systems like DHIS2 or clinical systems like OpenMRS. Data on the degree to which the systems described in this report 
adhere to standards is limited, as recognition of the importance of data standards 
and common data dictionaries is just emerging. Most of the materials available / 
repositories searched did not include any reporting of data architecture or data 
standards used by the programs.
Although the existing evidence for the cost-effectiveness of mHealth interventions 
for FHWs looks promising, there is insufficient evidence because of the limited 
research done on the topic. The literature reviewed provides an analysis of the 
cost-effectiveness of specific interventions, but the lack of a clear representation 
of which costs are included in different cost categories, and whether the costs 
evaluated are all-inclusive, both inhibits a clear understanding of the cost 
effectiveness of individual interventions and the aggregate cost-effectiveness of 
mHealth interventions for FHWs. In addition, the discrepancy needs to be made 
between research and intervention costs when considering the sustainability of 
an intervention. 
Expert opinion: Why is it so much easier to talk about scale than it is to accomplish it?
• “… NGOs and open source software providers are unproductively 
competing against each other and governments are overwhelmed by too 
many competitive choices. And often it’s the same donor funding multiple 
pieces of software that do basically the same thing and then through their 
competition, which involves different government folks competing for 
resources, nothing gets scaled…” (SC)
• “Tech programs can be myopic - programs are deemed a success when 
they do well on a specific indicator. Yet often these programs don't address 
the complexity of disease or human interactions or the multifaceted 
environment in which health workers work. NGOs all seem to want a specific 
app – despite the fact that about 99% of what most organizations want for a 
program can already be done by existing code/apps. So NGOs are 
essentially creating new apps for the 1%...These are issues related to 
mHealth implementers and planners rather than on the direct use by 
FLHWs. And because they focus on specific indicators, they are unlikely to 
go to scale once the funding for the program ends.  (LA)
• “…the most neglected area, which requires the most attention, is focusing 
on scale and what happens after the scale up - not in terms of software 
(although support is key), but in terms of everything else - procurement, 
distribution, training, support, financial management, monitoring, 
supervision, incentives etc.” (SC)
Page 61
5. Summary of Findings and Future Directions
(continued)
Further research should explicitly include a comprehensive list of costs 
included in all of the relevant cost categories; and then be evaluated and 
Gaps and Way Forward compared using a standard set of cost-effectiveness indicators. 
C
Expert Opinion: What are key areas to focus on as we move forward?
• From a programs perspective, a comprehensive approach (including 
interoperability in systems as well as coordination in programs), user-
centeredness, and willingness to improve on an existing technology rather 
than starting from scratch seem to be common sticking points – basically 
programs should be based on and only funded if they can demonstrate they 
have used the principles for digital development in their design/
implementation plans.
• “…some of the program areas that most stand to benefit from mobile 
technology are communication, reporting, and learning:
 Communication - FLHWs, especially in remote areas, need better  
 access to on-demand information, someone to answer questions, 
 a way to communicate their needs for resources (transport, supplies,  
 etc), and a functioning referral system (one of the aspects of HELP  
 that the community health volunteers rated the highest satisfaction  
 was not the learning aspects of the program but the fact they could  
 talk to each other and their supervisors using the free closed calling  
 system)
 Reporting - mHealth has not comprehensively solved the problem  
 that reporting systems are often slow, inaccurate, and extremely  
 time consuming for FLHWs; and in many cases an mHealth solution  
 is run alongside the existing print based solution so adds to the  
 health worker’s tasks;
 
 Learning - This includes training, but also broader areas including  
 tech literacy, access to new information, and peer learning. One big  
 issue here is integration of mobile tech into curricula, and training  
 that is useful to the user (considering language, pedagogy, relevance,  
 etc).” (LA)
Page 62
5. Summary of Findings and Future Directions
(continued)
To get a complete understanding of the cost-effectiveness of mHealth 
interventions for FHWs, the total savings should not only include the direct 
Gaps and Way Forward savings, but also the indirect and health systems savings resulting from the 
outputs and improved outcomes. Since the research indicates that initial 
costs are typically higher for mHealth interventions as opposed non-
C technical interventions, to make an argument for the mHealth interventions, it is important to understand the net-savings generated from their implementation by converting improved outcomes into monetary values.
Expert Opinion: What are key areas to focus on as we move forward? (cont)
• “Scaling distance learning/self-learning tools – as per our Mobile Academy 
– this is critical because standardized, high quality face to face training is so 
challenging and expensive to provide.” (SC)
• Scaling job aids to support their support FLWs in their critical outreach and 
health education work – as per our Mobile Kunji – again helps ensure facili-
tated, standardized, high quality counselling to families” (SC)
• “Scaling software that enables FLWs to create, access and update elec-
tronic medical records for women in their catchment area, and generate 
workplans/schedules with reminders for themselves is a critical next step – 
as per Dimagi/Motech/D-Tree/Cell-life and many more” (SC)
• Supply chain management for FLWs – so they can log shortages of sup-
plies (meds, contraceptive, supplements etc) and track shipments coming to 
their [primary health center].” (SC)
• On quality of care:
 “The use of decision support in the hands of health workers has  
 shown time and time again to improve diagnostic and treatment  
 accuracy and lead to more trust in the system by patients….The  
 question, then is what is needed? First, we need to focus more on  
 quality of care which in this case means getting the right diagnosis  
 and treatment. It also means communicating with the patient or  
 client in a way that can be heard. Using video and other novel ways  
 to communicate rather than relying solely on the provider to talk 
 with the client. We need ways to measure quality that measures if  
 treatments are correct and if patients who are sick get well. Do  
 clients feel they were well treated? Would they go back again?  
 Would they recommend it too their friends?” (MM)
Page 63
5. Summary of Findings and Future Directions
(continued)
Finally, while projections exist for both the cost-effectiveness of scaling 
mHealth interventions for FHWs, and opportunities to improve cost-
Gaps and Way Forward effectiveness, the research is very limited. Further research should be 
completed on mHealth interventions for FHWs that are either currently at 
scale, or are scaling up, to analyze the cost-effectiveness, but also to gain 
C a better understanding of what are the additional costs, costing challenge, and opportunities to improve cost-effectiveness. This will help inform the decision-making and design of mHealth interventions for FHWs with the 
objective of being implemented at scale.
Expert Opinion: What can government do to help?
• “A major step forward would simply be the provision of Closed User Group 
(CUG) SIM plans by government to allow FLWS to speak to each other for 
free.” SC
• “Digital training would be the next step – i.e. how to use a feature phone for 
anything other than voice calls.” SC
• “Provision of feature phones by government would be the next step (smart 
phones are obviously more useful – but battery life is a major issue) + SIM 
with data pack.” SC
Expert Opinion: What can donors do to help?
1) Support (not financially – but strategically and logistically) governments 
in not just the procurement of phones and SIM plans, but in figuring out how 
to support/repair/replace phones at scale on an ongoing basis. No one has 
really cracked this yet, and there seems to be little understanding of the 
economics of scaling and managing smart phone services. 
2) Fund digital skills development among FLWs
3) Recognize that it’s as important to figure out ongoing management, 
monitoring, supervision and support at scale as it is to fund software 
development – this isn’t about funding parallel government – it’s about 
figuring out strategies/methods/logistics and testing them, as much as 
testing software.
4) Fund localized content - and recognize that high quality content is as 
important as high quality software.
5) Stop funding so many competitive pilots and so much repetitive software.
Page 64
Platforms Case study 1: CommCare (Part of MOTECH Suite)
CommCare is a mobile platform for case management allowing frontline health workers for tracking and 
managing care for their beneficiaries. It allows implementers to rapidly create and deploy mobile applications 
without the need for any background in programming or software development. CommCare has over 300 active 
programs in over 50 countries, and  9,000 active users.
CommCare has two components:
1. CommCare Mobile: This is the mobile application 
that is typically used by the frontline health worker 
for data entry using a mobile phone or tablet. It can 
run on Android as well as basic feature phones.
2. CommCare HQ: This is the web application that 
Expert Opinion: What can government do to help? allows users, typically implementers or project 
managers, to create, edit and deploy applications 
without any programming. It allows users to create 
and manage frontline health workers (the users of 
CommCare Mobile) as well as for management of 
data, creation of reports and data analysis 
(CommCare, n.d.-b).
CommCare has been used for a number of mHealth 
application areas such as data collection and 
reporting, electronic decision support, supply 
chain management, client education and behavior 
Expert Opinion: What can donors do to help? change communication. One of the basic core 
functionalities of CommCare is in the ability to 
register and track clients for longitudinal care 
management. This allows FLWs to create a client 
record, manage visits and collect information at 
follow-up from the client.
Forms for data collection can be easily created on 
CommCareHQ with embedded logic for decision 
support. Decision support tools could be 
checklists, electronic protocols, algorithms for 
decision screening and supporting diagnostic tools 
(Chatfield et al., 2014). CommCare supports the 
inclusion of multimedia content - text, images, 
audio and video - and hence has been used for 
client counseling and education as well as for FLW 
training and learning. CommCare Mobile supports 
SMS and Internet as channels of communication 
for submitting data collected to a remote server. It 
can work in an internet disconnected environment, 
storing forms locally on the device and syncing in 
the presence of an internet connection.
Page 65
Platforms Case study 1: CommCare
(continued)
CommCare is open source and is also offered in a Software-as-a-Service (SaaS) model. Users can create an 
account on CommCareHQ and use their cloud hosted application to create mobile tools for FLWs. Its SaaS model 
has five software plans priced based on number of users and features provided, the basic “community” plan is free. 
Projects using CommCare pay more for advanced features and for more number of users. The software plans are 
not customizable and cannot be adjusted. Dimagi provides additional implementation support at added cost. 
Projects using CommCare can use the free online tools on CommCareHQ, though large scale applications typically 
use additional support from Dimagi. Dimagi has developed a Total Cost of Ownership (TCO) model that allows 
projects to estimate the total cost of adoption of CommCare over a five year period (CommCare, n.d.-a). 
CommCare mobile has an easy to use interface for FLWs allowing FLWs to swipe through screens and input data, 
show videos and photos, record findings, tag locations, capture photos, etc. The application can be developed in 
different languages. CommCareHQ allows implementers to develop applications though an easy-to-use user 
interface for application building and testing. It allows for easy customization of complex workflows, creation of 
multiple types of users and defining different roles for users in the system. The ability to create sophisticated, 
custom reports and dashboards is somewhat limited in CommCareHQ.
CommCare Supply (formerly known as CommTrack) is a specialized CommCare application developed for logistics 
and supply chain management. It supports FLWs for stock and inventory management. Some projects using 
CommCare Supply are the Informed Push Model in Senegal, the Early Warning System in Ghana and cStock 
in Malawi. 
Project focus: Innovations at Scale for Community Access and Lasting Effects (inScale)
Year started: 2013
Country: Mozambique
Organization(s): Malaria Consortium, Dimagi, Inhambane provincial health directorate, 
Mozambique Ministry of Health, London School of Hygiene & Tropical Medicine, University 
College of London (Implementation partners); Bill & Melinda Gates Foundation (Funder).
Health domain: Maternal, newborn and child health
FLW Users: Agentes Polivalentes Elementares (APEs), who are locally trained community 
workers for health promotion and education.
No. of users: 132 APEs, 47 supervisors and 6 district co-ordinators.
Deployments: Six districts in Inhambane province in southern Mozambique. Currently 
being scaled up to the provincial level by the MOH, UNICEF and Malaria Consortium.
The inSCALE project uses a mobile application for APEs developed using CommCare to 
provide decision support to APEs. It allows them to assess, classify, treat and refer patients 
to health facilities using decision support tools such as,
 • Symptoms checklist of mild and severe signs to provide treatment guidance
 • Pnuemonia detection using a built in respiratory timer
The application also allows APEs to collect case based information and also monitor drug 
stock levels at facilities. The data from APEs is aggregated on the CommCareHQ server 
which allows supervisors at the facility and district level to monitor health care workers, 
provide support, communicate over SMS, manage stock, create district level statistics and 
reports (Mendoza et al, 2014).
Page 66
Platforms Case study 2: DHIS2
DHIS 2 (District Health Information System) is a comprehensive HIS solution for reporting and analysis of health 
data. It is a platform for mobile data collection, analysis and visualization of aggregate healthcare statistical data, 
primarily used for (but not limited to) management of health information at a regional or national level.
Currently in use in over 47 countries, DHIS 2 is being 
used as the national level health information system 
for 16 countries (“DHIS2 Deployments,” n.d.) including 
Kenya, Tanzania, Uganda, Rwanda, Ghana, Liberia, and 
Bangladesh (“What is DHIS2?,” n.d.).
DHIS Mobile is a mobile application supporting one-time 
data capture as well as case-based data capture and 
tracking. It has been developed for low-end Java phones 
and collect data even in an offline environment. 
Collected data is submitted to a cloud based DHIS 2 
server over SMS and internet. In addition, it also has a 
web-browser based mobile client to support data 
collection using higher end smartphones.
The DHIS 2 web server is a cloud hosted server 
application with robust data management and data 
warehousing capabilities. DHIS 2’s strongest feature is 
its ability to manage data at the aggregate level, use data 
analytics, create dashboards and generate reports using 
its easy-to-use web UI. This along with its high degree of 
scalability makes it a strong HIS for patient data 
management.
Key features of DHIS 2 include 
(“Key Features and purpose of DHIS 2,” n.d.):
• Management of data using robust data warehousing 
principles
• Customization using a user interface, with no  
programming background required
• Tools to enable easy data entry through forms, lists 
and tables
• Case-based data collection to enable tracking of 
patients
• Data collection can occur in offline environment
• Tools for data validation to ensure data quality
• Easy visualization of aggregate data
• Ability to easily create sophisticated reports and 
summaries
• Modules for data analysis
• Dashboards of monitoring of important indicators for 
health surveillance
• Mobile based data collection solutions using SMS or 
web browser
• Extensibility through modular structure
• Integration with other software applications through 
the Web-API
• Highly scalable
Page 67
Platforms Case study 2: DHIS2
(continued)
A review of projects using DHIS 2 from the USAID compendia all utilized DHIS 2 in combination with other 
platforms, where DHIS 2 served the purpose of a data warehouse. These projects include SMS for Life: Sightsavers 
in Cameroon (platforms used – Mango, DHIS 2) (Levine et al., 2015), mCARE in Bangladesh (platforms used – 
OpenSRP, OpenMRS, DHIS 2) (Mendoza et al., 2013) and mHero in Liberia (platforms used – RapidPro, iHRIS, DHIS 
2) (Levine et al., 2015). 
Project focus:  DHIS2 in Kenya
Year started: 2011
Country: Kenya
Organization(s): Ministry of Health (MOH)
Health domain: N/A
Users: Health workers at district health level, data entry personnel, data managers.
No. of users: 9402 registered users as of September 2013 (Karuri et al. , 2014)
In September 2011, Kenya deployed a cloud based national HIS system becoming the first 
country in Sub-Saharan Africa to do so. Implementing a national level HIS system has been 
a part of Kenya’s national health strategy to improve health quality, healthcare service 
delivery, and collect meaningful information at the health facility level for data-driven 
decision making. The adoption of DHIS2 as its national HIS was notably due to its 
functional abilities of health facility level data reporting, data analysis, reporting and 
dashboards and GIS mapping (Manya et al., 2012).
The customized DHIS 2 software was initially tested in three distrcits: Machakos, Nyamira 
and Kisumu East and then piloted on a larger scale in the Coast province (Manya et al., 
2012). The proper development of ICT infrastructure, setting up a central national level 
server, collecting stakeholder feedback and ensuring stakeholder buy-in through meetings, 
proper training to users followed by supervision and support contributed to the overall 
success of the pilot. National level roll-out required a significant focus on training and 
assessment of readiness. Data import from other software systems being used by the MOH 
such as iHRIS was performed using WHO’s Statistical Data and Metadata Exchange for 
Health Domain (SDMX-HD) (Manya et al., 2012) ensuring interoperability between systems.
As of September 2013, the system had 9402 registered users and 2262 active users (users 
who had logged on to the system in the last 30 days) (Karuri et al., 2014). In order to meet 
the need for offline data entry due to fluctuation of internet connectivity, DHIS 2 used 
the offline capabilities of HTML 5 to save the data locally on the web browser and upload 
when the data connection was established. The system recorded 1,254,993 data points for 
deriving 688 indicators in the 30-day period from Aug-Sep 2013 (Karuri et al., 2014). User 
feedback was positive and the most popular tools reported were the standards reports 
and data visualizer (Manya et al., 2012). The adoption of DHIS 2 has significantly 
contributed to achieving Kenya’s Vision 2030 and improving health information reporting.
Page 68
Platforms Case study 2: DHIS2
(continued)
Project focus:  mHero
Year started: 2014
Country: Liberia
Organization(s): IntraHealth International, UNICEF, Jembu Health Systems, Thoughtworks, 
HISP, mPowering Frontline Health workers (Implementation Partners); UNICEF, USAID, 
Johnson & Johnson (Donors)
Users: Community Health Workers
No. of users: 500 – 1000 CHWs, 30 Other users
mHero (Health worker Electronic Response and Outreach) connects and empowers 
frontline health workers by enabling communication between health workers, supervisors, 
government officials and other stakeholders using SMS messaging for communication. The 
project originated among the Ebola outbreak in West Africa to address the need to rapidly 
disseminate actionable information to health workers and empower them with two-way 
communication tools(“The mHero Story: Adapting mobile technology to support health 
systems strengthening amid the Ebola Outbreak,” n.d.). It allows for data collection of key 
health indicators, manage the workforce and its continued professional development. 
Currently in pilot scale in Liberia, it is scheduled to scale up to the national level in Liberia 
with plans to expand to Guinea where it will be used to support health workers in maternal 
and child health.
mHero was built on top of existing platforms being used by the Ministry of Health and 
Social Welfare in Liberia - iHRIS and DHIS 2 and UNICEF’s RapidPro platform. Information 
about health workers and facilities in iHRIS and DHIS 2 is drawn and used to locate and 
connect healthcare workers. For this project, DHIS 2 and iHRIS acts as information 
systems for data management of data about health care workers and facilities. RapidPro is 
UNICEF’s interactive messaging system, which was already in use at the time of the Ebola 
outbreak. RapidPro serves as the messaging platform to disseminate information to groups 
of health workers and enable two-way communication between groups. This project 
leverages the interoperability of iHRIS and DHIS2 with RapidPro using the OpenHIE 
architecture (Levine et al., 2015).
Page 69
Platforms Case study 3: Open Data Kit (ODK)
ODK is an open source platform for building mobile data collection solutions. It allows users to build applications 
to enable easy collection of data, author forms and view aggregate data. An extensive survey of the ODK user and 
developer community conducted revealed up to 55 deployments of ODK in over 30 countries (Brunette et al., 2013); 
the actual number of active deployments of the ODK platform in mHealth may be different.
• ODK consists of tools for authoring forms,  
deploying applications for data collection  
based on these forms on Android devices and 
server-side tools for aggregating and viewing the 
collected data. 
• ODK Build (drag and drop tool for building forms) 
and XLSForm (allows for creation of more complex 
forms by creation in Excel): Tools for creating forms 
based on the XForms  
standard  
• ODK Collect: It is a smart phone client for data col-
lection that renders forms and content and can be 
deployed on an Android phone. 
• ODK Aggregate: An easy to deploy server  
application implemented on Google’s App  
Engine to which data is submitted by ODK  
Collect and is used to view the collected data.  
It can be hosted on the cloud, a virtual machine or 
private server. It has basic tools for data  
visualization and extraction such as spreadsheets, 
queries and maps (Anokwa et al., 2009). Data can be 
exported to other formats such as csv, kml or json 
(Hartung et al., 2010).
ODK is supported by a large developer community, uses 
open standards and is open source [2]. ODK has an easy 
to use interface to author forms, though it can be harder 
to create forms with more complex logic. The Android 
application has a simple user interface allowing the user 
swipe through screens to collect data points. In addition, 
the specialized applications of ODK greatly enhance the 
functionality, usability and flexibility of the ODK platform. 
• Sensors: connects external sensors to devices 
(Brunette et al., 2013)
• Scan: translate paper form to digital data 
(Brunette et al., 2013) 
Other specialized applications include Briefcase (transfer 
data from Collect and Aggregate), Clinic (Access/up-
date medical records), Tables (update/curate previously 
collected data) (Brunette et al., 2013) and Diagnostics 
(reads rapid diagnostic tests) (Dell et al., 2013).ODK is 
free to download and use, however, configuring and 
customizing ODK will vary based on implementation and 
requires additional expenditure for developer time. Other 
cost components would include server hosting, cost of 
internet connection, data, etc (Datadyne, n.d.) Page 70
Platforms Case study 3: Open Data Kit (ODK)
(continued)
Figure 1: Structure of the ODK platform with its various components and how they interact with each other.
Modified from Fig.1. Hartung C, Lerer A, Anokwa Y, Tseng C, Brunette W, Borriello G. Open data kit: tools to build 
information services for developing regions. InProceedings of the 4th ACM/IEEE International Conference on 
Information and Communication Technologies and Development 2010 Dec 13 (p. 18). ACM.
Basic features: 
• Easily create and author forms based on the XForms standard
• Easily digitize data collected using paper forms using ODK Scan
• Can easily and rapidly create an end-to-end data collection system
• Set up server using Google App Engine
• Data collected on devices is stored locally
• Data collection can occur in an offline environment; forms can be 
sent to the server once an internet connection is established
• Multiple languages are supported
• Active developer community and technical support available
• Can be easily customized
Page 71
Platforms Case study 3: Open Data Kit (ODK)
(continued)
Project focus: Hang Up and Track
Year started: 2014
Country: Democratic Republic of Congo
Organization(s): IMA World Health (implementation partner), Againt Malaria Foundation, 
UKAID (donors)
Health domain: Malarial prevention
Users: Community Health Worker (CHWs), Supervisors
No. of users: 1000+ CHWs, 22 Supervisors
Deployments: Eight health zones in western Kasai-Occidental province: Kitangwa, 
Mutena, Kamonia, Kamuesha, Banga Lubaka, Kanzala, Tshikapa and Kalonda. Expanding 
to Nord Ubangi province in 2016.
To increase malarial prevention in the Democratic Republic of Congo, IMA World Health 
implemented a mass long-lasting insecticidal net (LLIN) distribution campaign in which 
CHWs installed and hung up the nets in the household instead of simply distributing them 
to beneficiaries. In order to ensure accountability, accuracy and collect pertinent 
information related to the disease, the CHWs also registered the household, took a picture 
of the installed bed net, geo-tagged the location and collected socioeconomic data and 
data regarding malaria perception and malaria treatment using the ODK Collect 
application installed on their phones. This ensured full transparency and accountability 
through the use of the GPS data and images. It also allowed for easy visualization of the 
distribution activity visually through GIS using ODK Aggregate. Using the Hang Up and 
Track (HUT) strategy it was observed that coverage of households in the eight distribution 
areas was 93-99% (Levine et al., 2015). Recently, HUT has added an educational video for 
behavior change communication to the ODK survey that demonstrates how to hang up 
and take care of a net that is available in two local tribal languages.
Project focus: MP3Youth
Year started: 2014
Country: Kenya
Organization(s): New York University, University of Nairobi, Impact Research and 
Development Organization (implementation partners); National Institute of Health/
National Institute of Allergy and Infectious Diseases (Donor)
Health domain: HIV
Users: Field study staff
No. of users: 11-50 study staff, 600 Patients/clients
This is a pilot study assessing the impact of gender-specific packages for HIV prevention in 
high-burden settings. Patients are enrolled using tablets with ODK Collect using biometric 
identifiers which also simply patient tracking and follow up. A fingerprint scanner captures 
biometric data which is sent to ODK Collect. Behavioral data is also collected. Participants 
follow up occurs through the use of USSD and SMS to document behaviors and adherence 
to the selected intervention (Levine et al., 2015). 
Page 72
Appendix A: Descriptions of platforms most frequently reported as 
being used to support FHW programs
No. Technology Platform Description
1 Case.io Software for secure exchange of medical information with colleagues 
through transfer of files or images
3 CommCare Platform for quick development of mobile apps for longitudinal case 
management with minimal coding requirements.
4 CommCare Supply Platform for supply chain management, customized version of 
CommCare, formerly known as CommTrack
5 DataWinners Survey tool for digitizing paper forms for rapid data collection and 
visualization of data
6 DHIS2 Web based health data management information system to collect, 
manage, visualize and explore data with mobile client for data 
reporting. Commonly used at the national level for data reporting.
7 eMocha A mobile health platform for data capture, training and education 
and communication
8 Enketo Opensource, Saas, tool for creating web forms. Enketo Smart paper
9 FreeSwitch Opensource communications software for creation of voice and 
messaging products
10 Frontline SMS Mobile messaging platform to send and receive data over SMS
11 GuideView A platform for creating and delivering healthcare content, such as 
clinical guidelines and advice, with multimedia that requires no 
programming. 
12 iFormBuilder A platform for mobile data collection
13 iHRIS Opensource platform for managing health workforce
14 MagPi A platform for mobile data collection
15 Mango mobile Application Platform for mobile data collection, remote surveillance, monitoring 
Platform (Greenmash) and evaluation
16 Mangologic System for creating and deploying certain kinds of mobile apps, without 
programming. It is suited to the development of apps that need to run 
complex logic such as for clinical decision support.
17 MDConsults Customizable platform for teleconsultations
18 MedicMobile A platform for mobile data collection
19 Mezzanine Helium Platform for developing mHealth solutions that has been used for case 
management, stock management, managing patient records and data 
and decision support to name a few.
20 Mobenzi - Outreach Built on top of Mobenzi research, it is a case management platform 
for CHWs Page 73
Appendix A: Descriptions of platforms most frequently reported as 
being used to support FHW programs
No. Technology Platform Description
21 Mobenzi - Research Platform for field research and data collection
22 Moodle Opensource software for online learning allowing teachers to create 
and deliver online courses and also manage them
23 MOTECH Suite of services focusing on behaviour change and increasing demand, 
managing patient data, improving worker performance, last-mile supply 
chain, patient adherence
24 mSupply COTS solution for phamaceutical management, tracking inventory, 
stock and distribution
25 ODK Opensource platform to create and manage mobile data collection 
solutions
26 ONA SaaS platform for data collection and reporting
27 OpenEMR Opensource EHR platform - not a mobile platform
28 OpenLMIS Open source platform for logistics and supply chain management
29 OpenMRS Opensource electronic health record system
30 Open SRP Opensource platform that replaces paper registers with mobile 
registers allowing for patient tracking, appointment scheduling and 
management of health workers.
31 OpenXData Opensource platform for mobile data collection
32 OppiaMobile Opensource platform for devilering mobile learning content 
33 Poimapper Platform for mobile data collection and data management
34 RapidPro Build interactive messaging systems using an easy visual interface, 
evolved from RapidSMS
35 txtAlert Mobile messaging platform for sending bulk messages, broadcasts
36 Verboice Platform for creating IVR applications
37 Voto Platform for developing messaging and IVR based surveys
38 Vumi Opensource mobile messaging platform
* mPESA Mobile phone based money transfer, financing and microfinanicing 
service for Vodafone
Page 74
Appendix B: Key costs and cost drivers of mHealth programs
Adapted from Planning an Information Systems Project- A Toolkit for Public Health Managers 
http://www.path.org/publications/files/TS_opt_ict_toolkit.pdf
Software Development
Cost Category: Main Costs Cost Drivers
Development 
(Initial Cost) • Initial Software development • "Number of user  
(if new) requirements"
• Environment Configuration •  "Licensing each environment 
(all environments) (production, test, training)"
• Customization • "Licensing costs per user"
• Interface development • Number of interfaces and 
• Software licensing complexity
• Level of customization 
Hardware & Software
Cost Category:
Deployment Main Costs Cost Drivers
(Initial Cost)
• Computers, printers, scanners • # phones, printers, scanners, 
• Phones/ mobile devices- New computers
or old? • Cost and availability of power 
• Servers and connectivity, for setup
• Testing • Physical environment  
• Technical Support modifications to house  
• System Security and  hardware
Operating Capacity • Existing technical  
infrastructure
• Accessibility of hardware 
• Number of users
• Level of security needed
• Availability of PHI
Data & Communications
Cost Category: Main Costs Cost Drivers
Ongoing/Operations • Voice, data, and SMS services • Internet Connectivity
• Mobile SMS and Data plans
• Data/Minutes/SMS usage
• Telecommunications  
partnerships
Page 75
Appendix B: Key costs and cost drivers of mHealth programs
(continued)
Hardware Maintenance & Replacement
Cost Category: Main Costs Cost Drivers
Ongoing/Operations
• Equipment upgrades • # Devices/Computers
• Equipment maintenance • Maintenance and  
• Lost/stolen/damaged  Replacement Rate/Cost
hardware
Server/Software/Hosting Management & Maintenance
Main Costs Cost Drivers
• Software updates and  • Hosting (server or cloud)
upgrades • Data center setup
• Server management • Existing hardware and 
• Hosting software infrastructure
• System security • Service levels
maintenance/updates • Software and Hardware 
maintenance fees
• Internal vs. External  
Support
System Administration and Customer Support
Main Costs Cost Drivers
• Day to day operations • Expected call volume
including system  • Hours of operation
configuration/modification • Additional support staff 
• Administrator training needed for scale (National 
• Customer support and subnational level)
• Equipment replacement/ 
new installations rate
• Staff turnover
Cost Category: Main Costs Cost Drivers
Management and
Human Resources • Trainers • # Staff
• Implementers • Salaries
• Technical support • Travel
• Content Specialists • "Mix of local and international 
• Management technical assistance"
• Other • Mix of onsite and remote 
work
• Staff turnover
Page 76
Appendix B: Key costs and cost drivers of mHealth programs
(continued)
Cost Category: Main Costs Cost Drivers
Training
• Develop training • # Users
• Deliver training - Initial, New • Days of training
User, Software Updates • Days refresher training
• Refresher training • Training delivery method 
• Per diems for attendees In person, digital, hybrid
• Transportation for  
attendees
• Facility costs
Cost Category: Main Costs Cost Drivers
Governance • Oversight • # Trips
• Policy Development • # Meetings
• Trips • Policy requirements
• Meetings
Page 77
Appendix C: Summary of key costs considered by costing studies
*- Necessary for scale if there is a software component Page 78
Appendix D: Inactive USAID Compendia projects overview
Number of Non-operational Projects
Started in Year:
2008 1
2010 5 Maternal Health  34% (10)
2011 3
2012 1 Child Health  28% (8)
2013 3
Infectious, Parasitic & Vector-Borne Disease  21% (6)
Total Number of Family Planning & Reproductive Health  10% (3)
Signal Functions used 
11 in Projects Nutrition 3% (1)
Health domains 
addressed by 
Non-Communicable Disease 3% (1)
projects
6
Midwives/TBAs
3
2 7% (1)
1                2               3                4
No. of Signal Functions Health Facility Staff Type of frontline health worker 
 (includes doctors, nurses, & first respondents)
20% (3) employed by projects
Type of Phone 
used in Projects Community Health Workers (includes CHWs, ASHA, CHEWs)
73% (11)
Sensor & Point-of-Care Diagnostics
Smartphone 8% (3)
8
Client Education & Behavior Electronic Decision 
Change Communication Support
8% (3) 22% (8)
Any/Bring your 
Electronic Health 
own phone Records
6 14% (5) N=36
Provider Training & 
Education
Health domains 17% (6)Data Collection
Feature Phone addressed by 14% (5) Provider to Provider Communication
2 projects 17% (6)
Page 79
Appendix E: Expert survey questions
1. Do you consent to your data being used and reported anonymously as part of this research process?
2.  In what role do you primarily work with ICT-based health interventions ? 
 a. Software Programmer
 b. Project Implementer
 c. Researcher
 d. Policymaker / Government
 e. Other _________________
3. What countries is your organization currently using mobile phones to support frontline health workers? 
4. How have ICTs been used to support FHWs in your programs
 a. Client Education and behavior change communication
 b. Sensor and point-of-care diagnostics
 c. Registries and Vital events tracking
 d. Electronic health records
 e. Electronic decision support
 f. Provider to provider communication
 g. Provider workplanning and scheduling
 h. Provider training and education
 i. Human resource management
 j. Supply chain management
 k. Financial transaction and incentives
 l. Other
5. In your programs, do FHWs use their own devices or are these devices provided to them by the project
 1. FHW use their own device
 2. Device is provided to them
6. Approximately what is the size of your project, in terms of numbers of FHW directly interacting with the system? 
7.  Name up to three technical platforms that you/your organization have used to support the activities of frontline 
healthcare workers. (E.g. Commcare, Mangologic, OpenSRP, etc...)
8.  What were the THREE key considerations in your selection of this platform? (E.g. open source, SMS functionality etc.)
9. If you/your organization has used ICTs to support CHW/FHW activities, which type of device did you use? 
 a. Simple phone (e.g. SMSand call functions only)
 b. Feature Phone (e.g. can run simple java aps, etc.)
 c. Smart Phone (Android/iOS/Symbian)
 d. Tablet (Screen larger than 7*)
 e.  Laptop  (Connected to a network)
10. What were THREE of the main considerations in the selection of this (these) devices? (E.g. screen size, connectivity, 
battery life, cost, local availability etc.)
11. Name THREE global health programs employing ICTs for CHWs/FHWs that have reached maturity, in your opinion. 
These do not need to be programs run by your organization, but can include any programs using ICTs that you have heard 
about and feel are important ‘leaders’ in this space.  
12. Are you willing to be contacted for further information? If yes, please share your contact email address.
Page 80
References
Agarwal, S., Perry, H. B., Long, L.-A., & Labrique, A. B. (2015). Evidence on feasibility and effective use of mHealth strategies  
 by frontline health workers in developing countries: systematic review. Tropical Medicine & International Health,   
 20(8), 1003–1014. http://doi.org/10.1111/tmi.12525
Anokwa, Y., Hartung, C., & Brunette, W. (2009). Open Source Data Collection in the Developing World. Computer, 42(10),  
 97–99.http://doi.org/http://doi.ieeecomputersociety.org/10.1109/MC.2009.328
Asiimwe C, Gelvin D, Lee E, Ben Amor Y, Quinto E, Katureebe C, et al. Use of an innovative, affordable, and 
 opensource short message service-based tool to monitor malaria in remote areas of Uganda. Am J Trop Med Hyg  
 [Internet]. 2011;85(1):26–33. http://www.pubmedcentral.nih.gov/articlerender.fcgi?artid=3122339&tool=pmcen  
 trez&rendertype=abstract
Baker, B. K., Benton, D., Friedman, E., & Russell, A. (2007). Systems support for task shifting to community health workers,  
 1–5.
Braun, R., Catalani, C., Wimbush, J., & Israelski, D. (2013). Community Health Workers and Mobile Technology: A Systematic 
 Review of the Literature. PLoS ONE, 8(6), e65772. http://doi.org/10.1371/journal.pone.0065772
Brunette, W., Sundt, M., & Dell, N. (2013). Open data kit 2.0: expanding and refining information services for developing   
 regions. Proceedings of the 14th …. http://doi.org/10.1145/2444776.2444790
Callaghan, M., Ford, N., & Schneider, H. (2010). A systematic review of task- shifting for HIV treatment and care in Africa.   
 Human Resources for Health, 8, 8. http://doi.org/10.1186/1478-4491-8-8
Chatfield, A., Javetski, G., Fletcher, A., & Lesh, N. (2014). CommCare Evidence Base.
Chang LW, Kagaayi J, Nakigozi G, Serwada D, Quinn TC, Gray RH, et al. Cost analyses of peer health worker and mHealth   
 support interventions for improving AIDS care in Rakai, Uganda. AIDS Care [Internet]. 2013;25(5):652–6. http://  
 www.tandfonline.com/doi/abs/10.1080/09540121.2012.722600
CommCare. (2014a). Budgeting for a project - CommCare Total Cost of Ownership (TCO) Model. Retrieved January 12,   
 2016, fromhttps://confluence.dimagi.com/display/commcarepublic/Budgeting+for+a+Project
CommCare. (2014b). CommCare Fundamentals.
Dalberg Global Development Advisors. Preparing the next generation of community health workers : The power of 
 technology for training. 2012;(May).
Datadyne. (n.d.). Mobile Phone Based Data Collection Systems Comparison Table. Retrieved January 12, 2016, from
 https:// docs.google.com/spreadsheets/d/1HB8bESHOTpYd09q-SHnh3OKElD5M9TyZ4IXUF-ZjdJw/edit?hl=en_ 
 US#gid=0
Dell, N., & Borriello, G. (2013). Mobile tools for point-of-care diagnostics in the developing world. In Proceedings of the 3rd  
 ACM Symposium on Computing for Development - ACM DEV ’13 (p. 1). New York, New York, USA: ACM Press.   
 Retrieved from http://dl.acm.org/citation.cfm?id=2442882.2442894
DeRenzi, B., Sims, C., Jackson, J., Borriello, G., & Lesh, N. (2011). A Framework for Case-Based Community Health 
 Information Systems. 2011 IEEE Global Humanitarian Technology Conference, 8, 377–382.http://doi.org/10.1109/  
 GHTC.2011.59
DHIS2. (n.d.). DHIS2 Deployments. Retrieved January 12, 2016, fromhttps://www.dhis2.org/deployments
DHIS2 Documentation Team. (2016a). Key Features and purpose of DHIS 2. Retrieved January 12, 2016, from 
 http://dhis2.github.io/dhis2-docs/master/en/user/html/ch01s02.html
Page 81
References
DHIS2 Documentation Team. (2016b). What is DHIS2? Retrieved January 12, 2016, from http://dhis2.github.io/dhis2-docs/ 
 master/en/user/html/ch01.html
Diedhiou A, Gilroy K, Cox CM, Duncan L, Koumtingue D, Pacque-Margolis S, et al. Successful mLearning Pilot in Senegal:   
 Delivering Family. Glob Heal Sci Pract. 2015;3(2):305–21.
Dussault, G., & Franceschini, M. C. (2006). Not enough there, too many here: understanding geographical imbalances in the 
 distribution of the health workforce. Human Resources for Health, 4(1), 12.http://doi.org/10.1186/1478-4491-4-12
Every Mother Counts. (n.d.). The Healthcare Worker Shortage. Retrieved January 1, 2015, from http://issuu.com/every  
 mothercounts/docs/the-hr-shortage-study-guide_0
Free, C., Phillips, G., Watson, L., Galli, L., Felix, L., Edwards, P., … Haines, a. (2013). The Effectiveness of Mobile-Health   
 Technologies to Improve Health Care Service Delivery Processes: A Systematic Review and Meta-Analysis.PLoS   
 Medicine, 10(1), e1001363. http://doi.org/10.1371/journal.pmed.1001363
Frontline Health Workers Coalition. (n.d.). Who They Are. Retrieved January 1, 2015, from http://www.frontlinehealthwork  
 ers.org/frontline-health-workers/who-they-are/
GSMA. (2013). The Mobile Economy India 2013.
Grevendonk, J., & Brigden, D. (2013). Planning an information systems project.
Hartung, C., Anokwa, Y., Brunette, W., Lerer, A., Tseng, C., & Borriello, G. (2010). Open Data Kit: Tools to Build Information   
 Services for Developing Regions. Proceedings of the International Conference on Information and Communication  
 Technologies and Development, 1–11.http://doi.org/10.1145/2369220.2369236
Hunchangsith P, Barendregt JJ, Vos T, Bertram M. Cost-Effectiveness of Various Tuberculosis Control Strategies in 
 Thailand. Value Heal [Internet]. Elsevier Inc.; 2012;15(1):S50–5. http://linkinghub.elsevier.com/retrieve/pii/  
 S1098301511035431
IntraHealth International. (2015). The mHero Story: Adapting mobile technology to support health systems strengthening   
 amid the Ebola Outbreak. Retrieved January 20, 2016, from http://usaidlearninglab.org/lab-notes/
 mhero-story-adapting-mobile-technology-support-health-systems-strengthening-amid-ebola
Inventory, A., & Review, A. (2014). mHealth Support Tools for Improving the Performance of Frontline Health Workers:,   
 (March).
Karuri, J., Waiganjo, P., Orwa, D., & Manya, A. (2014). DHIS2: The Tool to Improve Health Data Demand and Use in Kenya.   
 Journal of Health Informatics in Developing Countries, 8(1), 38–60. Retrieved fromhttp://www.jhidc.org/   
 index.php/jhidc/article/view/113
Källander, K., Tibenderana, J. K., Akpogheneta, O. J., Strachan, D. L., Hill, Z., ten Asbroek, A. H. A., … Meek, S. R. (2013).   
 Mobile Health (mHealth) Approaches and Lessons for Increased Performance and Retention of Community 
 Health Workers in Low- and Middle-Income Countries: A Review.Journal of Medical Internet Research, 15(1), e17.   
 http://doi.org/10.2196/jmir.2130
Kho, A., Henderson, L. E., Dressler, D. D., & Kripalani, S. (2006). Use of handheld computers in medical education. Journal of  
 General Internal Medicine, 21(5), 531–537. http://doi.org/10.1111/j.1525-1497.2006.00444.x
Krishna, S., Austin Boren, S., & Balas, E. A. (2009). Healthcare via Cell Phones : Telemedicine and E-Health, 15(3), 231–240. 
 http://doi.org/10.1089/t mj.2008.0099
Page 82
References
Labrique, A. B., Vasudevan, L., Kochi, E., Fabricant, R., & Mehl, G. (2013). mHealth innovations as health system 
 strengthening tools: 12 common applications and a visual framework. Global Health, Science and Practice,1(2),   
 160–71. http://doi.org/10.9745/GHSP-D-13-00031
Lehman, U., & Sanders, D. (2007). Community Health Workers: What do we know about them?
Lehmann, U., Dieleman, M., & Martineau, T. (2008). Staffing remote rural areas in middle- and low-income countries: a 
 literature review of attraction and retention. BMC Health Services Research, 8(1), 19.http://doi.org/10.1186/1472-  
 6963-8-19
Lemay NV, Sullivan T, Jumbe B, Perry CP. Reaching Remote Health Workers in Malawi: Baseline Assessment of a Pilot   
 mHealth Intervention. J Health Commun. 2012;17(sup1):105–17.
Lester RT, Ritvo P, Mills EJ, Kariri A, Karanja S, Chung MH, et al. Effects of a mobile phone short message service    
 on antiretroviral treatment adherence in Kenya (WelTel Kenya1): a randomised trial. Lancet [Internet]. Elsevier Ltd;  
 2010;376(9755):1838–45.http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/21071074
Levine, R., Corbacio, A., Konopka, S., Saya, U., Gilmartin, C., Paradis, J., & Haas, S. (2015). mHealth Compendium, Volume   
 Five (Vol. 5).
Mahmud N, Rodriguez J, Nesbit J. A text message - Based intervention to bridge the healthcare communication gap in the  
 rural developing world. Technol Heal Care. 2010;18(2):137–44.
Manya, A., Braa, J., Overland, L., Titlestad, O., Mumo, J., & Nzioka, C. (2012). National Roll Out of District Health Information 
 Software (DHIS 2) in Kenya, 2011–Central Server and Cloud Based Infrastructure. IST-Africa 2012 …, 1–9. 
 Retrieved from http://www.researchgate.net/publication/230559375_National_Roll_out_of_District_Health_  
 Information_Software_(DHIS_2)_in_Kenya_2011__Central_Server_and_Cloud_based_Infrastructure/file/9fcf  
 d501777a933fe0.pdf
Mendoza, G., Levine, R., Kibuka, T., & Okoko, L. (2014). mHealth Compendium, Volume Four.
Mendoza, G., Okoko, G., Morgan, G., & Konopka, S. (2013). mHealth Compendium, Volume Two (Vol. 2). mHealth Evidence  
 Taxonomy. (2013).
Moore C, Long L-A, Keith K. mHealth Solutions- What’s the Cost? Washington, DC; 2014.
Njuguna HN, Caselton DL, Arunga GO, Emukule GO, Kinyanjui DK, Kalani RM, et al. A comparison of smartphones to   
 paper-based questionnaires for routine influenza sentinel surveillance, Kenya, 2011–2012. BMC Med Inform Decis  
 Mak [Internet]. 2014;14(1):107. http://www.biomedcentral.com/1472-6947/14/107
One Million Community Health Workers: Technical Taskforce Report. (n.d.).
OpenMRS. (2011). OpenMRS guide.
Palmer, S., & Torgerson, D. J. (1999). Economic notes: definitions of efficiency. BMJ (Clinical Research Ed.), 318(7191), 1136.  
 doi:10.1136/bmj.318.7191.1136
Perry, H., & Zulliger, R. (2012). How effective are community health workers?, 1–84.
Principles for digital development. (2008). doi:10.1598/RRQ.40.2.6 Qiang, C. Z., Yamamichi, M., Hausman, V., & Altman, D.  
 (2011). Worldbank report: Mobile Applications for the Health Sector, (December), 101
Page 83
References
Rednick, C., Dini, H., & Long, L.-A. (2014). The Current State of CHW Training Programs in Sub-Saharan Africa and South   
 Asia : What We Know , What We Don ’ t Know , and What We Need to Do. One Million Community Health Workers  
 Campaign, (January).
 
Schweitzer, J., & Synowiec, C. (2012). The Economics of eHealth and mHealth. Journal of Health Communication, 17(sup1),  
 73–81. doi:10.1080/10810730.2011.649158
Shieshia, M., Noel, M., Andersson, S., Felling, B., Alva, S., Agarwal, S., … Chandani, Y. (2014). Strengthening community   
 health supply chain performance through an integrated approach: Using mHealth technology and multilevel teams  
 in Malawi. Journal of Global Health, 4(2), 020406. doi:10.7189/jogh.04.020406
Surka, S., Edirippulige, S., Steyn, K., Gaziano, T., Puoane, T., & Levitt, N. (2014). Evaluating the use of mobile phone 
 technology to enhance cardiovascular disease screening by community health workers.International Journal of   
 Medical Informatics, 83(9), 648–654. doi:10.1016/j.surg.2006.10.010.Use
Thriemer, K., Ley, B., Ame, S. M., Puri, M. K., Hashim, R., Chang, N., … Ali, M. (2012). Replacing paper data collection forms   
 with electronic data entry in the field: findings from a study of community-acquired bloodstream infections in   
 Pemba, Zanzibar. BMC Research Notes, 5(1), 113. doi:10.1186/1756-0500-5-113
UNICEF. (2006). Addressing the health worker shortage : A critical action for, 2006.
University Research, & Quality Assurance Project Organization(s). (2009). Evaluation of an IMCI computer-based training  
 course in Kenya | USAID ASSIST Project, (August). Retrieved from https://www.usaidassist.org/resources/
 evaluation-imci-computer-based-training-course-kenya
Who. (2007). Task shifting to tackle health worker shortages. Geneva: WHO, (June 2006), 1–12. http://doi.org/10.1016/  
 S0033-3506(01)00422-X
WHO. (2008). Treat, Train, Retain: Task Shifting Global Recomendations and Guidelines. World Health Organization, 96.   
 http://doi.org/10.1080/17441692.2011.552067
WHO. (2013). WHO Global health workforce shortage to reach 12.9 million in coming decades. World Health Organization.  
 (2010). Increasing access to health workers in remote and rural areas through improved retention: Global policy   
 recommendations, (February), 2 – 4.
Zurovac D, Larson BA, Sudoi RK, Snow RW. Costs and Cost-Effectiveness of a Mobile Phone Text-Message Reminder 
 Programmes to Improve Health Workers’ Adherence to Malaria Guidelines in Kenya. PLoS One [Internet].   
 2012;7(12):e52045. Available from:http://dx.plos.org/10.1371/journal.pone.0052045
Page 84
