mHealth Education: 
Harnessing the Mobile Revolution to Bridge 
the Health Education & Training Gap in 
Developing Countries
Report for mHealthEd 2011 at the Mobile Health Summit June 2011
1
2
Contents
Authorship and Acknowledgements        5 
Executive Summary          6
Introduction to Mobile Health Education and Its Potential     9
The challenge: closing the healthcare worker gap in developing countries  9
The opportunity: mobile technologies for healthcare and learning   12
mHealth Education: definition and potential      15
The First Wave of mHealth Education Initiatives: Overview and Case Studies  17
Overview of early mHealthEd initiatives       17
Impact of and financial models for mHealth Education initiatives    20
Case Study – Millennium Villages Project: continuous education and refresher 
learning for community health workers       22
Case Study – TulaSalud: distance learning teleconferences for nurses in remote
regions of Guatemala         24
Case Study – AED-SATELLIFE: mobile health information system library for
healthcare workers in South Africa        26
Case Study – Health Education and Training in Africa (HEAT) programme
pilot in Ethiopia          27
Case Study – African Medical and Research Foundation (AMREF): distance
learning for nursing registration in Kenya       28
Beyond the First Wave: How to Maximize the Potential for mHealth Education  30
Adopt a systematic approach        30
Promote collaboration between actors and stakeholders     31
Aim for scale          31
List of mHealth Education Initiatives Studied       32 
List of Interviews Conducted         37
References           39
3
Report for mHealthEd 2011 at the Mobile Health Summit
June 2011
www.iheed.org
4
Authorship and 
Acknowledgements
The iheed Institute and Dalberg Global 
Development Advisors have prepared this report 
to set the stage for mHealthEd 2011 at GSMA 
m-Health Alliance Mobile Health Summit, which is 
the first dedicated conference on the emerging 
phenomenon of mobile Health Education.
The report has been authored by Dr. Paul Callan, 
Robin Miller, Rumbidzai Sithole, Matt Daggett, 
and Dr. Daniel Altman from Dalberg Global 
Development Advisors, and David O’Byrne from 
the iheed Institute. We are grateful to colleagues 
at the iheed Institute, particularly Dr. Caroline 
Forkin and Dr. Tom O’Callaghan, for their guidance 
and feedback as we prepared this report. 
We also wish to acknowledge the support of 
Houghton Mifflin Harcourt’s Innovation and New 
Ventures Group for the preparation of this report, 
and in particular to thank Fiona O’Carroll, Ciara 
Dowling and Paud O’Keeffe for their advice.
Many individuals and organizations offered 
their time to describe their work on mobile 
applications for health education, and to 
contribute perspectives for this report, and the 
authors wish to thank them for their contributions.
5
Executive Summary
 
Developing countries face an acute 
shortage of skilled health care 
workers, and consequently health 
education and training, especially for 
community health workers, needs to 
be a top priority. 
The High-Level Taskforce on Innovative 
Financing estimates that, to achieve the 
Millennium Development Goals for health, 
developing countries need an additional 
2.6 million to 3.5 million health workers, 
who must be trained with limited budgets. 
Quality training and continuing education 
for community health workers is essential, as 
it is linked to improved health outcomes. For 
example, Save the Children estimates that 
training and support to midwives to provide 
a package of eight proven interventions 
could prevent 38% of newborn deaths, thus 
saving 1.3 million babies each year. A training 
programme for community health workers in 
Bangladesh reduced maternal mortality by 
two-thirds, which would correspond 120,000 
fewer maternal deaths per year if replicated 
globally.
 
Mobile technology can help.
The developing world now has more than 
3.8 billion active mobile devices. They 
are transforming lives and accelerating 
development through a wide range of 
“mDevelopment” applications, including 
dissemination of agricultural prices, mobile 
banking, gathering data on disease 
epidemics, among many others.
“mHealth Education” or “mHealthEd” 
is the name given to an emerging 
new set of applications of mobile 
devices to the training, testing, 
support and supervision of health 
care workers, as well as applications 
that provide health information to 
individuals. 
The first wave of mHealthEd applications 
for health workers – most introduced within 
the last 4 years and some of which are 
6
presented in this report – include ones which approaches for training and for disseminating 
enable workers to learn new treatment health information.
procedures, test their knowledge after 
training courses, take certification exams The full potential of mHealth 
remotely, look up information in medical Education will require adoption 
reference publications, and trade ideas on 
crucial diagnostic and treatment decisions. of mHealthEd applications by 
Current applications mainly target nurses governments as tools to enable 
and community health workers, rather than cost-effective implementation of 
doctors. They do not attempt to replace their national health strategies and 
classroom-based training, but rather to healthcare workforce development 
supplement it with mobile refresher quizzes, 
quick access to reference materials, real- plans. 
time feedback, and updates about new or 
improved treatment procedures. The first wave of mHealthEd applications have come from pilot projects financed by 
donors, NGOs and academic institutions; and 
Early reports point to positive effects the next wave will benefit from interest from 
from mHealthEd applications. content producers, mobile operators and 
device manufacturers.
It is too early to test for impacts on health 
outcomes, but the first wave of projects Actors and stakeholders should 
suggest that mHealthEd applications are 
improving the provision of care and levels coordinate their efforts to develop, 
of knowledge. Improved training can also test and deploy new mHealthEd 
increase job satisfaction and reduce attrition applications. 
rates for healthcare workers. The current 
wave of applications for healthcare workers The actors must include governments, 
mainly involve providing supplementary healthcare institutions, academia, content 
support; later ones should tap the potential creators, mobile operators, device 
for mobile applications to reduce costs by manufacturers, NGOs, philanthropists and 
offering cheaper alternatives to traditional investors. 
7
Some of the priorities for coordination should be: 
•	 Identifying training needs, especially for community health workers, as well as 
public health information needs, than can be met with mHealthEd applications, 
working from existing national health strategies and healthcare human resources 
plans;
•	 Developing content in a collaborative way, sharing best practices and perhaps 
including a meta-library of existing content;
•	 Continuing the development and testing of new applications, ideally based on 
agreed standards and formats to facilitate easy sharing of content between 
applications; and
•	 Keeping abreast of new device developments and trends in device pricing, and 
collaborating on joint specification and purchasing
Different members of the coalition will, current healthcare workers and supporting 
of course, have different roles to play: the training of perhaps 2.6 to 3.5 million new 
governments must establish policies and workers. All actors should prioritize quick 
decide on applications to roll-out at scale; deployment of promising innovations over 
NGOs, content developers and mobile building extensive portfolios of pilot projects. 
industry companies must develop the 
applications; donors and investors must 
provide the financing for testing and rolling- Only by thinking big, 
out new ideas; mobile operators must 
provide capacity and pricing plans which and acting urgently, 
facilitate scaling up of mHealthEd initiatives. can mHealthEd make a 
The goals for mHealth Education meaningful contribution to 
must be ambitious, because the achieving the MDGs by the 
challenge is so great, especially 2015 deadline.
improving the training of over 2.1 million 
= +
+ +
8
Introduction to Mobile It is generally acknowledged that community 
health workers (CHWs, defined in Box 2), must 
Health Education and Its be an essential part of healthcare human 
Potential resources strategies for developing countries. Such workers can take on some duties 
traditionally performed by doctors and nurses 
The challenge: closing the healthcare at much lower cost; they require less training 
worker gap in developing countries than professional healthcare workers; and 
in many cases they also experience lower 
One of the primary barriers to improving rates of attrition. A 2007 study by McKinsey 
health outcomes, and overall development, estimated that, if sub-Saharan Africa 
in developing nations, is the shortage of continues to rely on professional doctors and 
trained healthcare workers. The Task Force on nurses, then closing the gap in healthcare 
Innovative International Financing for Health human resources would require a total of 
Box 1. The Millennium Development Goals. 4
World leaders adopted the Millennium Development Goals (MDGs) in 2000 REDUCE 
to align international efforts to reduce poverty and set ambitious targets to CHILD MORTALITY
be achieved by 2015. The eight MDGs have 21 quantifiable targets that are 
measured by 60 indicators.  All of the MDGs touch on issues of health, and 5
three set specific goals for health outcomes, namely:
Goal 4: Reduce by two-thirds the mortality rate among children under IMPROVE MATERNAL HEALTH
five.
Goal 5: Reduce maternal mortality by three-quarters, and achieve 6
universal access to reproductive health.
Goal 6: Halt and begin to reverse the spread of HIV/AIDS, malaria, 
tuberculosis and other major diseases, and achieve universal access to COMBAT HIV/AIDS, MALARIA AND OTHER 
DISEASES
treatment for HIV/AIDS.
Systems estimated in 2009 that between $33 billion in spending between 2007 and 
2.6 and 3.5 million health workers would 2030, together with the addition of 300 new 
be required to achieve the health-related medical schools (from 90 today) and 300 
Millennium Development Goals (MDGs, new nursing schools (approximately doubling 
described in Box 1), which would more than the number today)4. Using paraprofessionals 
double the 2.1 million workers who were in – substitute medical doctors as well as 
place in 20081. According to the WHO, some community health workers – offers a more 
of the most affected countries in sub-Saharan realistic path to strengthening rapidly the 
Africa would require an increase of as much healthcare workforces in low-income 
as 140% to attain the health MDGs2. The countries.
shortage of health personnel in developing 
nations correlates with the overall burden of 
disease3.
1Taskforce on Innovative International Financing Systems, More Money for Health and More Health for the Money, March 2009, and 
Working Group 1 Technical Report: Constraints to Scaling Up and Costs, 5 June 2009.
2Kinfua, Yohannes et al. “The health worker shortage in Africa: are enough physicians and nurses being trained?” in Bulletin of the 
World Health Organization 2009, 87:225-230.
3World Health Organization. Working Together for Health: World Health Report 2006.
4McKinsey and Company. Addressing Africa’s Health Workforce Crisis. 2007.
9
Box 2. Definition of community health worker and other types of healthcare 
workers.
Community health workers (CHWs) help individuals and groups in communities 
to access basic healthcare, social services and health information. The term 
covers workers who may have titles such as community health-education 
worker, community health aide, family health worker, lady health visitor, health 
extension worker, and community midwife. Training periods for CHWs are less 
than for professionals, but are often not regulated and may range from just a 
few days up to 1-2 years.
Professional healthcare workers include:
•	 Doctors or physicians, who are trained at medical school for 5 to 8 years, and 
licensed or registered after a further one or two years of supervised practice.
•	 Nurses, for whom registration usually requires a third-level degree or diploma; 
there are considerable variations between and within countries, there may 
be different certification levels each permitting a different degree autonomy 
in treating patients.
•	 Midwives, who are dedicated to the training and care of pregnant women, 
new mothers and newborn children, and whose requirements for training 
range greatly across countries, from unofficial trainings to bachelor’s 
degrees.
Paraprofessional healthcare workers include community health workers, as well 
as substitute medical doctors or assistant medical officers, who have 2-3 years of 
training and may provide many of the same services as physicians.
According to the Taskforce on Innovative International Financing Systems, low-
income countries have just over 2.1 million healthcare works, including nearly 0.5 
million doctors, nearly 1.2 million nurses and midwives, about 350,000 community 
health workers and about 135,000 lab, pharmacy and dental technicians.
Expanding and improving training mortality, infant mortality, and the overall 
programmes must be at the heart of burden of widespread disease. Save the 
human resources development strategies Children estimates that training and support 
for health systems in developing countries. to midwives to provide a package of eight 
New approaches to training are needed proven interventions could prevent 38% 
to increase the number of people who can of newborn deaths, or 1.3 million babies 
be trained, to decrease the time required per year6. A WHO study found that training 
for training, to decrease the cost per person community health workers in Bangladesh 
trained and to improve the quality of training. reduced maternal mortality by two-thirds 
For community health workers, whose training and still births by 40%, as illustrated in Exhibit 
is limited, the quality and impact of the 17 – results which, if applied globally, could 
training they do receive should be a priority. save the lives of 120,000 mothers and 96,000 
babies per year.
Evidence shows that improved training and 
ongoing learning, especially of community Better training may also help to reduce 
health workers, mean better diagnosis and attrition, especially among community 
treatment and improved health outcomes5. health workers. Attrition depletes already 
When healthcare workers are better trained, limited health workforces in developing 
there are marked declines in maternal countries. It was estimated in 2004 that only 
10
50 of the 600 doctors trained in Zambia lack of ongoing training also contribute10. This 
since independence were still practicing in is especially true for nurses and community 
the country8. Attrition of community health health workers in remote locations, who are 
workers has reached up to 70% per year in often isolated from medical colleagues in 
some community-supported programmes in their day-to-day jobs. TulaSalud, a health 
Ethiopia9. Turnover is costly due to the high service programme for indigenous regions of 
investment put into identifying, selecting, Guatemala profiled later in this report, has 
and training community health workers, and retained 95% of its 500 community health 
it disrupts continuity in relationships with the workers, in part due to ongoing training and 
community. While low pay is the largest driver interaction with them11.
of attrition among healthcare workers, lack 
of career development opportunities and 
5Global Health Workforce Alliance. Scaling Up, Saving Lives: Task Force for Scaling Up Education and Training for
Health Workers. 2008.
6Rawe, Kathryn. Missing Midwives. Save the Children, 2011.
7Extracted from WHO: Global Experience of Community Health Workers for Delivery of Health Related Millennium Development 
Goals: A Systematic Review. Ronsmans C, Vanneste AM, Chakraborty J, Ginneken JV. “Decline in maternal mortality in Matlab, 
Bangladesh: a cautionary tale” in Lancet 1997;350:1810-1814. Begum SF. “Role of TBAs in improving maternal and neonatal health in 
Bangladesh: a long-term programme need” in High risk mothers and newborns, Ott Publishers, 1978. Fauveau V, Stewart K, Khan SA, 
Chakraborty J. “Effect on mortality of community-based maternity- care programmeme in rural Bangladesh”in Lancet 1991;338:1183-
1186.
8Joint Learning Initiative. Human Resources for Health: Overcoming the Crisis. Harvard University Press, 2004.
9Wittcoff, Alison, and Lauren Crigler. “Measuring Engagement of Community Health Workers to Improve Productivity, Retention and 
Quality of Care”, USAID HCI Project, 2010. 
10Medecins Sans Frontieres UK. “Retaining Health Workers: the Basics - News - MSF UK.” 24 May 2007. Web. <http://www.msf.org.uk/
Retaining_health_workers_the_basics.news>.
11TulaSalud. Organization website <http://www.tulasalud.org>.
11
4.8 76.9
5 Maternal Still births 
mortality per 1000 -40%
per 1000 -69%
IMPROVE MATERNAL 46.2
HEALTH
4 1.5
REDUCE 
CHILD MORTALITY
Without training With training Without training With training
Source: WHO Global Experience of Community Health Workers for Delivery of Health Related Millennium 
Development Goals: A Systematic Review, Country Case Studies, and Recommendations for Integration into 
National Health Systems , Begum 198733 Rural Districts (Bongra, Tongi & Dhaka) Bangladesh.pg61.
Exhibit 1: Impact of a training programme for community health workers in 
Bangladesh on maternal mortality and still births.
The opportunity: mobile technologies now account for perhaps a third to a half of 
for healthcare and learning all mobile handsets in Africa
16. 
	
Mobile phones have achieved significant Across the developing world, mobile 
penetration in developing nations over the devices are making a significant impact 
past decade. At the end of 2010, the ITU on users, especially those most vulnerable 
17
estimates that there were 5.3 billion mobile and geographically hard to reach . The 
cellular subscriptions worldwide, including 3.8 use of mobile devices is transforming the 
billion in developing countries12. Access to lives of many low-income people and 
a mobile network is now available to 90% of communities, by giving people access to 
the world’s population, including 80% of the health information, correcting unbalanced 
population living in rural areas13. The growth access to markets, eliminating the cost of 
rate in mobile penetration was fastest in transportation to access services, and for 
Sub-Saharan Africa, where it grew from less many other reasons
18.
than 2% to 32.6% between 2000 and 2008, 
according to ITU statistics14. The numbers of The use of mobile devices to improve 
mobile phones and devices with internet healthcare – dubbed “mHealth” – has 
connectivity is increasing rapidly. (See Box 3 been one of the most prominent areas 
for brief descriptions of different categories within the larger field of “mDevelopment”. 
of mobile phones and devices.) There were As illustrated in Exhibit 2, mHealth includes 
940 million subscriptions to 3G data services a breadth of initiatives ranging from 
at the end of 201015. Estimates from experts treatment adherence to data collection 
suggest that smartphone penetration across to supply chain management and health 
Africa is still well below 10% of total ownership, financing. The biggest areas of activity are 
but the number of “feature phones” with the provision of tools and support to health 
internet connectivity is increasing and may workers, collection of public health data, and 
12International Telecommunication Union. The World in 2010: ICT Facts and Figures. 2010.
13Ibid.
14International Telecommunication Union. Information Society Statistical Profiles 2009: Africa. 2009.
12
Box 3. Categorization of mobile phones and devices.
Low-end phones or basic phones have only core functionalities including voice 
calling, SMS messaging and USSD (Unstructured Supplementary Service Data protocol 
which is used for adding airtime and can also be used for simple surveys, quizzes, and 
so on). 
Feature phones or internet-enabled phones are mobile phones or devices that, in 
addition to voice, SMS and USSD, can access the internet for sending email, browsing 
the web and so on (but usually without the same ease-of-use as smartphones due to 
smaller screens, etc.).
Smartphones provide voice, SMS, USSD and internet access, and have an 
independent operating system (e.g., Symbian, Android, Apple) which can run built-in 
applications for a wide variety of purposes (e.g., Web browsing, calendars, document 
reading, among others).
Tablet computers and e-Readers are handheld devices with large screens designed 
for easily reading and working on long documents. They can be designed with 
functionalities similar to smartphones (e.g., Apple’s iPad) or similar to traditional laptop 
computers, and can be designed to access the internet over mobile networks.
health information messaging and helpline recent report on mLearning: A Platform for 
services.  There are many opportunities to Educational Opportunities at the Base of the 
integrate multiple applications within a single Pyramid presented several case studies of 
programme, using a single mobile device successful applications including provision of 
for each health worker, including diagnostic materials for classroom use, the use of SMS for 
support services, training, epidemiological adult literacy and foreign language lessons 
surveying, patient record updating and delivered by voice and SMS.
scheduling. At the intersection of mHealth and 
mLearning is mHealth Education, which 
Mobile technologies have also been applied holds the promise of contributing to solving 
to support education, training and learning. the challenge of educating and training 
Many mLearning applications have been healthcare workers.
developed for smartphones: for example, it 
is estimated that mLearning apps generated 
$538 million in revenue in 2007 in the US, 
and accounted for 15-17% of the apps 
in the stores provided by China Mobile, 
China Telecom and China Unicom to their 
customers19. mLearning holds great potential 
for supporting education and learning in 
developing countries, and the GSMA’s 
15International Telecommunication Union. The World in 2010: ICT Facts and Figures. 2010.
16Estimates from experts made in interviews with Dalberg.
17Boakye, Kojo, Nigel Scott, and Claire Smyth. Mobiles for Development. UNICEF, 2010.
18World Bank ICT Division. The role of mobile phones in sustainable rural poverty reduction. 2008.
19GSMA Development Fund. MLearning: A Platform for Educational Opportunities at the Base of the Pyramid. 2010.
13
Diagnostic Support and Data Collection
•	 Remote diagnostic tools to help with disease 
surveillance and treatment
•	 Collection of data for disease tracking
•	 Collection and storage of patient data
•	 Note: Many diagnostic support and data 
collection applications are combined
Reminders on Treatment and Appointments
•	 Text and voice messages to patients regarding 
treatment (e.g., automated SMS reminders 
to patients about taking medications) or 
appointments
Emergency Medical Response
•	 SMS or call-in service to request ambulance 
services
Health / Medical Call Centres
•	 Medical call centers to triage services and 
treatment
•	 Helplines to provide access to medical 
information, advice, counseling and referral, 
often using a tele-triage model
Healthcare Supply Chain Management
•	 Tracking of medical goods in supply chains using 
mobile recording
•	 Advocacy informed by supply chain information
Healthcare Payments and Insurance
•	 Smart-cards, vouchers, insurance and lending 
for health services linked to mobile money 
platforms or otherwise supported with mobile 
phones
Health Information and Promotion
•	 SMS and voice messages to distribute health 
information to subscribers (e.g., on HIV, maternal 
& child healthcare, etc.)
Training and Support for Healthcare Workers
•	 Mobile device applications to train, test, support 
and supervise healthcare workers
Source: Dalberg research and analysis; World Bank Study on Mobile Applications for the Health Sector.
Exhibit 2: Overview of mHealth applications.
14
mHealth Education: definition and 
potential
“mHealth Education” or “mHealthEd” is 
the name given to an emerging new set of 
applications of mobile devices to the training, 
testing, support and supervision of health care 
workers, as well as to the provision of health 
information to individuals. It forms a subset of 
mHealth (illustrated by the shaded sections in 
Exhibit 2) and of mLearning. mHealth Education 
tools can be used for both self-motivated 
learning and employee training for everyone 
from doctors to community-nominated 
volunteers. mHealthEd content can ranges from 
basic public health information to complex 
medical texts; it can be static or it can be 
dynamic as in, for example, testing applications. 
mHealthEd applications be delivered through 
a range of devices, from low-end phones to 
smartphones to tablets or e-readers. Exhibit 3 
presents a framework for thinking about the 
range of possible needs, learners, content and 
delivery devices for mHealth Education.
This paper pays most attention to mHealth 
Education for healthcare workers, although 
it also provides an overview also of the many 
applications being developed to deliver basic 
health information to the general public or 
specific target groups such as pregnant women, 
mothers and youth. The paper does not cover 
applications such as on-the-job tools to help 
healthcare workers conduct diagnoses and 
decide on treatments, or medical helplines 
for individuals, which do have an educational 
aspect to them, but which are primarily aimed at 
directly improving healthcare service delivery.
The potential scale and impact of mHealth 
Education for healthcare workers can best be 
appreciated by thinking about it in multiple 
ways.
First, mHealth Education applications could bring 
benefits to all of the current healthcare workers 
in developing countries, who number over 
2.1 million in all, including nearly half a million 
doctors, nearly 1.2 million nurses and midwives, 
and about 350,000 community health workers20. 
As noted earlier, there are clear linkages 
between improved training of health workers 
and health outcomes such as maternal and 
child mortality. 
15
What NEED for 
improvement in What type of Through what DEVICE 
healthcare training Who is the CONTENT is being is the information 
is being addressed? LEARNER? delivered? delivered?
Availability of training: Medical Curriculum delivery Low end phone
Classes are full or institutions professionals •	 Traditional certification, •	 Text and audio only
lack capacity. •	Doctors  testing or textbook type •	Push, pull or interactive
•	Nurses * learning
Access to information: •	Midwives (trained)* •	Upgrading training Feature phone 
Limited access to up-to-date •	CHWs (trained)* certification (access to web)
information and training, •	 Text, documents, 
causing knowledge to Health institution Learning support audio, graphics or 
become dated over time. students •	Additional practice tests, video
•	 Students / Trainees vocabulary, •	Push, pull or interactive
Time efficiency: Lack 
time to take formal training Professionals (other) Consultation/ support Smart phone
courses or to travel from •	 Teachers •	Peer 2 peer sharing of •	Applications, text, 
remote locations to learning •	HR employee information documents, audio, 
institutions. graphics or video
Community Treatment protocols •	Push, pull or interactive
Cost reduction: Learning/ •	CHWs (untrained)* •	ART, TB, diabetes protocols
training is too expensive, •	Midwives (untrained)* Mobile-enabled 
either for  the individual or the •	 Traditional healers Reference materials/ devices (including 
provider. resources computers, 
Individuals •	 Encyclopedia type access e-readers)
Quality improvement: •	Mothers / pregnant to a broad database of •	 Text, documents, 
Potential to enhance learning women information audio, or video
through additional learning •	Other adults •	Push, pull or interactive
modules and/or on the job •	Youth Basic health information
learning. •	Public health information/
learning
•	Maternal health support
Source: Dalberg analysis; interviews with stakeholders
Exhibit 3: Framework for the space of possible mHealth Education applications.
Second, mHealth Education could investments in new training.
accelerate the rate of training of new health 
workers. As an example, AMREF’s distance Fourth, mHealth Education can reduce the 
learning programme for nurses in Kenya, in training costs for healthcare workers incurred 
which mobile phones play a part, has more by governments. WHO estimated in 2006 that 
than quadrupled the number of registered the additional training costs to add required 
nurses that Kenya can train each year. Thus, healthcare workers by 2015 would amount 
mobile technologies – most likely applied as to an extra $136 million per year on average 
part of larger reforms to training approaches for developing countries, or an increase of 
– do have the potential to contribute to 11% over total health expenditures in 200421. 
the more than doubling of the numbers of If one were to assume that even 2% of these 
healthcare workers that is needed to meet costs would be replaced by mHealthEd 
the MDGs. applications, and that the financial 
benefits were shared equally between the 
Third, mHealthEd applications could reduce government and the mHealthEd provider, 
health worker attrition rates, especially then one could estimate savings of tens of 
of community health workers. Even small millions of dollars per year for developing 
reductions in the numbers leaving each year country governments and revenues of tens 
would contribute significantly over time to of millions of dollars per year for mHealthEd 
the total numbers of healthcare workers in providers.
service and would increase the returns on 
20Taskforce on Innovative International Financing Systems, More Money for Health and More Health for the Money, March 2009.
21World Health Organization. Working Together for Health. World Health Report, 2006.
16
The First Wave of mHealth examples to discern clear patterns yet, and 
certainly it is too early to reach any definitive 
Education Initiatives: conclusions about where the “sweet spots” 
Overview and Case Studies might be for mHealth Education, especially for healthcare workers. Nevertheless, it is 
instructive to consider how the examples 
to date fall within the framework shown in 
Overview of early mHealthEd Exhibit 3.
initiatives
For healthcare workers, the needs most 
From a search which revealed more than 100 commonly addressed by the current 
mHealth and mLearning initiatives, we were mHealthEd applications are those for access 
able to identify eleven mHealth Education to information (e.g., AED-SATELLIFE’s mobile 
applications targeted at healthcare workers health information library), for availability 
and at least twelve applications targeted of places in formal training institutions (e.g., 
at providing information to members of AMREF’s distance learning programme to 
the general public (although we expect become a registered nurse in Kenya), and 
that there are applications, especially ones for enhancing quality of training and learning 
targeted at individuals, that we did not through the provision of supplementary 
Exhibit 4: Profile of mHealthEd initiatives studied by year of foundation.
training (e.g., refresher training courses for 
identify). Five of the initiatives for healthcare community health workers in the Millennium 
workers are presented in the case studies Villages). Exhibit 5 presents the mHealth 
which follow, and brief descriptions of all Education initiatives for healthcare workers 
of the applications are provided in the on a chart which shows the target groups of 
annexes. As illustrated in Exhibit 4, most of the learners and the types of content delivered 
mHealthEd initiatives were started within the for each of those initiatives. The learners 
last 4 years; this is very much the first wave of who are most commonly targeted are 
pilot efforts in mHealthEd. frontline health care providers such as nurses, 
community health workers and community 
There are perhaps too few mHealthEd 
17
volunteers, rather than doctors. The content have delivered the content on smartphones, 
of the mHealthEd applications typically and usually provided the devices to the 
does not aim to replace core curricula for targeted workers. Some of the content 
classroom trainings, but rather the most – streaming or downloading of training 
popular content includes materials to support videos, video conferencing, connecting 
training courses, quick updates about new or to other medical professionals via social 
improved treatment procedures, and access networking media, and so on – may be 
to medical reference materials. capable of delivery to feature phones as 
well as smartphones. Some of the mHealthEd 
For individuals, the need addressed is access applications for healthcare workers, and most 
to information. As shown in Exhibit 6, most of those for individuals, use relatively simpler 
applications provide information on sexual content – such as audio messages, audio 
and reproductive health (including HIV/ conferences, text messages and reminders, 
AIDS), on maternal and child health, and on and simple surveys – and are, or could be, 
general health issues. delivered on regular phones via voice calls, 
SMS or USSD.
Most of the initiatives for healthcare workers 
Doctors    
(generalists and Moodle
specialists)
Assistant medical 
officers / substitute 
doctors
AED-SATELLIFE 
LEARNERS Nurses/ 
AMREF mLearning
Mobile Health 
midwives* TulaSalud Information System 
Mobile IMCI ENACQKT
Community Health and FrontLine HealthLine
and traditional Education SMS Learn Millennium Villages 
health workers Training (HEAT) eMOCHA Health Worker Training
Others
(e.g., technicians)
Curriculum Learning Treatment Reference 
support protocols materials
Source: Dalberg analysis
Exhibit 5: Identified examples of mHealth Education services for health workers, 
plotted to show the types of learners and the types of content delivered.
18
Google SMS 
Health Tips Freedom HIV/AIDS
Individuals Healthphone.org Project Masiluleke
including target 
LEARNERS groups such mDhil TexttoChange
as pregnant 
women, mothers, MTN Kick Out Young Africa Live MoTeCH Mobile Midwife
youth Malaria
m4RH Text4Baby
Wellness World
General health Sexual & Maternal & 
reproductive child health
health, incl. HIV/
AIDS
Source: Dalberg analysis CONTENT
Exhibit 6: Selected examples of mHealth Education services for individuals, 
grouped by the primary topic of the health information content.
19
Impact of and financial and disseminating information; however it is 
hard to identify cost savings from the current 
models for mHealth wave of applications because most involve 
Education initiatives providing additional support and information to healthcare workers or individuals rather 
With many applications only recently than replacing existing services.
launched, and many operating only at 
small scales, it is impossible at this stage to Philanthropic capital is financing the field 
assess in any formal way the impact of the of mHealth Education today and models 
current applications on health outcomes. for financial sustainability have yet to 
This will be resolved over the next few emerge. As illustrated in Exhibit 7, the 
years through randomized control trials majority of mHealth Education applications 
currently being planned by Johns Hopkins, studied were financed by donors, often 
Grameen Foundation and others. In the along with subsidies or CSR support from 
meantime, anecdotal evidence suggests mobile operators, handset manufacturers 
that mHealthEd applications are having or other companies. Looking forward, 
multiple benefits. They are improving training it seems likely that the main source of 
of healthcare workers, especially community- revenue for mHealthEd applications for 
based workers – and there is ample evidence healthcare workers would come from sales 
that improved training of health workers to governments and relevant educational 
leads to improved care and better health institutions who want to offer the applications 
outcomes. Applications for individuals are to the workers they employ or train. Some 
increasing levels of knowledge about health applications may be able to partly or fully 
issues among the targeted populations. finance themselves through fees (possibly 
Mobile applications are clearly cheaper packaged with tuition and training fees), or 
than alternative approaches to training even through advertising.
Number of initiatives
10
For individuals
9 For health workers
8
7
6
5
4
3
2
1
0
Donor Donor & Donor & Users Academia Donor & 
Corporate Academia Government
PAYER
N = 23
Source: Organizational websites; Dalberg interviews
Exhibit 7: Sources of funding for mHealth Education initiatives studied.
20
Case Studies
21
Case Study – Millennium services. Despite the integral role they play 
in MVP, they often receive little medical 
Villages Project: continuous training, and their knowledge is rarely 
education and refresher reinforced after training. 
learning for community Telecommunications corporation Ericsson, 
health workers together with mobile carriers Airtel Bharti (formerly Zain) and MTN, is working with MVP 
to bring mobile communications and Internet 
The Millennium Villages Project (MVP) is a access to the fourteen MVP sites in ten 
community-led effort that aims to achieve African countries, in total reaching close to 
the Millennium Development Goals in the half a million people. Ericsson is providing the 
poorest, most remote places in  Sub-Saharan broadband communications infrastructure 
Africa, and beyond, through an innovative to MVP, enabling communities to remotely 
model. As part of the overall economic and connect with medical services, education, 
social development plan, community health and social networks which otherwise might 
workers, most of whom are members of the not be accessible. 
local community, are responsible for 100-250 
households each, conducting house visits, Ericsson, in conjunction with MVP, is also 
using paper forms to report information, and developing locally relevant applications 
providing routine and preventative health such as health worker training. One 
22
such programme is aimed at supporting modules that can be stored, particularly for 
continuous education and refresher learning non-English versions. As content evolves, it will 
for community health workers currently in need to be updated but this cannot be done 
Dertu, Kenya; Mwandama, Malawi; Mbola, remotely, a challenge that will need to be 
Tanzania; Ruhiira, Uganda; and Bonsaaso, addressed. The fact that not all phones have 
Ghana. Content is adapted from the the Java technology required to download 
community health worker training manual the modules could also limit the project’s 
and converted into a file format that is reach.
readable on a Java-enabled mobile phone. 
The modules help to reinforce community 
health worker learning in family planning, 
reproductive health, care for newborns, 
malnutrition, diarrhea, and infectious 
diseases. Community health workers can 
select their module of interest from a menu. 
At the end of each module, the community 
health workers can test their knowledge by 
answering multiple choice questions and 
getting immediate feedback on the answers. 
There are also optional case studies that can 
be used to test knowledge.
While promoting a sustainable business 
model and building the capacity of local 
community communication, Ericsson also 
aims to contribute to economic growth 
by stimulating higher levels of education, 
improved health services, and reduced 
poverty. Ericsson has also included 
environmental protection measures, using 
renewable energy to run its network, which 
reduces reliance on dirtier energy sources, 
as well as reducing operating costs. The 
Mobile Innovation Centre works closely with 
local people to find out what is needed 
and at what scale, increasing the centre’s 
understanding of market dynamics among 
the poor and across remote areas of Africa 
around the specific technologies proven to 
have positive social impact. 
Initial indications show that community health 
workers find the modules easy to access. 
Community health workers report that having 
a mobile reference point eliminates the need 
to carry a heavy manual or constantly call a 
nurse for support. Initial feedback also shows 
that community health workers wanted more 
quiz questions in their module-end evaluation. 
One problem is the small storage capacity of 
the phones, limiting the length and number of 
23
Case Study – TulaSalud: Nurses are now trained in rural health centres 
using low-cost high-efficiency information 
distance learning and communication technologies. The 
teleconferences for nurses majority of these nursing students are themselves indigenous peoples from 
in remote regions of remote rural communities, and they return 
Guatemala to provide services near their homes. They speak the local languages and understand 
the complexities of interaction between 
More than 75% of indigenous people in traditional and Western medicine. Over time, 
Guatemala live in poverty – a number the centres began to provide education, 
which has not decreased despite significant training, and curative care to rural 
increases in average incomes. Health communities on the margins of Guatemala’s 
outcomes mirror the poverty indicators; health care system. 
the highest maternal mortality rates are 
found among the rural, poor, indigenous Since 2004, ENEC and TulaSalud have been 
populations who often live in remote areas offering a community auxiliary training 
with very limited access to healthcare. programme via distance education to 
  indigenous students from seven departments 
In 2003, the Guatemalan Ministry of Health of Guatemala. The students are linked for 
and the National School of Nursing of distance training classes with their teacher 
Cobán with the support of CIDA, and the at the nursing school through the internet 
Tula Foundation began training culturally- provided by TulaSalud.
appropriate healthcare workers to live, 
study, and work with indigenous populations. 
24
Many of the nurses returned to their donors continue to fund the operational 
communities and found they were asked costs of some of the training centres. To 
to perform procedures far beyond their date, 500 new community auxiliary nurses 
knowledge and skill levels. Those with cell have graduated from the programme, and 
phones called their health centres or their more than 95% are working close to their 
teachers. This sparked a new programme to home communities. ENEC is currently training 
use TulaSalud’s community health workers, a new cohort of 450 students. The success 
known as tele-facilitadores, to use mobile of this programme spawned a distance 
phones to: (i) get help from doctors in education programme for certifying auxiliary 
diagnosing and making decisions; (ii) receive nurses to become technical nurses; there are 
calls from people in their communities currently 200 students enrolled in this 3-year 
seeking care; (iii) organize logistics and programme. Christy Gombay from TulaSalud 
transportation for emergencies; and (iv) refer said, “Some health centres have said that 
patients to hospitals and follow up to ensure they are the best trained nurses they have 
they received care. ever had because they are from those areas 
and training by distance gives them the 
TulaSalud is then also able to: (i) monitor practical and theoretical grounding.” 
disease outbreaks in real time based on the 
data aggregated from patient consultations The project is showing excellent results: 
through EpiSurveyor, (ii) send text message community health workers have been 
alerts and reminders to tele-facilitadores using instrumental in epidemiological surveying 
FrontlineSMS, (iii) evaluate the productivity (for example providing training for H1N1 
of tele-facilitadores working in the field, and early detection in 2009), community training 
(iv) deliver remote health training via mobile- in health issues like nutrition and HIV/AIDS, 
based audio conferencing. Christy Gombay and community-based health planning 
from TulaSalud said, “Now everyone is talking for emergencies. Initial results have been 
about technology. Get the right people into impressive in 2010: over 31,000 consultations 
the right place and it will grow organically -- and more than 590 patients transferred 
we picked students who wanted to have an to health centres, approximately 450 of 
impact on their community.” which were high-risk pregnancies. In the 
Department of Alta Verapaz, maternal 
TulaSalud was initially funded by a grant mortality fell from 260 per 100,000 births in 
from the Tula Foundation in Canada and 2006, the highest in the country, to 203 in 2010 
from CIDA. Seeing the programme’s positive with no maternal deaths where the tele-
results, the government started to fully facilitadores are working. 
subsidize the fees of all teachers for these 
auxiliary nurse students, and other local 
25
Case Study – AED-SATELLIFE: “The nurses were initially apprehensive at 
the training, so we started with playing an 
mobile health information electronic game on the phone. Only two 
system library for healthcare weeks later they were already asking for specific and specialty guidelines that they 
workers in South Africa needed.”
The pilot programme was funded by the 
Rochelle Gelandt is a registered nurse at the John M. Lloyd Foundation, Henry E. Niles 
Livingstone Hospital Wellness Clinic in Port Foundation, and Qualcomm’s Wireless Reach 
Elizabeth, South Africa. Due to a shortage of Initiative. Collaborating partners included the 
doctors, the duty of providing health care to Eastern Cape Department of Health, MTN, 
the poorest populations often falls to nurses Nelson Mandela Metropolitan University, and 
like Gelandt. When complex cases come South Africa Partners. Once the project has 
up, nurses need advice and information to been fully tested, AED-SATELLIFE says it would 
decide on the appropriate response. But like to see the tool used in every hospital. 
only 11% of South Africa’s population has “We want the hospitals to institutionalize 
Internet access and only 1% has broadband, this and streamline the tool in the same 
so healthcare workers, particularly in rural way they would support the purchase and 
settings, often have no way to get online. maintenance of a microscope. There is a lot 
Leela McCullough from AED- SATELLIFE said, of political will and support,” Berhane Gebru 
“In a 2006 pilot project in South Africa that said. “The programme needs smartphones 
tested the usefulness of HIV/AIDS information because of data storage needs, but with 
on mobile devices, we found that doctors the negotiating power of the Department 
had enough information but nurses were of Health, they can obtain them at a lower 
hungry for it. Targeting clinical nurses in cost.”
our 2009 project, it was clear that they 
did not have access to most of the health According to an evaluation conducted by 
information on the Eastern Cape Department the Nelson Mandela Metropolitan University, 
of Health’s website.” They were thus unable 82% of nurses said they were more confident 
look up references in real time for patient answering questions at the point of care, 
evaluation, share information on complex and 89% indicated that their nursing practice 
cases, and keep abreast of epidemics. was enhanced. Of the initial group of nurses, 
68% had little or no computer training, but 
AED-SATELLIFE designed and implemented 81% said they found it easy to find and read 
the Mobile Health Information System content on the mobile device. The nurses 
(MHIS) project to provide nurses at three also reported that the project generated 
urban hospitals in Port Elizabeth with clinical a pattern of knowledge-seeking behavior 
information on smartphones at the point and learning, with nurses increasing 
of care. They created an electronic library communication with medical colleagues 
of over 4,500 pages, including continuing both within South Africa and internationally 
provider materials such as digitized South via email. All of the surveyed nurses said they 
African medical treatment guidelines, will continue to use the Mobile Library and 
protocols, diagnostic tools, drug formulas, tools after the pilot programme ends, and 
and content from health journals. The 92% said they would be willing to buy their 
MHIS Library was created using a software own mobile device to access the information
tool called GUIDE which converts large 
documents to an optimized format for “Since I was introduced to the device in 
viewing on smartphones, and then loads into January 2009, I have been using it on a daily 
the main memory of the phones and the basis – the device as well as the mobile library 
micro-SD card for backup purposes. loaded on it,” said Gelandt. “I love that I 
can access health information at the point 
Through the MHIS, nurses can simply launch of care, as I do not always have the time to 
the mobile library interface from an icon on go to the library. The device is loaded with so 
the main screen of the smartphone. (The much relevant and interesting content that it 
nurses were also trained to use email, SMS, is hard not to want to read more.”
and search the Internet.) McCullough said, 
26
Case Study – Health “The uniqueness of HEAT and TESSA is that 
they were developed in African countries 
Education and Training in with the help of reviewers and the OU, versus 
Africa (HEAT) programme being modeled on a Western curriculum,” said Long. The modules are freestanding materials 
pilot in Ethiopia that can be integrated into existing training 
programmes or used to create new ones, as 
The HEAT in Africa programme aims to in Ethiopia. As open source material, they can 
transform the way in which healthcare be taken and adapted to local needs and 
education is delivered and in which health circumstances in other countries and regions. 
workers are supported in communities across The access portal is easily downloaded so 
Africa, and is currently considering ways to use the information can be printed in cases 
mobile phones to accelerate the training of where Internet connectivity is unreliable or 
these health workers. The pilot programme is unavailable. Since mobile coverage is poor 
a partnership between the Ethiopian Federal in Ethiopia, the possibility of using discrete 
Ministry of Health (FMOH), the Regional components of the training will be explored in 
Bureaus, the UK’s Open University(OU), UNICEF, other countries.
WHO and AMREF. As part of a national 
programme formed at the request of the The HEAT programme in Ethiopia is being 
Minister of Health, the programme is supporting funded through a UK£250,000 grant from 
the FMOH’s aim to upgrade the skills of its the Ferguson Trust and a US$4 million grant 
31,000 Health Extension Workers (HEWs) through from UNICEF, which cover the costs of the 
“blended learning” in order to ensure that the pilot, curriculum development costs, student 
programme can be delivered with consistent costs, tutor fees, and clinical equipment 
quality nationwide with minimum disruption to and supplies. Once the Open University has 
the delivery of village health services. “There is secured additional grant funding, it intends to 
no disconnect between theory and practice. expand the programme to six more countries: 
It’s all integrated because they do training Zambia, Tanzania, Rwanda, Ghana, Kenya 
and work at the same time. HEWs used to be and Nigeria. Funding will go towards recruiting 
trained at residential colleges, away from their staff to engage with governments, to adapt, 
communities. There was significant variation update and translate material, and to support 
in the content delivered by each of these programme planning, implementation and 
colleges. Now the national curriculum has monitoring and evaluation.
been standardized and most HEWs will be 
studying in their communities, using the same The HEAT pilot was launched in the first quarter 
high quality learning resources” said Lesley- of 2011 with 1,000 students, 100 distance 
Anne Long, director of HEAT. learning tutors, and 100 practical skills tutors 
from six regions of Ethiopia. There are plans 
HEAT is modeled on the successful Teacher to add 3,000 students to the programme in 
Education in Sub-Saharan Africa (TESSA) the second quarter of 2011, and thereafter to 
initiative, a web portal with extensive audio register larger numbers of students until all of 
and text materials covering the core areas the current 31,000 healthcare workers have 
of primary education, and which is now been upgraded. Based on the success of 
being accessed and used by nearly 400,000 TESSA, the HEAT programme is expected to 
primary school teachers in 12 African increase the knowledge and skills of health 
countries. Distance-learning resources to meet extension workers, help health supervisors to 
enhanced occupational standards have been support distance education programmes, 
developed by Ethiopian educators, supported and increase the number of experts able 
by the Open University’s HEAT Programme to develop distance education learning 
team. The materials are designed as open resources. Governments and other partners 
educational resources and are freely available have already begun to show interest in 
for anyone to access, adapt and use. adopting the programme as well as expanding 
it to other health professionals.
27
Case Study – African Medical 
The various components of learning were 
and Research Foundation funded by Accenture (eLearning Nurse 
(AMREF): distance learning Upgrading Programme) and the Flying Doctors Society of Africa and the Fresenius 
for nursing registration in Foundation (AMREF Virtual Nursing School). 
Kenya Students are required to pay the fees to the nursing institutions they are studying 
with, and these amounts vary slightly per 
Getting a place at one of the few nurse institution. Public institutions charge up to 
training schools in Kenya is very difficult. Too $486 per module, while private and faith-
many applicants vie for too few places. based organizations can charge up to $846 
Consequently, most of Kenya’s 20,000 and $692 per module, respectively. Some 
nurses (more than 85% in 2005) are trained employers such as Kenyatta National Hospital 
only at certificate level and do not have a are now funding their employees. 
Registered Nurse’s diploma. Classroom-based 
training for the nursing diploma was limited; Between 2005 and March 2011, over 7000 
only 100 of the 20,000 nurses could qualify students have enrolled in the eLearning 
each year, leaving Kenya with 1 registered programme. In Kangundo Hospital, 
nurse per 27,000 people. programme-trained nurses were reported to 
be more motivated, knowledgeable, and 
Anne Kamene, who was an enrolled nurse proactive. As the training programme built 
at the Kangundo District Hospital in Kenya’s nurses’ general professional capacities (for 
Eastern Province, said: “I tried twice but both example, by training them on computer use), 
times I was not selected. Then in 2006, I saw they took on duties previously performed 
an advertisement in the newspaper for a by doctors, which in turn helped doctors 
diploma nursing course by eLearning.” focus on their own core responsibilities. The 
work of administration was also lessened 
AMREF, the Nursing Council of Kenya, Kenyan since the nurses need less supervision. Time 
Ministry of Health, Accenture, and the Kenya savings are realized through fewer meetings 
Medical Training Colleges teamed up to needed to explain procedures. The end result 
develop a training programme that shifts the is an improvement in overall patient care. 
emphasis from traditional classroom-based Whereas patients used to stay for up to a 
teaching to “paper-based” distance learning month in the wards, the maximum stay is now 
and eLearning. The partnership developed 14 days. The wards are less congested and 
four computer-based training modules that doctors can concentrate on other patients. 
are being delivered through more than 100 
eLearning centres by 400 tutors and mentors Kamene said: “I [now] interact a lot with the 
– reaching nurses in the most remote areas patients and give them more attention than I 
of Kenya. Unlike traditional training, the used to. Even the doctors respect us. Before, 
eLearning programme is flexible, enabling we were just there to follow instructions, but 
students to learn anytime and anywhere, after seeing what we’re able to do, they 
without the need to stop working while they listen to us and even consult us.”
acquire new skills. 
The Registrar of the Nursing Council of Kenya 
The programme uses mobile phones to states, “We are proud of the programme, 
provide students with academic reminders as nurse managers are reporting an 
via text messaging, and for accessing improvement in the quality of nursing care. 
telephone tutorials. AMREF is now testing With improved nursing care, we are confident 
whether mobile phones can be used to of our contribution in steering our country 
distribute selected eLearning materials to towards meeting the health-related MDGs.” 
students via mobile phone using a Java The programme’s success in Kenya has also 
application. led to interest in replicating it in other African 
28
countries. According to Dr. Peter Ngatia, already being replicated by the Ministries of 
Director of Capacity Building for AMREF, “This Health in Uganda and Tanzania with support 
programme is not only going to drastically from AMREF– and the impact on Africa’s 
improve the health care of Kenya, it is health system will be enormous.”
29
Beyond the First Wave: How identify gaps between needs and the current 
training and learning provided, and to pick 
to Maximize the Potential for out the areas where there is both a gap and 
mHealth Education a high likelihood that a mobile application could help. Likewise, new applications for 
individuals should be targeted towards 
Adopt a systematic approach identified critical knowledge gaps among affected populations.
mHealth Education is only getting started, There is a wealth of content for health 
but there is enough promise to merit a worker training and learning, but much work 
more systematic approach to exploring needs to be done to make it suitable for 
opportunities and developing solutions. mobile applications. Both the Millennium 
This systematic approach should include Villages Project and FrontlineSMS noted the 
work on needs identification, on content challenge of designing, managing, and 
development, on standards and formats delivering content despite working from 
for platforms, and on business models. Most preexisting community health manuals. 
importantly, it needs to tie mHealthEd work to Given the similarities in topics about which 
national health strategies, and especially to most healthcare workers need to learn, 
plans for strengthening health systems and for there would be real value in a coordinated 
developing healthcare human resources. approach to reviewing existing content, 
validating its educational value, and 
Initiatives to date have sought to address converting the most useful sets of materials 
specific opportunities identified by particular into a shared meta-library with appropriate 
organizations in particular contexts. It formats and multiple languages, so that new 
could be useful to review existing national efforts don’t have to create new content. Of 
healthcare human resource plans, and course, this baseline of pre-existing content 
conduct further research on key training and would need to be refined for each country, 
learning needs for different categories of to reflect the health priorities and country 
healthcare workers in different countries, to context as directed by the government’s 
health experts.
30
As with most technologies, there could be would, of course, have different roles to play. 
real benefits to all from agreeing on common Governments have the responsibility in their 
standards and formats for applications, countries to set national health strategies 
content storage, and so on. Such standards and healthcare workforce development 
and formats would facilitate the involvement plans, establish relevant policies to govern 
of telecoms and education industry players, and support mHealthEd (including, for 
who could engage with governments, NGOs example, facilitating the use of content 
and funders to define and develop platforms. developed in other countries), and decide 
on which mobile applications to roll-out at 
Grants have financed the majority of scale. NGOs, content developers and mobile 
mHealth Education applications to date, so industry companies need to collaborate to 
there are not yet many proven models of develop applications, and also to evaluate 
financial sustainability. A variety of paths to pilot efforts so that the most effective 
sustainability may be possible. For mHealthEd models can be identified. Donors and 
applications for healthcare workers, the investors are needed to provide financing 
most likely is that government ministries or for testing and rolling-out new ideas. Mobile 
health worker training institutions will be operators provide the capacity for voice, 
willing to pay for mHealthEd applications text messaging and data, and can promote 
that demonstrate the ability to enhance mHealth Education through subsidies or 
quality significantly and/or reduce the time pricing plans which facilitate scaling up of 
or cost to train a healthcare worker. Some mHealthEd initiatives.
applications may be directed at students 
interested in supporting their own learning Aim for scale
and certification. Mobile operators or device 
manufacturers may be willing to offer to The goals for mHealth Education must be 
provide mHealth Education-related services ambitious. The challenges which mHealth 
or devices for free to healthcare workers, or Education seeks to meet are great, in 
to facilitate health information campaigns particular improving the training of 2.1 million 
with free or low-cost rates, either as part of current healthcare workers and supporting 
larger contracts with government or private the training of perhaps 2.6 to 3.5 million 
healthcare institutions or as part of their new workers. And the 2015 deadline for 
corporate social responsibility programmes. achieving the Millennium Development 
Goals is only a few years away. The mantra 
Promote collaboration between cited by Gustav Praekelt, whose foundation 
actors and stakeholders developed the Young Africa Live portal, is 
apt: “Don’t do it unless you can reach at 
Real benefits could come from increasing least one million people”. Therefore, the focus 
collaboration among the relevant actors should be on quick deployment of the most 
in mHealth Education, to implement a promising innovations as part of national 
systematic agenda along the lines of that health strategies and healthcare workforce 
presented above, to design, develop, test development plans, on carefully selecting 
and deploy new mHealthEd applications, any pilots based on their likelihood to be 
and to share best practices and learnings scaled quickly, and not so much on building 
with each other as the field develops. extensive portfolios of pilot programmes.
The actors should include governments, 
healthcare institutions, academia, content 
creators, mobile operators, device 
manufacturers, NGOs, philanthropists and 
investors. Different members of the coalition 
31
List of mHealth Education Initiatives Studied
Applications for healthcare workers
Initiative Location Primary Partners Description
African Medical and Kenya, Nursing Council of Kenya, AMREF is exploring the integration of 
Research Foundation Uganda AMREF, Accenture, the mLearning into its existing eLearning 
(AMREF): distance learning Kenya Medical Training curriculum which aims to accelerate 
for  nurses Colleges, several private the training of nurses from certificate 
and faith-based nursing to diploma level.  As a complement to 
schools, Kenya Ministry of the Virtual University training, AMREF 
Health has also developed a mobile website 
for nurses to access information about 
ART treatment protocols and is currently 
piloting the use of mobile based peer-to-
peer learning for nursing students.
eMOCHA: electronic mo- Afghanistan, Johns Hopkins Center for In addition to data collection and com-
bile open-source compre- Uganda, Clinical Global Health munication tools for health workers, the 
hensive health application United States Education eMOCHA application provides multi-
media courses and lectures (recorded 
in MP4 format), followed by quizzes to 
test users’ knowledge of the information. 
Results are submitted to a central server 
for further analysis on the impact of the 
courses.
ENACQKT: Enhancing Nurs- Barbados, University of Saskatchewan, ENACQKT nurses use PDAs in publicly 
es Access for Care Quality Dominica, IDRC funded hospitals to improve care for 
and Knowledge through Dominican patients with hypertension, diabetes, HIV 
Technology Republic, St. and AIDS. Nurses use the PDA to access 
Lucia, St. Kitts preloaded material including policy 
and Nevis and procedure manuals, a medication 
handbook, laboratory diagnostics, a 
symptom-interpretation program, critical-
thinking tools, and a medical calculator; 
and they feed back data to a central 
computer.
FrontlineSMS: Learn Uganda Johns Hopkins Program for JHPIEGO, in partnership with Marie 
International Education in Stopes International and Abt Associates, 
Gynecology and Obstetrics uses FrontlineSMS, a free open source 
(JHPIEGO), USAID-funded software, to support knowledge reten-
SHOPS program, Abt As- tion for trained health workers. JHPIEGO 
sociates, Marie Stopes is currently piloting the platform to 
International prompt SMS based responses and quiz-
zes on family planning modules after a 
training in Uganda.
32
HealthLine Pakistan Carnegie Mellon Univer- The HealthLine project is an information 
sity, Aga Khan Univer- access system for health workers, to help 
sity Pakistan, Health and them fill gaps in their knowledge. Piloted 
Nutrition Development in 2008, health workers can call a toll-free 
Society (HANDS), Micro- number and learn about a variety of 
soft Research through the topics through audio transmission in their 
Digital Inclusion Initiative, native language.
Siebel Scholars Foundation, 
Pakistan-US Science and 
Technology Cooperative 
Program
Health Education and Ethiopia Ethiopian Federal Ministry HEAT is a comprehensive online knowl-
Training in Africa (HEAT) of Health, OU HEAT team, edge bank of learning resources that 
Programme AMREF, Allan and Nesta can be freely accessed by anyone – 
Ferguson Charitable Trust, individuals, organizations training com-
UNICEF, WHO munity health workers and global health 
institutions – and is currently exploring 
the use of mLearning for distribution. 
The materials are designed to be easily 
downloaded for printing and distribution 
particularly in regions where connectiv-
ity is unreliable or not yet available. In 
Ethiopia, HEAT delivers training for CHWs 
across the country. 
Millennium Villages Project Ghana, Ken- The Earth Institute at Co- The Millennium Villages Project is building 
(MVP): continuous educa- ya, Uganda, lumbia University, Ericsson, on their existing mHealth initiatives (Child-
tion for health workers Tanzania, Millennium Villages Project, Count+) to introduce applications that 
Malawi Sony Ericsson create access to health manuals and 
reinforce training on topics ranging from 
family planning, reproductive health, 
care for newborns, malnutrition, diarrhea 
and infectious diseases. Questions are 
linked to a central database where infor-
mation can also be used for monitoring 
and supervisory support. 
AED-SATELLIFE: Mobile South Africa AED-SATELLIFE, Eastern AED-SATELLIFE designed a management 
Health Information System Cape Health Department, health information system (MHIS) which 
(MHIS) MTN, Nelson Mandela Uni- provides health workers with locally 
versity, Qualcomm Wireless relevant, reliable and accurate clinical 
Reach, Universal Service information at the point of care through 
and Access Agency of smartphones pre-loaded with a library 
South Africa (USAASA) of pertinent resources. The library of 
information includes digitized medical 
guidelines, protocols, diagnostic tools, 
drug formularies and other actionable, 
evidence-based clinical content drawn 
from publicly available information 
sources.
33
Mobile IMCI Peru DataDyne.org, Ministry of The Mobile IMCI programme sends text 
Health in Peru, Pan Ameri- messages to nurses and community 
can Health Organization health workers to reinforce key elements 
(PAHO/OPS), Adventist of the IMCI curriculum. Using a series of 
Development and Relief quizzes and follow-up tests, trainers can 
Organization (ADRA), Zolt- determine if the reinforcement texts help 
ner Consulting Group health professionals retain the informa-
tion, with the expectation that better 
informed care-givers will lead to better 
health outcomes for children.
Moodle Peru Institute of Tropical Medi- In a pilot study, smartphones were distrib-
cine Alexander von Hum- uted to twenty physicians loaded with 
boldt (IMTAvH) in Lima, Insti- a set of 3D learning scenarios simulating 
tute of Tropical Medicine interactive clinical for a continuing medi-
(ITM) in Antwerp, Ministry cal education program lasting three 
of Health Peru, REACH months. A mobile educational platform 
Initiative-Tibotec supporting learning events (Moodle) 
tracked learning progress of participants, 
who were assessed through multiple 
choice mobile quizzes at the end of 
each module. 
TulaSalud Guatemala Ministry of Health, National TulaSalud is a Guatemalan NGO using 
School of Nursing Coban, mLearning solutions to provide distance 
Tula  Foundation, and the education and auxillary nurse training 
Centre for Nursing Studies in Guatemala. TulaSalud’s goal is to 
Canada support to Ministry of Health and the 
National School of Nursing to improve 
health services to the rural population, 
using e-health and m-health. TulaSalud’s 
programs allow students and teachers 
to download videos onto mobile phones 
and play back on various devices includ-
ing televisions. Post-graduation, students 
can continue to use the phones to 
receive remote diagnostic and decision 
support from urban physicians as well as 
to conduct community learning sessions 
with external experts. 
34
Applications for individuals
Initiative Location Primary Partners Description
General Health
Google SMS – Health Tips Uganda Grameen Foundation, SMS based service that allows users to 
AppLab Uganda, Google, access information on healthcare.
MTN Uganda, Marie Stopes 
Uganda, Straight Talk 
Foundation
Healthphone.org India Mother and Child Health Audio service to help communities and 
and Education Trust health workers access information on 
issues such as timing births, safe mother-
hood and HIV. Information is in English 
and 15 Indian languages.
mDhil India mDhil Uses SMS and web to deliver interactive 
healthcare information and daily health 
tips on sex, fitness, diet, etc. through web 
and mobile.
MTN Kick Out Malaria South Africa MTN, Medical Research ‘Please Call Me’ SMS based quiz use 
Council of South Africa, to educate the general public about 
FIFA, Praekelt Foundation malaria.
Wellness World India Handygo Technologies, Interactive Voice Response (IVR) and 
Uninor, Indian Hospitals Short Messaging Service (SMS) platforms 
including VidyaSagar to deliver daily information to Uninor sub-
Institute of Mental Health & scribers on health-related issues.
Neurosciences (VIMHANS), 
GM Modi Hospital, Jaipur 
Golden Hospital
Sexual & reproductive health (incl. HIV/AIDS)
Freedom HIV/AIDS India, Kenya ZMQ Systems, House of Cricket, soccer and other mobile games 
Learning, Delhi State AIDS designed to create HIV/AIDS awareness.
Control Society, Hivos, 
Manufacturers Association 
for Information Technology, 
Mobile4Good, Reliance, 
Times Foundation
Project Masiluleke South Africa iTeach, Praekelt Founda- Uses ‘Please Call Me’ messages to 
tion, Frog design, MTN provide referral to the National AIDS 
South Africa, Pop!Tech, Helpline.
Nokia Siemens Networks, 
National Geographic 
Society
Text to Change Kenya, Text to Change, Zain, General HIV/AIDS quiz and workplace 
Uganda AIDS Information Center in policy programme using SMS to create 
Uganda HIV/AIDS and health awareness.
Young Africa Live South Africa Praekelt Foundation, Voda- Mobile entertainment portal designed to 
fone Live/Vodacom, Traffik, engage youth on topics of general and 
Matchboxology, iTeach, sexual health.
Cell-Life, Mindset
35
m4RH Kenya, Tan- Text to Change, Family Automated SMS based system that pro-
zania Health International, Marie vides access to family planning informa-
Stopes tion.
Maternal & child health
MoTeCH MobileMidwife Ghana Grameen Foundation, Java-based information service that 
Grameen AppLab, Bill & delivers time-specific voice or text mes-
Melinda Gates Founda- sages to pregnant mothers and their 
tion, Columbia University's partners and families before and after 
Mailman School of Public childbirth. MoTeCH also helps community 
Health and the Ghana health workers to identify women and 
Health Service newborns in their area in need of health-
care services and automate the process 
of tracking patients who have received 
care.
Text4Baby United States National Healthy Mothers, SMS based mobile information service 
Healthy Babies Coalition designed to promote maternal and child 
(HMHB), Voxiva, CTIA - The health. 
Wireless Foundation and 
WPP, Johnson & Johnson, 
WellPoint, Pfizer, CareFirst, 
BlueCross BlueShield, White 
House Office of Science 
and Technology Policy, US 
Department of Health & 
Human Services, US Depart-
ment of Defense Military 
Health System, BabyC-
enter, Danya International, 
Syniverse Technologies, 
Keynote Systems, George 
Washington University, MTV
36
List of Interviews Conducted
Name Title/Responsibility Organization 
Aker, Jenny Assistant Professor of Development Fletcher School, Tufts University Centre for 
Economics & non-resident Fellow Global Development, 
Centre for Global Development Fellow Project ABC, Niger
Banks, Ken Founder Kiwanja.net & FrontlineSMS 
BonTempo, James Learning Technology Advisor Johns Hopkins Program for International 
Education in Gynaecology and Obstetrics 
(JHPIEGO),  
D'Elia, Nicola mApps and Innovation Manager GSMA Development Fund
Das Gupta, Trina mWomen Programme Director GSMA Development Fund 
Gebru, Berhane Director of Programmes AED-SATELLIFE
Gombay, Christy Director TulaSalud 
Hellström, Johan PhD student; Author of SIDA mLearning University of Stockholm
Report 
Jacobs, Rachel Consultant (former Director of Strategy Lead Growth and Innovation (Mc Graw Hill)
and Planning ) 
Kaonga, Nadi mHealth Programme Associate Millennium Villages, Earth Institute, Colum-
bia University
Keisling, Kelly Coordinator mHealth Working Group (formerly Johns 
Hopkins) 
Kelly, Tim Lead ICT Policy Specialist InfoDev 
Ladd, Holly Vice President and Centre Director AED-SATELLIFE
Long, Lesley-Anne Director of Health Education and Train- Open University 
ing (HEAT) Programme
Manzur, Omar Director Public Relations & Corporate Mobilink 
Social Responsibility
Mbindyo, Caroline eLearning Programme Manager Africa Medical Research and Foundation 
(AMREF)
McCullough, Leela Director of Information Services AED-SATELLIFE
Mechael, Patricia Director of Strategic Application of Mo- Millennium Villages Project, Earth Institute, 
bile Technology for Public Health and Columbia University
Development
Neethling, Marcha Head of Operations Praekelt Foundation 
Qiang, Christine Lead Economist (ICT) World Bank 
Riahi, Sep Digital Media at Sesame Workshop Sesame Street
Smith, Clive Director of Global Operations mHealth Alliance 
Trucano, Mike Senior ICT and Education Policy Special- InfoDev/World Bank
ist
van Beijma, Hajo Founder TexttoChange 
Vanska, Riitta Senior Manager, Mobile and Learning Nokia 
Solutions 
Vedula, Indrani Project Manager Mobile and Immersive Learning for Literacy 
in Emerging Economies (MILLEE )
Voosloo, Steve Mobile Impact Evangelist mLab Southern Africa (former Shuttleworth 
Foundation Fellow) 
37
Walji, Aliya Operations Manager (Former Technical Jacaranda Health 
Programme Manager ) (Grameen Foundation )
Warman, Ken Senior Programme Officer Bill and Melinda Gates Foundation 
Wilson, Damian Public Affairs and Media Relations BBC World Services Trust (Janala)
Manager
Zeigler, Jessica Programme Coordinator Worldreader 
38
References
Accenture and AMREF. Nursing ELearning in Kenya. Business in the Community. 
Web <http://www.bitc.org.uk/global/millennium_development_goals/mdgs_case_studies/accenture_and_
amref.html>.
AED SATELLIFE and the Nelson Mandela Metropolitan University. Final evaluation study of the Mobile Health 
Information System Project. 2011.
Africa Medical Research and Foundation (AMREF), Training 20000 nurses in Kenya - AMREF. 
Web <http://amref.org>.
Article 13. CSR, Sustainability & Governance Consultants. 
Web <http://www.article13.com/A13_ContentList.asp?strAction=GetPublication>.
Article 13. “Ericsson - Telecommunications for Millennium Villages—Connectivity and CSR” in CSR Case Study 
Series (Oct 2009). Print.
Begum SF. “Role of TBAs in improving maternal and neonatal health in Bangladesh: a long-term programme 
need” in High risk mothers and newborns. Ott Publishers, 1987.
Bhavsar, Mohini. “Up Close and Personal with TulaSalud’s M-Health Work in Guatemala” on MobileActive.org. 
Web <http://www.mobileactive.org/case-studies/close-and-personal-tulasaluds-m-health-work-guatemala>.
Bhutta, Zulfiqar A., Zohra S. Lassi, George Pariyo, and Luis Huicho. Global experience of community health workers 
for the delivery of health related Millennium Development Goals: A systematic review, country case studies, and 
recommendations for integration into national health systems. WHO and Global Health Workforce Alliance, 2008.
Business Leaders Initiative on Human Rights. The Millennium Development Goals and human rights: Companies 
taking a rights-aware approach to development. 2010.
Boakye, Kojo, Nigel Scott, and Claire Smyth. Mobiles for development. UNICEF, 2010.
Dalberg and the World Bank. Study on Mobile Applications for the Health Sector. 2011.
DiMagi. CommCare – Community health mobile platform. 
Web <http://www.dimagi.com/commcare/>.
DiMagi. “DiMagi CommCare” on MobileActive.org. 
Web <http://www.mobileactive.org/tagging/dimagi>.
Ericsson. Ericsson Monitoring and Evaluation Report.  2010. 
Web <http://www.ericsson.com/res/thecompany/docs/corporate- responsibility/2010/MVP_M_&_E_Final_Report_
August_31_2010.pdf>.
Fauveau V, Stewart K, Khan SA, Chakraborty J. “Effect on mortality of community-based maternity- care 
programme in rural Bangladesh” in Lancet 1991; 338:1183-1186.
GSMA Development Fund. MLearning: A Platform for Educational Opportunities at the Base of the Pyramid. 2010.
Heatwole, Anneryan. “GUIDE: Getting medical information into the hands of community health workers” on 
MobileActive.org. 
Web <http://www.mobileactive.org/case-studies/guide-getting-medical-information-hands-community-health-
workers>.
Hellström, Johan. “The Innovative Use of Mobile Applications in East Africa” in Sida Review 2010:12.
iheed Institute. MHealthEd. Web <http://mhealthed.org/>.
International Telecommunication Union. Information Society Statistical Profiles 2009: Africa. 2009.
International Telecommunication Union. The World in 2010: ICT Facts and Figures. 2010.
39
International Telecommunication Union and the French Ministry of Foreign and European Affairs. 
Innovative ways of appropriating mobile telephony in Africa. 2010.
Kinfua, Yohannes et al. “The health worker shortage in Africa: are enough physicians and nurses being trained?” 
in Bulletin of the World Health Organization 2009, 87:225-230.
McKinsey and Company. Addressing Africa’s Health Workforce Crisis. 2007.
Medecins Sans Frontieres UK. “Retaining Health Workers: the Basics - News - MSF UK.” 24 May 2007. 
Web. <http://www.msf.org.uk/Retaining_health_workers_the_basics.news>.
Open University. “OU in Africa teaching & education the HEAT (Health Education and Training) Project” on 
Distance Learning Courses and Adult Education - The Open University. 
Web <http://www.open.ac.uk/africa/HEAT_project.shtm>.
OpenLearn LabSpace. Web <http://labspace.open.ac.uk/>.
OpenLearn LabSpace. ”Case Study AMREF.” 
Web <http://labspace.open.ac.uk/file.php/5730/Case_studies/Case_Study-AMREF_eLearning_for_Nurses_
Upgrading.pdf>
OpenLearn LabSpace. ”Case study HEAT.” 
Web <http://labspace.open.ac.uk/file.php/5730/Case_studies/Case_Study-OU_HEAT.pdf>
Puri, Jyotsna, et al.  “A study of connectivity in Millennium Villages in Africa” posted on MobileActive.org. 1 Dec 
2010.
Web <http://www.mobileactive.org/research/study-connectivity-millennium-villages-africa>.
Qualcomm. “Wireless Reach South Africa case study.” 
Web <http://www.qualcomm.com/documents/wireless-reach-south-africa-case-study>.
Rawe, Kathryn. Missing Midwives. Save the Children, 2011.
Ronsmans C, Vanneste AM, Chakraborty J, Ginneken JV. “Decline in maternal mortality in Matlab, Bangladesh: a 
cautionary tale” in Lancet 1997; 350:1810-1814. 
Shambora, Jessica. “Treating patients with a cell phone” on Business, Financial, Personal Finance News - 
CNNMoney.com. 29 Dec 2008. 
Web <http://money.cnn.com/2008/12/26/technology/mobile_health.fortune/>.
Taskforce on International Innovative Financing for Health Systems. More Money for Health and More Health for 
the Money. March 2009.
Taskforce on International Innovative Financing for Health Systems. Working Group 1: Technical Report: 
Constraints to Scaling Up and Costs. 15 June 2009.
Tula Foundation. Organization website <http://www.tula.org>.
TulaSalud. Organization website <http://www.tulasalud.org>.
Wittcoff, Alison, and Lauren Crigler. Measuring Engagement of Community Health Workers to Improve 
Productivity, Retention and Quality of Care. USAID HCI Project, 2010.
World Bank ICT Division. The Role of Mobile Phones in Sustainable Rural Poverty Reduction. 2008.
World Health Organization. Working Together for Health. World Health Report, 2006.
World Health Organization, Global Health Workforce Alliance. Global Experience of Community Health Workers 
for Delivery of Health Related Millennium Development Goals: A Systematic Review, Country Case Studies, and 
Recommendations for Integration into National Health Systems. 2010.
World Health Organization, Global Health Workforce Alliance. Scaling Up, Saving Lives: Task Force for Scaling Up 
Education and Training for Health Workers. 2008.
40
In the Information Age, no child should suffer 
due to a lack of access to health information.
41
www.iheed.org
42
43
t +353 25 52200
f +353 25 86885
e info@iheed.org
www.iheed.org
iheed Institute, Cork, Ireland.
44
