 
  
Automating Data Colle ction for HIV Services 
 
B rief Overview 
 
Faced with the high costs of printing and couriering 
paper client records, with a high data entry burden, and 
inconsistent quality of reporting, many programs are 
turning to electronic data capture solutions to improve 
efficiency and lower costs. Indeed, a project’s reporting 
requirements may involve multiple paper-based tools 
used to collect client information, laboratory testing 
results, and supervision data.  Client Intake Register 
(CIR) forms are often incorrectly or incompletely filled 
out by staff, while the large data entry burden regularly 
results in delays in reporting. Because of rising client 
volumes, it can become increasingly expensive to print 
client record forms, pay for courier services, and even 
pay for data entry (data entry might be outsourced to research agencies).  
Population Services International/Zimbabwe (PSI) annually provides counseling and testing (VCT) services to 
over 350,000 people through its network of 17 VCT sites. To lower costs and improve the data entry 
process, PSI/Zimbabwe piloted the use of tablet computers for data capture in its New Start Centers and by 
outreach teams. A pilot was conducted during the second half of 2011 in three sites.  
 
 Geographic Coverage: 
Three sites in Zimbabwe 
 
 Implementation Partners: 
Population Services International 
 
 Funder: 
USAID 
 
 For More Information Contact: 
USAID 
 Bill Jansen, USAID/Zimbabwe; 
Pascoe Avenue, Belgravia, Harare, Zimbabwe; 
Tel: +263-4-250-992; email: wjansen@usaid.gov 
PSI 
 Aleck Dhliwayo, MIS Coordinator, PSI/Zimbabwe; 
30 The Chase West, Emerald Park Offices, Block E, 
Emerald Hill, Harare, Zimbabwe; 
Tel: +263-4-334-63; email: adhliwayo@psi-zim.co.zw 
 
 25 
 
Data Collection 
  
 Automating Data Collection for HIV Services 
 
About Automating Data Collection  
A Windows-based application was developed by a Estimated cost comparison over five years 
consultant and includes a data collection tool with digital Source: Population Services International, 2012 
CIR forms, a data management interface, and export 
functionalities. Key system requirements were that it $250,000
should be a scalable system, allowing for easy upload of $200,000
client records to a central repository, the incorporation $150,000 Paper Based
of logical skip patterns and coherence tests into the data System$100,000
collection forms, and interconnections between tablets Tablet Based
in order for multiple counselors to have access to all $50,000 System
information of a particular client.  $0
 Yr 1 Yr 2 Yr 3 Yr 4 Yr 5
Suitable hardware was identified and the system was  
deployed and tested at three New Start clinics for a Lessons Learned 
period of three months; 12 counselors were trained on • Users struggled with navigation of Windows 7, 
the use of the tablets and of the application. Each team which requires additional training. 
of about 10 devices was to have its own WLAN hub • Device to device network (15m radius) did not 
with one of the tablets acting as the back-end server for work well. Each site and outreach team needs to 
synchronization purposes. Technical support was have a Wireless Local Area Network (WLAN). 
provided throughout the pilot by the IT and MIS units • Battery life problems can be alleviated by including 
and by the consultant. battery packs and solar chargers in the hardware 
 requirements and using tablets that are less power-
Evaluation and Results intensive. 
The successful pilot highlighted the value technology will • Windows 7 licenses are very expensive. Revised 
bring to the testing and counseling department while forms will be developed in a Java-based application 
significantly reducing the cost of the data collection compatible with Android operation system, 
process. During the pilot, the IT/MIS team successfully resulting in lower price for equipment and no more 
created a user-friendly digital data collection form for license fees. 
the client intake forms, and designed a system that • Securing the devices is difficult. Counselors have to 
allowed for networking of responses among the multiple carry the device around and then store them in the 
clients and sharing of client records between safe after hours. 
counselors. All 54 variables required for statistical • Adequate IT resources and IT support staff is 
analysis and reporting purposes were successfully required to set up and run the system. 
exported into SPSS. The forms can be paused and  
resumed at any time, and include built-in logical skip Conclusion 
patterns. 
Using tablets to collect data can result in improved data 
 
quality, faster data collection, near real-time data and 
Currently PSI is installing the system in all of its 17 New 
timely reporting of client records on monthly basis, and 
Start clinics, soon to be followed by the organization’s 
is less costly, despite high initial set-up costs. Tablets can 
New Life sites (provision of post-test support services). 
also be used for data collection and reporting by field 
Phase one of the implementation plan is now completed, 
staff such as IPC agents, medical detailers, or community 
with five sites now exclusively using tablets for VCT 
health workers. 
record keeping (following a transition period during 
which both digital and paper records were kept). During  
the pilot, CIR printing, data entry and courier costs  
were significantly cut.   
26  
