  
  
e Family Planning (e-FP) 
 
B rief Overview 
 
Family planning saves lives, improves the health of 
both mother and child, strengthen communities, 
and stimulates economic growth. Despite the 
evidence, a quarter of Tanzanian women have an 
unmet need for family planning services,  and only 
27 percent reported using a modern contraceptive 
method in 2010.  Community-based Family 
Planning is a fundamental approach to increase 
access to Family Planning services. In order to 
strengthen community-based family planning 
services, D-tree, in collaboration with FHI 360 and 
Pathfinder International, developed and is 
implementing an open-source mobile phone-based 
family planning application. The electronic family 
planning (e-FP) application is expected to improve 
counseling on FP, and hence increase access to and 
the uptake of family planning methods. The e-FP 
job aid is a new module for the home-based care 
(HBC) system that is currently being scaled up by 
community health workers (CHWs) in Dar es 
Salaam, Tanzania.  
 
The tool provides each CHW with an algorithm to 
enable the CHW to effectively counsel, screen, provide and refer clients for FP, HIV, and STIs services. The e-
FP application also allows for the collection and reporting of data that will help to monitor and evaluate the 
program.The project runs from February 2011 to March 2013 and is currently being used by 20-30 CHWs in 
Dar es Salaam, Tanzania. 
 
  Geographic Coverage: 
 Dar es Salaam, Tanzania  
 Implementation Partners: 
FHI 360, under the PROGRESS Project, is leading a team of partners which includes: 
D-tree International | Pathfinder International | Tanzania Ministry of Health RCHS Unit 
 
 Funder: 
USAID 
 
 For More Information Contact: 
USAID 
 Mihira Karra, AOR PROGRESS Project;  
Tel: +1-202-712-5934; email: mkarra@usaid.gov 
FHI 360  
 Christine Lasway, Senior Technical Officer; 
Tel: +1-919-544-7040 ext. 11233; email: clasway@fhi360.org 
D-tree 
 57  Marc Mitchell, President; 
52 Whitney Tavern Road, Weston, MA 02493 
   Tel: +1-617-432- 6322; email: mmitchel@hsph.harvard.edu 
 
Service Delivery 
 
 eFamily Planning (e-FP) 
 
About e-FP It guides the CHWs to effectively counsel, screen, 
D-tree, in partnership with FHI 360, Pathfinder, and the provide and refer clients for FP, HIV, and STIs services. 
Ministry of Health, has developed the e-FP job aid based  
on a combination of proven evidence-based tools Evaluation and Results 
including the balanced counseling strategy plus (BCS),  Evaluation of this project, planned for 2013, will examine 
the pregnancy checklist, the provider screening checklist the acceptability and feasibility of the mobile job aid 
for oral contraceptives, and the decision-making toolkit.  using a randomized control design, and will compare 
The development of this application therefore builds on quality of FP service provision, including screening and 
what has already been developed and will continually be referrals, and efficiency of data reporting, to a paper-
tested and further refined. based tool.  Six health facilities in the Dar es Salaam 
 region of Tanzania were randomized to use either the 
The BCS is a family planning counseling framework mobile phone-based application (intervention group) or 
developed and refined over a number of years by the paper-based tools (control group). The post-test only 
Population Council. It was originally developed for use control group design includes structured surveys with 
in a clinical setting rather than by community health clients, in-depth interviews with CHWs and their 
workers. The heart of the BCS is an 11-step algorithm supervisors, data abstraction from client records, field 
which choreographs a specific dialogue between reports, and cost-effectiveness analysis. 
provider and client, and which is supported by two  
kinds of materials for each method: a counseling card Lessons Learned 
and a brochure.  • Close partnership with the government is 
 
essential for effective program implementation. 
The provider screening checklists help providers  
determine if a woman is medically eligible to initiate use 
of any of four popular contraceptive methods: combined  
oral contraceptives (COCs), injectables (DMPA and Conclusion 
NET-EN), the copper intrauterine device (IUD), and Although it is too early to assess the results of the 
implants. A fifth checklist helps to rule out pregnancy program, the team anticipates seeing positive impacts 
among non-menstruating women.  from the implementation of the program as far as quality 
 of the family planning counseling given and in the 
The Decision Making Toolkit includes a decision-making efficiency of managing the program, due to the improved 
aid for clients, a job-aid and reference manual for timeliness of data. 
providers, and a training resource. Its format allows easy   
interaction with clients – one page faces the client (with  
simple information on key issues for the client to 
consider) and a corresponding page faces the provider 
(with key points and detailed reference information). 
Health-care providers can use it step-by-step to help 
clients make informed choices that suit their needs. 
 
The e-FP application consists of an algorithm (the e-FP 
job aid) and an SMS-based management tool.  The 
application also supports the following: 
• registration of clients; 
• collection of follow-up data on clients; and 
• monitoring of referral status. 
Information was excerpted from: 
58 http://healthmarketinnovations.org/program/d-tree-international-0  http://d-tree.org/wp-content/uploads/2010/05/Yaounde-March-2010-Family-Planning1.pdf 
http://www.fhi360.org/en/Research/Projects/Progress/GTL/mobile_tech.htm 
 
