PARTICIPATORY MONITORING AND 
EVALUATION (PARTME) 
Participatory mobile data collection to monitor pro-poor health policies in 
Ghana  
DATA COLLECTION 
Implementation date: January 2010 
SEND Foundation Ghana is a non-governmental organization that operates in many of the rural districts in Ghana. Central to 
SEND-Ghana’s work on health is Participatory Monitoring and Evaluation (PartMe) of pro-poor health interventions and policies. 
This participatory research generates issues of policy implementation on health for engagement with stakeholders at district, 
regional and national levels for change. SEND-Ghana gathered data manually but noted a number of challenges using paper 
tools including  delay in receiving  and submitting completed questionnaires, data entry and cleaning processes, loss of 
questionnaires, high mailing costs, high volume of paper, mix-ups of questionnaires, delay in data analysis and reporting and 
difficulty in disseminating research findings to district partners and other stakeholders. 
To address these challenges, the Innovation for Participatory Monitoring and Evaluation (PartMe) project was piloted in 21 
districts (in Northern Region, Upper East, Upper West and Greater Accra) and subsequently up scaled to all 50 districts where 
SEND operates.  
About PartMe 
PartMe is an ICT for development project that uses for advocacy on the accessibility and utilization, as well the 
t echnology to facilitate data collection and information quality of implementation of pro-poor health policies. SEND 
dissemination between SEND-Ghana, its grassroots partners, conducted surveys to monitor the National Health Insurance 
health providers, national health insurance and policy - Policy, the Free Maternal Care policy, the Community-based 
m akers in the health sector in Ghana. The project has Health Planning and Service Policy. The findings are also 
developed and deployed an information management tool being used to enhance the quality of SEND-Ghana’s website 
(customized ODK) to enable mobile data collection. This (http://www.sendwestafrica.org/) by ensuring regular and 
t ool is installed on mini laptops and mobile phones, which timely updates on the results of the surveys and advocacy 
have been distributed to the newly formed District Citizen activities.  
Monitoring Committees (DCMCs). For data collection 
 
DCMCs download the surveys, while they have internet In addition, a virtual platform (e.g D-Group) is being used to 
access, but during the data collection itself they don’t have discuss key-issues on pro-poor health policies with 
to be online. Once the data has been collected, internet stakeholders. The evidence from the reports are used to  
access is needed to submit the data to a remote server encourage policy makers to change the policies based on 
(central database).   collected evidence and used to start sensitization activities 
by DCMCs in districts were citizens lack certain knowledge  
 
At the SEND-Ghana office, SPSS software is being used to about health policies.  
analyze the collected data. The findings are used by SEND 
40  |  mHealth Compendium Volume 4 
E valuation and Results 
In August 2014 an impact analysis was conducted. Results 
are expected in December 2014, however internal 
learning and review meetings conducted give very 
promising results for the PartMe program: 
 50 Focal NGO’s leading the 50 DCMCs effectively 
use the technology to collect data and improve 
communication 
 550 members of the DCMCs are trained and able to 
collect mobile data 
 Mobile data collection using PartMe is 70 percent 
more efficient than paper based collection leading to 
more quality research reports  
 More pro-poor policies have been reviewed based 
on evidence collected with the PartMe tool 
 Based on data from research on the free maternal care policy, a sensitization program towards couples has been 
conducted in 25 districts reaching 3,200 participants; This has led to increased health seeking behavior by pregnant 
women, but also towards commitments to improve transport delays between communities and clinics through 
acquisition of tricycle ambulances 
 Based on collected evidence in the free maternal care policy research an outreach program for 55 health professionals 
(nurses and midwives) in different districts was developed on respectful maternal care 
Lessons Learned 
 Evidence gathering is essential for effective public policy advocacy 
 Using a mobile data collection system is much more efficient than Geographic Coverage: 50 districts in four 
paper based questionnaires regions (Northern Region, Upper East Region, 
Upper West Region and Greater Accra) in 
 A feedback system using SMS and Voice messages in local languages Ghana  
strengthened the message spread  
Implementation Partners: SEND 
 Equipping DCMCs with modern data collection tools and a feedback Foundation Ghana  
system gives them local credibility and empowerment; Some of the 
DCMCs members have been elected or appointed in the district Funder: Connect4Change partners (Cordaid, 
assemblies IICD, Text to Change) 
 Collecting evidence in 50 districts provides benchmark data to Contact Information: 
compare districts; This gives input for dialogue with health providers 
SEND Foundation Ghana | Mohammed Mumuni, 
and policy makers to define local action plans to improve health care 
Learning, M&E Coordinator (Tel: +233-7320-
22547/24515, Mobile: +233-244-091148, 
Conclusion mumuni@sendwestafrica.org) 
The shift from paper to electronic data collection has allowed SEND IICD | Martine Koopman, Country Manager, 
Foundation to create a better picture of civic involvement in Ghana. Ghana (Tel: +31-703117311 / +31-611276026, 
Starting this dialogue between DCMCs, local policy makers and health mkoopman@iicd.org) 
providers has created a focus on local improvements. SEND’s activities 
See References on page 89. 
have also led to an increase in the number of subscribers of the National 
Health Insurance Scheme.  
 
mHealth Compendium Volume 4  |  41 
