HFG
Navigation
The	Health	Finance	and	Governance	Project
Select	Language ​ ▼ Search…
Advanced	Search
You	are	here:Home›Resources	›Mobile	Money	for	Health	Case	Study	Compendium
Mobile	Money	for	Health	Case	Study	Compendium
Categories:	Digital	Finance,	Publications,	Universal	Health	Coverage,	Where	We	Work
Resource	Type:	Case	Studies
Authors:	Health	Finance	and	Governance	(HFG)
Published:	10/31/2015
Resource	Description:
Globally,	2.5	billion	people	are	“unbanked,”	lacking	access	to	formal	financial	services.	As	a	result,	roughly	one	third	of	the
world’s	population	is	forced	to	rely	on	cash	transactions	or	informal	financial	systems,	which	can	often	be	unsafe,
inconvenient,	and	expensive.	Among	the	unbanked,	however,	a	billion	have	access	to	a	mobile	phone,	and	mobile-based
financial	services	are	quickly	closing	the	financial	access	gap.
Recognizing	the	potential	of	mobile-based	financial	services,	the	United	States	Agency	for	International	Development
(USAID)	is	committed	to	accelerating	the	adoption	and	uptake	of	mobile	money	based	on	its	potential	to	increase	financial
inclusion,	root	out	corruption,	and	provide	economic	benefits	to	communities.	To	support	these	goals,	the	USAID	Health
Finance	and	Governance	(HFG)	Project	seeks	to	promote	the	use	of	mobile	money	in	health	programs,	both	as	catalyst	for
uptake	in	communities	and	to	strengthen	health	systems.
Despite	the	recent	proliferation	of	mobile	phone	usage	and	uptake	of	mobile	money	in	developing	markets,	use	in	the	health
sector	remains	limited	and,	often,	has	not	been	brought	to	scale.	This	compendium	seeks	to	expand	the	knowledge	base	on
mobile	money	in	the	health	sector	by	drawing	out	trends	from	existing	programs	and	examining	what’s	worked,	what	hasn’t,
and	why,	while	documenting	recommendations	and	insights	from	past	and	current	practitioners	for	future	adaptation.
The	14	mobile	money	programs	profiled	in	this	compendium	span	a	range	of	countries,	health	topics,	and	application	types,
from	health	insurance	schemes	promoting	universal	health	coverage,	to	lottery	voucher	payments	encouraging	parents	to
vaccinate	their	children	against	polio	and	other	diseases.
Download
	
Follow	@HFGProject
Tags:	Case	Study,	Health	Financing,	Mobile	Money
Abt	Associates	is	a	mission-driven,	global	leader	in	research	and	program	implementation	in	the	fields	of	health,	social
and	environmental	policy,	and	international	development.	Known	for	its	rigorous	approach	to	solving	complex	challenges,
Abt	Associates	is	regularly	ranked	as	one	of	the	top	20	global	research	firms	and	one	of	the	top	40	international
development	innovators.	The	company	has	multiple	offices	in	the	U.S.	and	program	offices	in	more	than	40	countries.	
2015	©	Abt	Associates
