GIS MAPPING OF HEALTH FACILITIES 
Identifying health facilities to provide integrated, high-quality maternal, newborn 
and child health services in Pakistan 
DATA COLLECTION 
Implementation date: April 2014 
Each year approximately105,000 children under the age of five and 3,000 mothers die from preventable causes in Pakistan. 
Lack of access to quality health care is a primary determinant of high maternal and child mortality in rural Sindh.  USAID is 
implementing a maternal and child health (MCH) program in Sindh to improve the quality of rural health care services. At the 
end of its five years, the program aims to leave behind 1,000 maternal, newborn and child health (MNCH) centers which provide 
integrated MNCH and family planning services in rural districts of Sindh. A critical initial step in this process is the identification of 
health facilities spread across the districts which have the potential to provide integrated, high quality MNCH services. 
Taking advantage of advances in smartphone technology, MCHIP/Jhpiego, a component of USAID’s MCH program, conducted a 
Geographic Information System (GIS) census of all health facilities in ten rural districts of Sindh. Quality improvement and facility 
upgrading activities are concentrated in these ten districts during the first three years of the program.  
About GIS Mapping of Health Facilities 
A short, structured instrument was used to collect data on private sector ownership, and services. In addition, once a 
f acility ownership status (i.e. public, private or managed by user clicks on a particular facility’s symbol on Google Maps, 
the People’s Primary Health Care Initiative (PPHI)), facility the two photographs and all data collected on the facility are 
o pening hours and types of services provided. An application shown. The portal makes the data accessible to anyone with 
was developed for the Android operating system and 90 data internet access that has an interest in getting information on 
collectors used Samsung Tab 2 smartphones to collect and health facilities in rural Sindh.   
t ransmit data on all health facilities identified and visited by 
The map shown identifies 57 service delivery points that the 
them during the census operation. Two photographs, one of 
program is working on in Khairpur district. These include 
the exterior and the other of the interior of each facility 
 facilities managed by PPHI, public sector managed facilities were also submitted along with Global Positioning System 
and private sector managed facilities. The database also 
(GPS) coordinates of the facility. 
permits the integration of additional data, such as service 
A  web portal was designed to allow data submitted delivery statistics from the government’s District Health 
wirelessly through smartphones, to be directly entered in an Information System, Lady Health Worker Program’s 
e asily accessible environment. The portal displayed the Management Information Systems (MIS), Community 
location of each facility location on Google Maps. It allows a Midwife and MNCH Program MIS, and private sector 
user to conduct searches for facilities by district, public or facilities.  
 
28  |  mHealth Compendium Volume 4 
 
Evaluation and Results 
Out of 1,425 facilities which provide maternal and reproductive 
health services in ten rural districts, 687 (48 percent) facilities 
were under private management (including NGOs), 516 (36 
percent) were under PPHI management, and the remaining 222 
(16 percent) were under public sector management. About 489 
(34 percent) facilities reported providing 24/7 normal delivery 
services and 134 (9 percent) facilities reported providing 
caesarian sections around the clock. Of facilities open during any 
time of the day, about 85 percent reported providing family 
planning/reproductive health or antenatal care services, and 75 
percent reported providing normal delivery services. No 
information was collected during the census on the quality of 
care provided at these facilities.  
Lessons Learned 
 Since the census relied on provider reports, follow-up efforts will need 
to be made to ensure the accuracy of census data Geographic Coverage: Sindh, Pakistan 
 Almost all of the private health facilities did not have a record keeping 
Implementation Partners: MCHIP/Jhpiego 
system, making verifying reported information challenging  
 An in-depth facility assessment would be needed to determine the Funder: USAID 
actual capacity of each health facility  
Contact Information: 
MCHIP/Jhpiego | Dr. Sohail Agha, Director 
Conclusion M&E (+92-302-856-2351, 
GIS mapping of health facilities in Sindh, provides valuable information on Sohail.agha@jhpiego.org); Rashid Nazir, 
Manager M&E (+92 302 856 2359, 
public and private sector facilities, including times of operation, available 
Rashid.nazir@jhpiego.org) | Anayat Ali, 
services, delivery volume, and images for facility identification. The Assistant Manager M&E (+92-302-856-2320, 
geographical maps and analyzed data also aid program managers in Anayat.ali@jhpiego.org)  
identifying potential facilities for implementing quality improvement 
USAID Pakistan | Monica Villanueva, AOR 
activities and facility upgrades. Integrating datasets around service delivery, 
(mvillanueva@usaid.gov) 
quality of care, voucher schemes, and health provider profiles will be a key 
step to help bolster planning and donor reporting within the province.  
 
mHealth Compendium Volume 4  |  29 
