We	enable	organisations	to	measure	and	maximise	their
impact	by	digitising	their	fieldwork.
Collaborating	for	Global	Impact
Since	2007	we've	worked	alongside	leading	organisations	to	scale	their	impact	through	thousands	of	frontline
workers	in	over	50	countries.
Explore	Key	Features
Mobile	Data	Collection
Design	forms	yourself	in	minutes.	Supports	offline	data	entry,	including	real-time	validation	and	advanced	inputs.
Workflow	Automation
Embed	algorithms	&	decision-support	tools	to	guide	frontline	workers.
Central	Handset	Administration
Prevent	handset	misuse	by	limiting	access	to	only	the	apps	you	approve.	Avoid	costly	downtime	caused	by
fieldworkers	tampering	with	settings.
Contextual	Communication
Push	notification	&	SMS	support	for	alerts	and	notifications.
Data	&	Team	Management
Full	data	edit	audit	history.	Fieldworker	management	&	performance	reporting.
Instant	Reporting
Chart,	map	and	export	data	captured.	Leverage	powerful	filters	to	create	&	share	insights.
Integration	&	Interoperability
Our	tools	are	compatible	with	the	XForms	standard	and	our	flexible	API	allows	you	to	integrate	with	third-party
systems	and	databases.
Data	Security
Download	our	data	management	white	paper	to	see	how	we	leverage	world	class	infrastructure	and	industry	best
practice	to	protect	your	data.
Our	latest	thinking	from	the	blog
Mobenzi	in	Uganda:	what	donors,	government	and	NGOs	have	to	say	about
digital	transformation
Blaise	Peccia-Galletto
We	recently	spent	time	in	Kampala,	Uganda,	working	with	a	range	of	stakeholders	from	NGOs,	donors	and
government	on	best	practice	digital	fieldwork.	This	article	provides	a	summary	of	the	incredible	i	...
Continue	reading
Behind	the	scenes:	#WomeninTech	life	at	Mobenzi
Marinthea	van	Tonder
At	Mobenzi,	we’re	privileged	to	work	with	a	team	of	intelligent,	capable,	successful,	ambitious,	driven	and
hard-working	women.	Each	individual’s	stories	and	experiences	contribute	positively	to	the	M	...
Continue	reading
Latest	feature	releases:	embed	media	and	import/export	XForms
Andi	Friedman
In	continuing	our	commitment	to	evolving	digital	data	collection	for	the	modern	NGO,	we’ve	recently	added
two	major	features	to	our	next	generation	tools	that	were	released	in	May:	embedded	medi	...
Continue	reading
Ready	to	digitise	your	fieldwork?
Hundreds	of	organisations	like	yours	have	transitioned	from	paper	to	digital	fieldwork	using	our	easy-to-use	platform.
Create	Free	Account
Get	in	touch
Please	feel	free	to	contact	us	for	further	information	or	pay	us	a	visit.
Spaces,	Sunclare	Building
21	Dreyer	Street
Claremont,	Cape	Town
South	Africa
Sales:	+27	21	424	0221
Your	Name
Email	Address
Phone	Number	(incl.	dialing	code)
Your	Organisation
Message...
	
Submit 	By	clicking	"Submit"	you	are	agreeing	to	our	Privacy	Policy.
©	2019	Mobenzi.	All	rights	reserved.
Legal	 Privacy	Policy
NEWSLETTER	S IGN	UP
First	Name
Email	Address
Subscribe
SOCIAL
										
