  
 I ntegrated Logistic System - 
ILSGateway  
Brief Overview 
Health programs succeed when the supply chain delivers a reliable, 
continuous supply of essential commodities to clients, so they can 
choose, obtain, and use these products when and where they are 
needed. The USAID | DELIVER PROJECT, a U.S. Agency for 
International Development (USAID) funded project, improves 
essential health commodity supply chains by strengthening logistics 
management information systems, streamlining distribution systems, 
identifying financial resources for procurements and supply chain 
operations, and enhancing quantification and procurement planning 
  
Implemented by John Snow, Inc., the project designs, develops, 
strengthens, and, upon request, operates safe, sustainable, and reliable 
supply systems that provide a range of affordable, quality essential 
health commodities, including drugs, diagnostics, and supplies, to clients in country programs. The project's 
technical support strengthens all aspects of in-country supply chains, including quantification, procurement, 
distribution, management information systems, quality assurance, storage and infrastructure, and medical 
waste disposal. 
  
 
 
 Geographic Coverage: 
Tanzania 
 
 Implementation Partners: 
  Tanzania Ministry of Health and Social Welfare | John Snow, Inc. | Dimagi 
   
 Funder: 
USAID, under the USAID | DELIVER PROJECT 
 
 For More Information Contact: 
USAID 
 Alan Bornbusch, Public Health Advisor, Bureau for Global Health; 
USAID, Ronald Reagan Building,Washington, DC; 
Tel: +1-202-712-4691; email: abornbusch@usaid.gov  
 
DELIVER PROJECT 
 Ousmane Dia, Chief of Party, USAID | DELIVER PROJECT Tanzania; 
Plot No. 392, Toure Drive, Masaki, P. O. Box 9263, Dar Es Salaam, Tanzania; 
Tel:  +255-22-2602891- 3; email: odia@jsi.co.tz 
 
 43 
 
Logistics 
 
Integrated Logistic System - ILSGateway 
About the ILSGateway  ILSGateway improved their diligence in conducting a 
The USAID | DELIVER PROJECT has worked with the stock count on time. In addition to that, 93 percent 
Tanzanian Ministry of Health and Social Welfare indicated they are more likely to submit their ILS report 
(MOHSW) to establish the ILSGateway, a mobile and requisition forms to the district on time as a result 
logistics system that supports the Integrated Logistics of the alerts provided by the ILSGateway. Eighty-eight 
System (ILS).  In Tanzania, obtaining high quality logistics percent of 17 district respondents said the tool has 
data has been a challenge for  the health care system. increased attention to the management of a list of 20 
Without this data, decision makers have difficulty essential medicines, including reproductive health 
managing the supply chain, leading to the possibility that commodities, in their districts. A majority of the district 
patients won’t receive the medicines they need. Before users surveyed (94 percent) responded that ILSGateway 
2005, the health care system in Tanzania was made up has improved the timeliness with which they receive 
of a number of parallel systems for restocking health report and requisition forms. Overall, 45 percent of 
care facilities with the supplies needed. The growing facilities indicated an increase in tracer product 
number of systems was uncoordinated; each cluster of availability through the use of ILSGateway. 
facilities had separate procedures for ordering supplies 
from the Medical Stores Department (MSD). However, 
the successful implementation of an integrated logistics 
system (ILS) by the MOHSW, with technical support 
from the USAID | DELIVER PROJECT, addressed the 
duplicative processes by integrating them into one 
system with a single set of procedures. In 2010, the 
USAID | DELIVER PROJECT designed the ILSGateway, a 
mobile system to be used at the lowest level health 
facilities as a means of enhancing information visibility of 
key logistics data from the ILS. This new system allows  
real-time visibility into existing stock levels of crucial  
medicines.   In the post-pilot phase, the USAID | DELIVER PROJECT 
 and the MOHSW are working to instill a data culture 
Created to enhance supply chain decision-making, the and build requisite computer skills among health 
ILSGateway is a mobile health alert and reporting workers, particularly at the district level to improve 
system designed to increase the visibility of logistics data their ability to access data generated in the ILSGateway. 
and improve product availability. The system was Moving forward, the project and partners hope to link 
developed with an eye on sustainability, requiring health this mobile health logistics system to other automated 
facility personnel to use personal cell phones to send health systems being developed by the MOHSW with 
logistics data via text message (SMS) to a toll-free the USAID | DELIVER PROJECT and its partners. As the 
number. This data is then transmitted to a website that visibility of logistics data improves, decision makers and 
analyzes and displays the information. health workers at all levels will be able to improve the 
 availability of health commodities in Tanzania. 
Results/Evaluation  
The project conducted a quantitative review in addition Conclusion 
to a qualitative review that was attended by users from Using mobile phones, the ILSGateway improves the flow 
the facility, district, and central levels to evaluate system of information from facilities to central medical stores, 
functionality, usability, and impact. Of the 29 facility thereby facilitating more timely decision-making and 
ultimately improved product availability at service 
users that responded to the survey, 93 percent felt that delivery points. 
Information was excerpted from: 
USAID | DELIVER PROJECT, Task Order 4: http://www.jsi.com/JSIInternet/IntlHealth/project/display.cfm?ctid=na&cid=na&tid=40&id=7801 
The ILSGateway: Mobile phones improve data visibility and lead to better commodity availability in Tanzania: 
http://www.jsi.com/JSIInternet/Features/article/display.cfm?thisSection=Features&thisSectionTitle=Features&thisPage=stories&ctid=na&cid=na&tid=20
44 &id=414; AIDSTAR-Two: The Use of Information and Communication Technology in Family Planning, Reproductive Health and Other Health   Programs:  A Review of Trends and Evidence: http://www.msh.org/resource-center/publications/upload/AIDSTAR-Two_Use-of-ICT-in-FP_Final-
Paper_November-7-2011.pdf 
Photo Credits: USAID | JSI Deliver Project 
 
 
