 
mTRAC STOP MALARIA PROGRAM (SMP) 
and identified stock outs by telephoning health facility in-
charges or getting reports during their integrated 
support supervision visits. These systems were time-
consuming and the reporting was not in real-time. 
As part of the USAID-funded Stop Malaria Program 
(SMP)—project supporting malaria programs in 34 
districts in Uganda through activities that address 
malaria prevention, diagnosis and treatment, capacity 
strengthening in M&E, and integrated support 
supervision—the MOH’s mTRAC SMS-based system is 
being utilized to track stock levels of essential malaria 
medicines at health facilities. 
The mTRAC system was developed by UNICEF with 
funding from DFID and WHO, and adopted by the 
MOH. It has been rolled-out to all Uganda’s districts 
with USAID Implementing Partners (IP) playing a key 
role in facilitating the roll-out and in ensuring its ongoing 
use by the District Health Teams  As a USAID IP, SMP 
began providing support on the mTRAC system 
implementation since November 2011. 
ABOUT mTRAC SMP 
All USAID IPs have supported the MOH’s rollout of its 
electronic Health Management Information System 
(HMIS) through printing HMIS tools, training of district 
health team staff, assisting districts to complete accurate 
and timely reports, and providing internet connectivity. 
mTRAC is part of the overall electronic HMIS system.  
BRIEF OVERVIEW The MOH’s mTRAC system uses SMS technology to 
Malaria is Uganda’s leading cause of morbidity and track stock levels of essential malaria medicines at health 
mortality. It accounts for 25 to 40% of outpatient visits facilities. District health workers have been trained to 
to health facilities and is responsible for nearly half of summarize the data entered in the weekly HMIS form as 
inpatient pediatric deaths. The proportion of children an SMS string using their own cell phones. The reports 
under five treated with an antimalarial drug on the same are then sent to a District Dashboard in the mTRAC 
or the next day after onset of fever is about 36%, system, which is accessed and approved by the District 
although the proportion receiving an ACT is only about Health Officer. The MOH-Resource Center also 
14%. The proportion of women receiving two doses of accesses this data and compiles a summary report based 
intermittent preventive treatment in pregnancy (IPTp) is on the data submitted the previous week. The report is 
32%. Ensuring the availability of the right quantity of the shared with the Stop Malaria Program, which then 
right type of malaria medication is difficult. This is in part works with districts to avoid or correct stock problems 
due to the often missing or inaccurate information by redistributing medicines from over-stocked facilities 
related to stock levels. In the past, District Malaria Focal to facilities facing imminent stock-out, and by contacting 
Persons tracked the stock levels of malaria medicines 
56 mHEALTH COMPENDIUM   │    VOLUME 2 
 
 LOGISTICS 
National Medical Stores (NMS) to advocate for 
restocking.  GEOGRAPHIC COVERAGE 
Uganda 
EVALUATION AND RESULTS IMPLEMENTATION PARTNERS 
While early data cannot yet clearly state the effect of Johns Hopkins School of Public Health: Center for 
mTRAC, the following graph does suggest fluctuations in Communication Programs; Partners: Malaria 
stock-outs have appeared to decrease. Further Consortium, Infectious Diseases Institute (IDI), 
evaluation must be completed before attributing Communication for Development Uganda (CDFU) and 
improvements to mTRAC.  the Uganda Health Marketing Group (UHMG) 
FUNDER 
LESSONS LEARNED USAID, DFID, WHO  
 The success of any electronic solution depends on 
the follow-up support provided after the initial 
CONTACT INFORMATION 
training and SMP fills this critical gap by providing 
SMP 
ongoing support supervision to mTRAC users. 
 Dr. Chime Mukakwa, COP Stop Malaria 
 mTRAC also has some challenges, such as structural Project, SMP Uganda  
issues with the HMIS weekly surveillance form Email: c.mukakwa@smpuganda.org  
because the form does not disaggregate data for USAID 
some items, such as quinine, which is not  Daryl Martyris, Health Officer, USAID 
disaggregated by type (injectable or tablets) on the Uganda  
form. Thus, District health teams have to follow up Tel: +256-414-306-001 x6557, Email: 
with the actual health facilities with stock-outs to dmartyris@usaid.gov  
determine whether it is injectables or tablets that 
are needed.  
 Poor network connection and congestion, especially 
at reporting times, is also sometimes a deterrent to 
consistent reporting by the health facility in-charges. 
As part of the mTRAC Steering Committee, USAID 
is working to address these challenges.  
CONCLUSION 
The mTRAC system may be contributing to the quick 
and efficient reporting of stock-outs of essential anti-
malarial drugs, enabling medical personnel to respond to 
disease outbreaks in record time and take preventative 
measure. 
Information was excerpted from:  
President’s Malaria Initiative: Uganda: Malaria Operational Plan FY2013. USAID. 2013. Print. 
“Uganda: Featured Projects.” The Johns Hopkins University: Center for Communications Program. 2011. Web. 
  MHEALTH COMPENDIUM  |  VOLUME 2 57 
 
SERVICE DELIVERY 
 
