  
Home 	 	Resource	Library 	 	Browse	by	Topic 	 	mHealth
In	This	Section 
mHealth
Connected	Health	is	the	generation,	aggregation,	and	dissemination	of	health	information	via	mobile	and	wireless	devices	and	the	sharing
of	that	information	between	patients	and	providers.	The	mHealth	topic	area,	supported	by	the	HIMSS	mHealth	Community,	provides	critical
updates	on	mobile	health	IT	policy,	industry	thought	leadership,	such	as	the	mHealth	Roadmap,	how	the	Roadmap	is	being	used ,	and	the
opportunity	to	network	with	stakeholders	across	the	mHealth	ecosystem,	guided	by	the	mHealth	Committee.	For	more	information	on	how
to	get	involved,	contact	us	at	mHealth@himss.org.
Resources	-	Best	Practicies,	Case	Studies,	and	Implementation	of	mHealth 
mHealth	Strategies	for	Providers:	Value	&	Insights 
Partners	–	Updates	from	the	Ecosystem 
Get	Involved!	-	Community,	Committee,	&	Task	Forces 
	
Contact	Us
We’d	love	to	hear	from	you!	Questions	on	getting	involved?	How	to	submit	a	blog?	Looking	for	resources?	Suggestions?	Please	reach	out
to	connectedhealth@himss.org.
Latest	News
12/13/2016
New	Alliance	Focused	on	Best	Practices	for	Mobile	Health	Applications
HIMSS	aligns	with	three	other	organizations	to	form	Excertia,	a	nonprofit	corporation	focused	on	developing	mobile	app	guidelines
03/02/2016
2016	HIMSS	Connected	Health	Survey	Suggests	Positive	Future	for	Connected	Health	Technologies	in	U.S.	Hospitals
More	than	Half	of	Hospitals	Represented	Currently	Use	Three	or	More	Connected	Health	Technologies	with	Many	Organizations	Planning
to	Implement	Additional	Technologies	to	Improve	Engagement	and	Quality	of	Care	with	Patients
02/12/2016
Are	You	Ready	for	the	Rise	of	Patient	Empowerment?
We	saw	glimpses	of	the	rise	in	patient	empowerment	last	year	at	HIMSS15	in	Chicago.	More	fitness	tracker	watches	and	apps	were	visible
and	many	attendees	wanted	to	know	how	this	trend	was	going	to	impact	the	healthcare	technology	landscape.
and	many	attendees	wanted	to	know	how	this	trend	was	going	to	impact	the	healthcare	technology	landscape.
 	 	More	News	 
 	 	Subscribe	to	HIMSS	eNewsletters
Upcoming	Events
20 Nursing	Informatics	Bootcamp
with	Susan	Newbold	|	Central	&
Sep
North	Florida	Chapter	of	HIMSS
HIMSS	Event
23 Business	Process	Management
for	Healthcare	Industry	Workshop
Sep
HIMSS	Event
23 U.S.	National	Health	IT
Week
Sep
HIMSS	Event
More	Events 
About	HIMSS

Job	Opportunities 
Legal/Privacy	Policy
Contact	Us
Advertise
Healthcare	Information	and	Management	Systems	Society	(HIMSS)
33	West	Monroe	Street,	Suite	1700,	Chicago,	IL	60603-5616	
Phone:	312.664.4467	|	Fax:	312.664.6143
©	2019	Healthcare	Information	and	Management	Systems	Society	(HIMSS)
  	  	 
