 
HEART HEALTH MOBILE 
An interactive, educational, monitoring and gaming application to improve 
cardiovascular health 
Heart disease and stroke are the first and fourth 
leading causes of mortality in the United States, 
making cardiovascular disease (CVD) responsible for 
one out of every three deaths in the country. Each 
year, over two million people suffer from heart 
attacks and strokes, while approximately 2,200 people 
die from CVD. The financial implications are also 
large; over $444 billion is spent in health care 
expenditures and lost productivity due to these non-
communicable diseases.  
To tackle the burden of CVD, the Department of Health 
and Human Services (HHS) launched the Million Hearts 
national public-private initiative in September 2011, with 
a goal of preventing one million heart attacks and 
strokes in the U.S. over a five-year period. To help 
consumers take charge of their heart health, the 
initiative challenged developers to create an application 
to assist consumers in this process. The HHS Office of 
the National Coordinator for Health Information 
Technology, in partnership with Million Hearts, 
organized the Million Hearts Risk Check Challenge. In 
response, Marshfield Clinic Research Foundation 
(MCRF) developed the Heart Health Mobile (HHM) 
application and won the competition. HHM was first 
released in February 2013 for Apple products and 
expanded to a web-based (HTML5) version in March 
2013 that works on other devices. 
Implementation date: February 2013 
About Heart Health Mobile 
MCRF’s Heart Health Mobile application is designed to 
achieve the following:  
HHM is currently available as a downloadable mobile 
1. Reach individuals across the country, taking special application through the Apple Store or as a web app at 
aim at those who may be at risk for CVD and but www.HeartHealthMobile.com. Its interface provides the 
are unaware of their risk, user with a brief assessment of CVD risk, taking into 
account self-reported behavioral, familial and biometric 
2. Motivate at-risk individual to obtain an accurate risk risk factors, including blood pressure and lipids. Based 
assessments, and on the level of CVD risk, users are directed to nearby 
community pharmacies, clinics and other locations for 
3. Direct consumers to nearby community pharmacies 
more advanced CVD risk factor screenings, 
and other locations that offer affordable and 
assessments, and treatments. The app also provides 
convenient blood pressure and cholesterol 
basic health education materials on key CVD risk factor 
screenings. 
management topics including hypertension, dyslipidemia, 
12 mHEALTH COMPENDIUM   |   VOLUME 3 
 
HEART HEALTH MOBILE 
An interactive, educational, monitoring and gaming application to improve 
cardiovascular health  BEHAVIOR CHANGE COMMUNICATION 
weight management and tobacco cessation.  HHM can Conclusion 
be readily shared via social media links such as Facebook Heart Health Mobile appears to provide users with 
and is also available in a gamified version.  important information but its potential for affecting 
improvements in CVD health is unclear. Yet, with the 
aid of this app, a patient can be directed towards 
Evaluation and Results appropriate, nearby health professionals for information 
From January 28 to August 1, 2013, HHM was and advice.  Future iterations of the app could include 
downloaded 3,225 times from the Apple Store across all information about how to access health care providers, 
iPhone, iPad and iPod Touch devices. During this time thus, expanding its utility. Future development efforts 
period, almost 90% of usage was though iPhones and will focus on expanding launch locations, strengthening 
iPhone users conducted 100% of the shares via email involvement of local screeners, physician-patient 
and Twitter.   engagement, and the capture and measurement of health 
outcomes via patient-reported data.  
The mobile app had a global reach even without 
explicitly promoting it in countries outside the US. From -------------------------------------------------------- 
January 31, 2013 to October 8, 2013, 104 different 
countries logged usage in the app. Geographic Coverage: The United States and 103 other 
countries 
Implementation Partners: Marshfield Clinic Research 
Lessons Learned 
Foundation, The Department of Health and Human 
 The number of downloads was somewhat limited Services (HHS) Office of the National Coordinator for 
due to the nature of the Million Hearts Challenge.  Health IT (ONC), U.S. Centers for Disease Control and 
Concentrated efforts in five major US metro areas Prevention (CDC) 
were scheduled to promote the Million Hearts 
Campaign, of which Heart Health Mobile was the Funder: The Department of Health and Human Services 
chosen mobile tool available free of charge for users (HHS) Office of the National Coordinator for Health IT 
to download or use at HeartHealthMobile.com.   (ONC) 
 Some campaigns were more effective than others in Contact Information:  
driving users to the Apple Store or directly to the Marshfield Clinic Research Foundation: Bryan 
app’s website.  Chicago saw the largest spike in Weichelt, IT Project Manager, Biomedical Informatics 
users by promoting the app during Heart Month in Research Center (+1-715-389-7707, 
February, in conjunction with other heart healthy weichelt.bryan@marshfieldclinic.org) 
activities and promotions.   HHS ONC: Chinara Smith, Million 
Hearts® (chinara.smith@cms.hss.gov) 
 Gain of the following valuable market-related 
insights: 1) traditional media efforts (e.g. news References: 
segments via local television and newspapers) have 1. MCRF Mobile App Wins National Competition. Heart Health 
been most effective, 2) feedback is limited through Mobile. 14 Feb 2013.  
the site (<20 instances of user feedback submitted 2. Million Hearts Fact Sheet. Department of Health and Human 
through the website), and 3) national attention Services. No Date. 
through a government organization’s $100,000 
contest does necessarily equate to high user 
interest or adoption of a heart health tool 
  mHEALTH COMPENDIUM   |   VOLUME 3 13 
