 
WIRED MOTHERS 
Increasing skilled delivery attendance to reduce maternal and neonatal  
morbidity and mortality 
Every year, approximately 270,000 women die during The intervention involved all three levels of the health 
pregnancy. Moreover, the risk in Sub-Saharan Africa is system. 
much larger, 50 times greater than in 
developed countries. Seven million children 
also die before reaching the age of five, a 
growing proportion of these (43%) occurs at 
or around the time of birth. Therefore, 
antenatal care (ANC), skilled delivery 
attendance and access to emergency obstetric 
care are essential in improving maternal, 
neonatal and child health. In Zanzibar, 99% of 
pregnant women attend an ANC visit at least 
once, yet only 51% of births are attended by a 
health professional and more than half do not 
receive any postnatal care.  
Wired Mothers is an mHealth project that seeks 
innovative ways to ensure access to ANC and 
skilled attendance at delivery and to examine the Evaluation and Results 
beneficial impact mobile phones can have on maternal 
The Wired Mothers intervention was evaluated in a 
and neonatal morbidity and mortality. In 2009/2010, the 
cluster randomized controlled trial. The study involved 
University of Copenhagen, in collaboration with 
2,550 pregnant women (1,311 interventions and 1,239 
Zanzibar’s Ministry of Health and Social Welfare and the 
controls) receiving care from 24 primary health care 
Danida Health Sector Programme Support, conducted a 
facilities in six districts in Zanzibar. Within each district, 
study to compare differences in service delivery and 
two facilities were randomized for intervention and two 
health outcomes between women receiving the Wired 
for no intervention (standard care). To ensure mobile 
Mothers mobile phone intervention and those receiving 
phone access, the pregnant women in the intervention 
standard care.  
group received a phone credit voucher. 
Implementation date: March 2009 to March 2010  
The intervention significantly increased the proportion 
of women receiving four ANC visits during pregnancy as 
recommended by WHO and there was a trend towards 
About Wired Mothers 
more women receiving preventive health services, more 
The Wired Mothers mobile phone intervention was women continuing to attend ANC late in pregnancy and 
designed with the aim of linking pregnant women to more women with antepartum complications who were 
their primary health care provider throughout their identified and referred. 
pregnancy, childbirth and post-partum period. Wired 
mothers, or mama mitandao, received appointment The majority of intervention women stated that the 
reminders and educational information via SMS and appointment reminders influenced their health seeking 
were provided with mobile phone vouchers to enable behavior and felt that the educational messages helped 
them to call a primary care provider to discuss any them in various areas, including learning about danger 
acute or non-acute issues. Additionally, mobile phones signs in pregnancy and feeling that the health system 
were used by health facility workers, ambulance drivers, cared for them.  
and referral hospital employees to strengthen 
communication between different levels of the health Results also showed that the mobile phone intervention 
system. was associated with an increase in skilled delivery 
attendance. 60% of the women in the intervention 
18 mHEALTH COMPENDIUM   |   VOLUME 3 
 
 BEHAVIOR CHANGE COMMUNICATION 
group, versus 47% in the control group, delivered with The policy implication of the Wired Mothers study is 
skilled attendants. While the intervention had a that developing countries should improve public private 
significant increase in skilled delivery attendance among partnership in the area of health education and 
urban women (OR, 5.73; 95% CI, 1.51–21.81), it did not information and use the momentum of information 
influence skilled birth attendance among rural women   technology in delivering health services. Specifically, 
mobile phone interventions should be considered as a 
strategy to improve provision and utilization of ANC, 
Lessons Learned delivery services and emergency obstetric care, which 
 The Wired Mothers intervention was highly are essential for maternal and perinatal health. mHealth 
appreciated by women and health workers. interventions for maternal health should however 
consider the special needs of rural women.  
 The study demonstrates that simple mobile phone 
interventions that involve community and health -------------------------------------------------------- 
workers can promote the provision and utilization 
Geographic Coverage: Tanzania (Zanzibar) 
of essential maternal health interventions such as 
ANC, skilled delivery care and emergency obstetrics Implementation Partners: University of Copenhagen; 
services. Ministry of Health and Social Welfare, Zanzibar, Tanzania; 
 Health Sector Programme Support Zanzibar; Danida  The study has proved that supportive supervision,   
Health Sector Programme Support 
clear job descriptions (responsibilities) and regular 
provision of logistics have the potential to improve Funder: Danida Health Sector Program Support 
staff moral and performance  
Contact Information:  
 The intervention was developed in Tanzania using University of Copenhagen: Stine Lund, MD 
simple technology and at low cost.  (+4522440789, stine_lund@dadlnet.dk);  
 Danida Health Sector Program Support: Boudewijn  The collaboration between a government agency, a 
Peters, MD (boudewijn.peters@gmail.com) 
development organization and an academic 
Zanzibar Ministry of Health: Maryam Hemed, MD 
institution was efficient and increased the evidence 
(+251927361823, hemed32@yahoo.com) 
base for policy makers interested in using mHealth 
applications. References: 
 1. Wired mothers - use of mobile phones to improve maternal and  Simple mobile phone solutions such as Wired 
neonatal health in Zanzibar. Danida Research Portal. 12 March 
Mothers are a feasible solution for strengthening 
2013. Web. 
access to essential maternal and child health (MCH) 
2. mHealth Info. Wired Mothers. November 2010. Web. 
services in low-resource settings.  
3. Lund, S. 2009, Wired Mothers - Use of Mobile Phones to 
Improve Maternal and Neonatal Health in Zanzibar, 
Presentation, Institute of International Health of the University 
Conclusion 
of Copenhagen. 
The Wired Mothers mobile phone intervention 
4. Lund S, Hemed M, Nielsen B, Said A, Said K, Makungu M, Rasch 
significantly increased the number of urban women 
V. Mobile phones as a health communication tool to improve 
receiving the recommended number of ANC visits and 
skilled attendance at delivery in Zanzibar: a cluster-randomised 
skilled delivery attendance. Evidence-based mobile 
controlled trial. BJOG 2012;119:1256–1264. 
phone solutions may contribute towards improved 
5. Wired Mothers Project Team 2009, Wired Mothers - Use of 
MCH and the achievement of Millennium Development 
Mobile Phones to Improve Maternal and Neonatal Health in 
Goals 4 (to reduce child mortality) and 5 (to reduce 
Zanzibar, FFU Application. 
maternal mortality). 
  mHEALTH COMPENDIUM   |   VOLUME 3 19 
