Mobile	for	Development


Latest	Blogs  
Resources  
FOLLOW
 	 
SUBSCRIBE	TO	OUR
NEWSLETTER

M4D	DONORS

Mobile	Internet	Skills
Training	Toolkit
Today	there	is	still	a	“usage	gap”	of	3.3	billion	people	who	have	access	to	mobile	broadband	coverage,
but	are	either	unable	or	unwilling	to	use	it.
GSMA	research	has	consistently	shown	that	low	levels	of	basic	digital	literacy	are	one	of	the	main
barriers	to	mobile	internet	adoption.	To	address	this,	the	GSMA	Connected	Society	programme
developed	the	Mobile	Internet	Skills	Training	Toolkit	(MISTT).
The	MISTT	is	a	visual,	easy-to	follow	curriculum	that	helps	trainers	demonstrate	the	functionality	and
value	of	the	internet	on	internet-enabled	mobile	phones.	With	modules	that	can	be	adapted	to	local
needs	and	languages,	the	MISTT	uses	a	“train	the	trainer”	approach	to	build	a	rich	body	of	knowledge
from	the	bottom	up.
The	six	core	MISTT	modules	are:	Wikipedia,	Facebook,	WhatsApp,	YouTube	and	Google,	as	well	as	an
introductory	module	that	covers	the	basics	of	the	internet,	including	internet	safety	and	costs.
To	download	the	MISTT	training	materials	please	fill	in	the	form	below	or	click	here.	If	you’d	like	to	be
the	first	to	hear	about	new	MISTT	modules,	features	and	publications,	submit	your	details	here	and	we’ll
email	you	with	important	updates.	You	can	unsubscribe	at	any	time.
About	You
* First	Name
* Last	Name
* Email
* Company	Name
* Job	Title
* Country/Region
Please	select...
Sector
Please	select...
What	is	your	intended	use	of	the	MISTT?
Please	select...
EMAIL	CONSENT
To	ensure	you	stay	up-to-date	on	the	latest	developments	in	the	mobile	industry,	the	GSMA	would	like	to	send	you
information	about	events,	products,	services	and	initiatives,	as	well	as	industry	news.	Please	subscribe	by	ticking	this
box;	once	subscribed,	you	can	tailor	what	you	receive	from	us	at	any	time,	or	unsubscribe,	should	you	wish.
Submit
1.	Driving	digital	inclusion	in	Bangladesh 1 2.	Driving	digital	inclusion	in	Rwanda
2
In	Bangladesh,	87%	of	the	population	use	mobile.	Yet,	only	25%	of	them	use	mobile	internet.	A	key A	pilot	study	of	the	MISTT	was	conducted	in	Sub-Saharan	Africa	by	Tigo	Rwanda.	Over	300	sales
reason	for	this	is	a	lack	of	basic	digital	skills. 3 agents	were	trained	to	use	the	MISTT	who,	in	turn,	trained	over	250,000	customers.	This	resulted
4 in	significant	benefits	for	Tigo	Rwanda	including:
By	using	a	force	of	3,200	sales	agents,	Banglalink	trained	over	117,000	customers	over	three
5
months	and	has	already	delivered	positive	results.	After	just	three	months,	amongst	customers -	77%	of	MISTT	trained	customers	increased	their	data	usage	in	the	period	after	their	sales	agents
who	were	trained,	there	was: introduced	the	training
-	MISTT	trained	sales	agents	we	able	to	increase	the	number	of	new	data	subscribers	by	15%
-	A	228%	increase	in	mobile	internet	usage -	This	led	to	a	240%	increase	in	quarterly	return	on	investment
-	A	143%	growth	in	data	revenue
-	A	83%	total	revenue	growth Read	the	Tigo	Rwanda	case	study
-	Increased	traffic	to	Banglalink’s	self-care	app
Read	the	Banglalink	case	study

What	We	Do
Industry	Programmes
Future	Networks
Identity
Internet	of	Things
GSMA	Documents
Advocacy	Initiatives
External	Affairs	&	Industry	Purpose
Mobile	for	Development
Public	Policy
Spectrum
The	Mobile	Economy
Services
GSMA	Intelligence
IMEI	Services
PathFinder
TAC	Allocation
Network	Settings	Exchange
Convening	the	Industry
MWC	Barcelona
MWC	Shanghai
MWC	Los	Angeles
Mobile	360	Series
4YFN
Join	us!
Legal
©	Copyright	2019	GSM	Association.
The	GSM	logo	is	registered	and	owned	by	the	GSM
Association.

