The mHero platform allows 
health workers, government 
authorities, and other key 
stakeholders to engage 
in real-time, targeted 
communication via mobile 
phone two-way short 
message service (SMS), 
interactive voice response, 
and direct calls. 
mHERO
IMPLEMENTATION DATE:  August 2014 to Present
Connecting and empowering health workers through mobile phones in Liberia
Severe shortages of qualified health workers and poor communication and coordination among those on 
the front lines have exacerbated the Ebola virus disease (EVD) outbreak in West Africa. These challenges 
were hindering the delivery of quality health services in the region even before the outbreak.1 Harnessing 
mobile technology and using it to improve existing health information systems (HIS) makes it possible to 
rapidly strengthen communication among health authorities, the health workforce, and local communities, 
in order to save lives.  
In August 2014, the mHero Partnership, led by IntraHealth International, the US Agency for International 
Development (USAID), UN Children’s Fund (UNICEF), and a team of international stakeholders, 
created mHero.2 The mHero platform allows health workers, government authorities, and other key 
stakeholders to engage in real-time, targeted communication via two-way short message service (SMS), 
interactive voice response, and direct calls. mHero communications, which are flexible and scalable, and 
can be triggered both centrally and locally, go far beyond the traditional “message blasts” offered by many 
technology vendors, enabling stakeholders to rapidly respond to health workers’ needs.
About mHero
mHero unites globally recognized technologies—RapidPro, technologies/standards, and a collaborative partnership, 
the iHRIS open source health workforce information system, the mHero approach exemplifies the nine principles for 
and District Health Information Software (DHIS2)— digital development.6 The platform also allows for continual 
using Open Health Information Exchange interoperability development of extra modules and features for Ebola-related 
architecture.3,4,5 Drawing on information about health services and those for maternal, neonatal, and child health.  
workers and facilities in iHRIS and DHIS2 and harnessing Since 2014, mHero has operated at pilot scale in Liberia, 
RapidPro’s platform, mHero permits communication via where a Ministry of Health and Social Welfare (MOHSW)-
basic mobile phone. Through country ownership, open appointed team designed, deployed, and guided the country’s 
90  n  SERVICE DELIVERY 
Leah McManus, IntraHealth International 
approach. With help from Liberia’s mobile network operators, iHRIS was correct (95 percent), reported submitting account 
the team set up easy-to-remember phone numbers (short information to their human resources officer (90 percent), 
codes) for free SMSs and calls within mHero’s network. The and reported completing daily attendance sheets at their 
health ministry provided direction to configure high-priority health facility (97 percent).
use cases and readied them for launch within weeks. Priority 
messages included: verifying active health workers; identifying 
inactive workers to re-engage them and restore essential Lessons Learned 
services; and determining health facility status through SMS 
exchange with officers-in-charge. Full mHero rollout in Liberia n Health workers were receptive to the mHero 
is scheduled for mid-2015. Implementation is also being messages, wanting to share information and actively 
initiated in Guinea and the health ministries in Sierra Leone participate in the system. 
and Senegal have expressed interest. The platform can be used n Several different planning, implementation, and mon-
to quickly disseminate critical information; rapidly collect itoring tools created by the MOHSW contributed to 
data on key health services delivery indicators and health mHero’s strong, efficient, and effective operations. These 
workforce management areas; support continuing professional tools continue to be adapted and updated. 
development; identify and monitor health worker attitudes 
n The initial mHero use case increased the MOHSW’s 
and needs related to the work environment; and provide a understanding of the value of effective and efficient com-
technical resource for frontline health workers. munication with health workers, as they had not  
had access to such a rapid communication method  
Evaluation and Results prior to mHero. 
n The pilot experience provided important lessons 
The Liberia pilot marked mHero’s launch and tested its for enhancing the mHero approach on a global level, 
technical capabilities. At the outset, the mHero team and particularly with regard to the engagement strategy, tools, 
ministry leaders discussed post-Ebola sustainability, county- and technologies. 
level decentralization, and integration of mHero activities 
with existing systems. Working with technology experts from 
UNICEF and IntraHealth, the MOHSW adapted, tested, Conclusion 
and enhanced the platform. The initial stages of the Ebola 
crisis greatly disrupted Liberia’s health workforce, with some IntraHealth and UNICEF continue to engage with global 
health workers moving to community care centers and Ebola partners to harness the interoperability of mHero with HIS 
treatment units and others abandoning their posts due to fear and further develop the software. mHero implementation 
or uncertainty. It became clear that existing data in iHRIS will continue in West Africa and beyond to strengthen 
needed validation to ensure accurate personnel records for communication between health ministries and health workers. 
planning, management, and communication. mHero’s staff In Liberia, the mHero team is scaling up mHero in line with 
validation use case enabled the MOHSW to update iHRIS MOHSW priorities. Crucial next steps include: planning 
records in real time, including verifying critical health worker mHero sustainability beyond the Ebola response; rolling out 
contact information. mHero with administrators at the county level; expanding 
monitoring and evaluation efforts; and establishing a strong 
During the pilot, mHero sent SMSs to 482 health workers governance system within the ministry to ensure effective and 
in four counties (Bomi, Grand Cape Mount, Grand Gedeh, efficient implementation of mHero. In Guinea, initial mHero 
and Margibi) to validate health workers’ phone numbers, use cases will be developed to support health workers providing 
location, job title, supervisor, and facility. In addition, this maternal, newborn, and child health care.   n   
use case sought to provide information about the proportion 
of health workers submitting bank account information 
(critical for timely payments) and use of facility attendance 
logs. At the time, only 60 percent (n=289) of the 482 health 
workers were reached due to ongoing negotiation of mobile 
Geographic Coverage:  West Africa
network operator contracts. Promisingly, of the 289 health 
workers reached, 57 percent (n=165) responded to the first Implementation Partners: IntraHealth International, UNICEF, 
Jembi Health Systems, Thoughtworks, HISP, mPowering 
mHero message. About three-fourths (72 percent or n=119) Frontline Health Workers
of those who responded to the first message completed all 15 Donors: UNICEF, USAID, Johnson & Johnson
questions in the workflow. Most (92 percent) were frontline 
health workers; the rest were administrative and support Contact Information: Amanda Puckett, Technical Advisor, Intra-Health International, apuckett@intrahealth.org 
staff. Nearly all 119 respondents confirmed that the name in 
mHEALTH COMPENDIUM  VOLUME 5  n  91
