  
Sustainable Financing for Mobile Health (mHealth): 
Options and opportunities for mHealth financial 
models in low and middle-income countries 
 Sustainable Financing for Mobile Health (mHealth):  0 Options and opportunities for mHealth financial models in low and middle-income 
countries 
© 2013 Published February 2013 
 
The mHealth Alliance champions the use of mobile technologies to improve health throughout the 
world. Working with partners in multiple sectors, the Alliance convenes stakeholders across the mobile 
health (mHealth) community to overcome common challenges. To accomplish this, the mHealth 
Alliance facilitates the sharing of tools, knowledge, experience and lessons learned as well as advocates 
for more and better quality research and evaluation and informed policy making. The mHealth Alliance 
also builds capacity throughout the ecosystem, promotes sustainable business models, and supports 
systems integration goals by advocating for standardization and interoperability of mHealth platforms. 
 
 
Vital Wave engages multinational corporations and development organizations to provide actionable 
solutions to scale-up businesses and programs in emerging markets. Working across diverse global 
markets and sectors, the firm is a recognized leader in the fields of health and technology, with a 
particular focus on mHealth. Vital Wave draws on decades of field experience and research in low and 
middle-income countries, proven analytical methods and world-class professional services to achieve 
sustained impact and growth for its clients at the global, regional and local levels. 
 
  
 
Cover photo credits: 
RAMP, ENACQKT, and DataDyne 
 
 Sustainable Financing for Mobile Health (mHealth):  1 Options and opportunities for mHealth financial models in low and middle-income 
countries 
© 2013 
Message from the Executive Director 
mHealth presents a critical opportunity to re-envision how health information 
and services are consumed and delivered. In maternal, newborn and child 
health, we are witnessing the game-changing effects that mobile technology has 
to offer through services such as pregnancy and birth registries, immunization 
and nutrition tracking. While there is no longer doubt that mHealth is a viable 
strategy and tool for improving access, coverage and quality of care,  as well as 
generating cost savings, the question of financial sustainability and ultimately 
“Who pays?” poses persistent challenges and barriers to scale and investment.    
I am convinced that the findings in this report will provide valuable insights 
across all facets of the mHealth community. The report outlines prospects for 
each and every member of our diverse community to seek and support opportunities for mHealth 
initiatives to become financially sustainable.  As with other aspects of mHealth, it is through the 
collective action of governments, industry, NGOs, academia and the many private philanthropies and bi-
laterals that have catalyzed mHealth that we will reach our goals of providing sustainable services that 
improve the health and well-being of millions and increasingly billions of people throughout the world.   
With the growing urgency to advance our thinking and discussion in this area, I welcomed the 
opportunity to engage Vital Wave to undertake the investigation that led to this report. Specifically, I 
asked for answers to following questions: 1) which aspects of mHealth are most likely to be taken up by 
commercial forces; 2) how will mHealth benefits be valued in the absence of commercial involvement; 3) 
how can donors complement government investment; 4) how can ecosystem actors overcome gaps to 
reach later stages of maturity; and 5) what can we learn from current financial models in mHealth? 
The heart of the mHealth Alliance mission is to catalyze a movement towards the scalable and 
sustainable mainstreaming of mobile technologies for improved health outcomes and wellbeing.  This 
report provides a platform through which we can begin to answer the questions “Who pays, and at 
what stage is their investment most needed and appropriate?” It is my pleasure to share the results of 
this analysis with you. We look forward to continuing to work with all of our partners to help ensure 
that more initiatives achieve financial sustainability and reach the scale required for game-changing 
impact.  
Best regards, 
 
Patricia Mechael 
Executive Director, mHealth Alliance   
 Sustainable Financing for Mobile Health (mHealth):  2 Options and opportunities for mHealth financial models in low and middle-income 
countries 
© 2013 
Acknowledgements 
The mHealth Alliance and Vital Wave would like to first and foremost express our appreciation to the 
Norwegian Agency for Development Cooperation (NORAD) for their generous support and Tore 
Godal for posing the challenging questions, “For those mHealth applications in which there is no 
commercial interest: Who should pay? What is the role of the government and what is the role of the 
donors?”  
In addition, we would like to thank the mHealth community, case study representatives and colleagues 
in Nigeria for helping to ground this work in the various programs and movements that are ongoing to 
improve maternal, newborn and child health.   
From the mHealth community – Erick Gaju at the Rwandan Ministry of Health; Lisa Felton at Vodafone; 
Josh Nesbit at Medic Mobile; Peter Breitenbach at Vodacom; Marcha Neethling at the Praekelt 
Foundation; Chris Bergstrom at WellDoc; Katherine de Tolly at Cell-Life; Kirsten Gagnaire at MAMA; 
Anaya Raihan at D.Net; Karl Brown at the Rockefeller Foundation; Ken Warman at the Bill & Melinda 
Gates Foundation; Haitham El-noush at NORAD; Sandhya Rao at USAID; Patricia Mechael, William 
Philbrick and Francis Gonzales at the mHealth Alliance. 
We are especially grateful for the organizations that devoted additional time and effort with us on the case studies, which 
greatly enrich the report.  
Thank you to the following organizations and their representatives – VillageReach, Emily Bancroft; Switchboard, 
Eric Woods; Changamka, Sam Agutu; Novartis, Rene Ziegler. 
Thank you to the following individuals from Nigeria – Eugene L.T. Ivase and Mohammed Sidi Ali at the 
Nigerian Ministry of Health; Oluwafemi “Femi” Adedipe, Ugo Okoli and Adetokunbo Oshin at SURE-
P; Osahon Omorodion at Pfizer; Steve Felix-Uduh at the National Primary Health Care Development 
Agency. 
 Sustainable Financing for Mobile Health (mHealth):  3 Options and opportunities for mHealth financial models in low and middle-income 
countries 
© 2013 
Table of Contents 
Executive Summary ........................................................................................................................................... 5 
Definitions .......................................................................................................................................................... 8 
Introduction ...................................................................................................................................................... 10 
SECTION 1: Financial Sustainability and Value Chain Analysis ............................................................. 12 
SECTION 2: Success Factors for mHealth Financial Sustainability and Scale ...................................... 18 
SECTION 3: Sustainable Financing Case Studies ...................................................................................... 22 
DEMAND & AWARENESS CASE STUDY: VillageReach ................................................................................................................................................... 23 
PERFORMANCE & ACCOUNTABILITY CASE STUDY: Switchboard ......................................................................................................................... 25 
QUALITY MONITORING CASE STUDY: Sproxil ............................................................................................................................................................... 27 
SUPPLY CHAIN AWARENESS CASE STUDY: SMS for Life............................................................................................................................................ 29 
FINANCIAL BARRIERS CASE STUDY: Changamka ........................................................................................................................................................... 31 
SECTION 4: Nigeria Use Case ..................................................................................................................... 33 
Mitigating Risk Associated with Economic Buyers – The Use Case of Nigeria .................................................................................................................... 34 
UN Commodities Commission Implementation Planning for Nigeria .................................................................................................................................. 36 
SECTION 5: Strategies for mHealth Financial Sustainability .................................................................. 38 
Conclusion ........................................................................................................................................................ 40 
  
  
Sustainable Financing for Mobile Health (mHealth):  
4 Options and opportunities for mHealth financial models in low and middle-income 
countries 
 © 2013 
Executive Summary 
The consumption and delivery of health-related 
“[In global health] the issue is a failure to 
services via mobile communication devices, 
deliver. We have the money and the ability 
known as mHealth, is fast becoming an essential 
. . . the problem is an implementation 
component of global health. Today, the global 
bottleneck.” 
health community enjoys unprecedented levels of 
— Jim Yong Kim, 
scientific knowledge and technical ability, and the 
President of the World Bank 
rapid expansion of mobile technology means that 
 
the vast majority of adults, even in rural and remote regions, possess the means to access health 
information and services through personal devices.  
Yet, concern is growing within the global health community that despite this promise mHealth 
implementations are challenged to sustain scale at a national level in low and middle-income 
countries.  The lack of viable sustainable financial models for mHealth contributes to the challenges 
that implementers face.  While there are a variety of financial models currently in use for the 
hundreds of mHealth projects active in low and middle-income countries, there is general consensus 
that most of these projects rely too heavily on short-term grant funding from government, 
foundation and private-sector entities. In addition, fragmentation in the delivery of global health care 
has led to a lack of holistic systems thinking in both the design and delivery of mHealth solutions. 
Frequently, this leads to misalignment between ecosystem players and produces models that are not 
financially sustainable or scalable.  
The growing urgency to resolve this circumstance in order to scale a greater number of 
implementations has prompted key players in the mHealth community to focus on financial 
modeling. This Sustainable Financing for Mobile Health (mHealth) report, commissioned by the mHealth 
Alliance and delivered by Vital Wave, uses a value chain analysis framework at the stakeholder level 
to evaluate five financial models that exist today in priority mHealth areas. In this report, the value 
chain1 is defined as the sequence of transactions that bring a product from its raw inputs to the final 
consumer. Each member of a given value chain has a unique perception of the costs (or the “give”) 
and the benefits (or the “get”). In order to achieve long-term financial sustainability, the balance for 
each member must be tilted in favor of the benefits. The fundamental conclusion from the various 
value chain analyses contained in this report is that to achieve financial sustainability implementers 
must successfully transition from operational dependence on funding to reliance on economic buyers (i.e., 
“payers” or “purchasers”).  This requires organizations and individuals that are motivated to 
purchase the mHealth product or service and value chains that are designed to include members that 
                                                 
1The value chain concept was first introduced by Michael Porter in 1980. Since 2001, Porter has been focused on research related to 
health service delivery. Whereas the value chain analysis in this Sustainable Financing for Mobile Health (mHealth) report focuses on 
stakeholders at the implementation level, Porter’s efforts have focused on creating care delivery value chains for specific medical 
conditions. 
Sustainable Financing for Mobile Health (mHealth):  
5 Options and opportunities for mHealth financial models in low and middle-income 
countries 
 © 2013 
have incentives to remain part of the delivery process. Importantly, achieving financial sustainability 
is not a one-time event.  It requires proactive monitoring and rebalancing of the value chain.  
As an additional framework for analysis, this report uses the recommendations of the United 
Nations Commission on Life-Saving Commodities for Women and Children (or the Commodities 
Commission). The Commodities Commission was created in response to the UN Secretary-
General’s call to increase access to medicines, devices and supplies that address avoidable causes of 
death during pregnancy, childbirth and childhood. The Commission’s report2, published on 26 
September 2012, identified 13 essential commodities that have the potential to save the lives of 
millions of women and children and made 10 recommendations for how to get these commodities 
to those who need them most.   Given the cross-cutting nature of the recommendations and the 
focus on scale, the mHealth Alliance derived five priority mHealth application categories from the 
Commodities Commission report, which are further explored in this report. These categories are: 1) 
Demand & Awareness; 2) Performance & Accountability; 3) Quality Monitoring; 4) Supply Chain 
Awareness; and 5) Financial Barriers.  
After examining these five categories, this report concludes that sustainable financial models are 
contingent on a deep understanding of ecosystem players, market dynamics, and each value chain 
members’ incentives specific to each application area. In particular: 
• Applications that address Quality Monitoring or Supply Chain Awareness are likely to be 
attractive to private-sector organizations in addition to public-sector actors. The products 
and services that fall into these two categories facilitate the free flow and proper use of 
health-related goods and services, as well as address pain points that have very near-term 
impact on the ability of health systems and markets to function effectively. Improving 
communication between health care providers, identifying counterfeit drugs and preventing  
stock-outs of needed medications not only have a tangible impact on health outcomes, but 
they also present opportunities for private-sector players like pharmaceutical companies to 
increase and diversify revenue streams by improving their distribution logistics and the 
reputation of their products.  
• Applications that address Demand & Awareness and Financial Barriers pertain primarily 
to the ability of end users to access health services. These categories present an opportunity 
for public and philanthropic-sector organizations to leverage successful platforms, business 
models, and services from other sectors to deliver health services and information. For 
example, applications that leverage gaming or entertainment platforms might allow demand 
generation applications to reach populations more cheaply, while services tied to mobile 
money platforms could facilitate the payment of services by end users. Donors and funders 
                                                 
2UN Commission on Life Saving Commodities for Women and Girls, Commissioner’s Report (September 2012) 
http://www.everywomaneverychild.org/resources/un-commission-on-life-saving-commodities 
Sustainable Financing for Mobile Health (mHealth):  
6 Options and opportunities for mHealth financial models in low and middle-income 
countries 
 © 2013 
may be apt to participate in projects in these categories if their investments yield desired 
health outcomes, access or behaviors. 
• Applications that address Performance & Accountability pertain mostly to health workers. 
Due to the large government role in paying health workers in many low and middle-income 
countries, governments need to see the value in improving performance if they are going to 
be incentivized to be an economic buyer of these services. Donors and funders may need to 
play a role in financing the development and implementation of solutions until that value is 
recognized.  
The various facets of analysis in this report are brought to life through an examination of Nigeria as 
a use case. Nigeria’s national leaders enjoy an active role in the Commodities Commission, and the 
country’s Saving One Million Lives program is aimed in part at leveraging mobile technology to 
improve the availability of lifesaving medicines and supplies. As Nigeria and its partners make a 
concerted effort to reach ambitious goals in maternal and child health, it can provide a test case for 
putting into practice the recommendations for each of the five mHealth application areas explored 
in this report.   
Examples of current mHealth projects, as well as the evolution of mHealth in Nigeria, suggest that 
there are several options for achieving financial sustainability. Some options improve the perceived 
benefits to value chain members by attracting new buyers through additional services, revenue 
sharing, monetizing other assets (such as data), or providing better evidence of a solution’s value 
through monitoring and evaluation (M&E).  Other options for achieving financial sustainability 
promote reducing the perceived costs of mHealth products and services by unlocking new sources 
of revenue or introducing new payment models. 
For a value chain analysis to be truly actionable it must be executed in the local context. The analysis 
requires a deep understanding of the incentive structures and constraints faced by value chain 
members in situ. This analysis must also be continually refreshed to account for changes in health 
conditions, market environments and technological improvements that may alter these structures. 
Regular, ongoing analyses of the “gives” and “gets” for each stakeholder will allow mHealth 
implementers to adjust the value chain model in order to maintain financial sustainability in the long 
term. 
  
Sustainable Financing for Mobile Health (mHealth):  
7 Options and opportunities for mHealth financial models in low and middle-income 
countries 
 © 2013 
Definitions 
Channel organizations: intermediaries aiding the delivery of goods and services to customers 
Commodities Commission: UN Commission on Life-Saving Commodities for Women 
and Children 
Component providers: entities that develop or provide essential component parts of the mHealth 
solution (e.g., mobile operators, handset makers, application developers and content providers) 
Demand & Awareness: an mHealth application category that refers to the widespread 
dissemination of mobile phone-based messaging to promote demand and utilization of health 
services and products 
Economic buyer: also known as “payers” or “purchasers”, individuals or entities that are willing 
and able to pay for, or purchase, specific products or services; the economic buyer may or may 
not be the end user 
End user: the individual(s) that need and are intended to be the user(s) of a product or service 
Financial barriers: an mHealth application category that refers to the use of mobile phone-based 
technologies to remove or address financial barriers in accessing health services and products 
Financial sustainability: the point at which projects or implementations transition from financial 
dependence on funders to dependence on economic buyers (i.e., “payers”, “purchasers”) 
Freemium: a business model most commonly used for digital goods and services whereby a basic 
version of the product is provided free of charge, but a premium is charged for advanced features 
or functionality  
Funders: organizations or individuals (i.e., donors or investors) that provide funds to set up or grow 
programs and organizations   
“Get”: the sum of all forms of utility (i.e., benefits or value) received from products or services 
produced and delivered in the value chain 
“Give”: the perceived price of products, services or payments contributed to the value chain 
Health workers: individuals that are engaged in actions whose primary intent is to enhance health, 
including: doctors, nurses, midwives, pharmacists, laboratory technicians and community health 
workers 
Influencers: individuals and entities (e.g., policy-makers, government regulators) that play a critical 
role in influencing the development, delivery and uptake of mHealth solutions 
Sustainable Financing for Mobile Health (mHealth):  
8 Options and opportunities for mHealth financial models in low and middle-income 
countries 
 © 2013 
MNCH: Maternal, Newborn and Child Health 
Performance & Accountability: an mHealth application category that refers to the use of mobile 
phone-based point of care support tools for health workers 
Project implementer: the entity, or collection of organizations working in partnership, that 
develop, initiate and manage an mHealth project  
Quality Monitoring: an mHealth application category that refers to mobile phone technologies 
used to monitor essential commodities to reduce the number of counterfeits on the market 
Single point of failure: any part of a system that, if it fails, will stop the entire system from working 
Supply Chain Awareness: an mHealth application category that refers to evidence-based mHealth 
solutions that identify where stock-outs are occurring and improve forecasts  
Systems thinking: a process of understanding how the components of an ecosystem influence one 
another within a whole; a solutions approach where individual problems are viewed as parts of an 
interconnected system 
Value added services (VAS): a term commonly used in the telecommunications industry to refer 
to all non-core services 
Value chain: the sequence of transactions that bring a product from its raw inputs to the final 
consumer or end user 
Value chain analysis: a framework for understanding the relationship between entities in a 
particular industry; an examination of the overall performance or governance of a value chain and 
identifying the conditions under which it would better perform 
  
Sustainable Financing for Mobile Health (mHealth):  
9 Options and opportunities for mHealth financial models in low and middle-income 
countries 
 © 2013 
Introduction 
In less than a few decades, mobile phones have become a vital, practical tool in the hands of 
millions of new users in low and-middle income countries. In the area of mobile health, or mHealth, 
the past few years have witnessed the spread of innovative applications and solutions that have 
demonstrated the potential to overcome some of the biggest problems in global health, from the 
shortage of trained health personnel to persistent stock outs of medicines and vaccines. Yet, the 
attention devoted to mHealth in the media and in the global health community belies the fact that 
mobile solutions receive a tiny fraction of health funding, typically in the form of short-term grant 
funding, a situation that has impeded their ability to reach the level of scale at which meaningful 
impact on health outcomes can be fully realized. While this state of affairs can be partially attributed 
to the relative newness of mHealth as a field, decision makers in global health are increasingly in 
agreement that more robust, sustainable financing models are needed if mHealth is to turn promise 
into reality.  
The mHealth Alliance champions the use of mobile technologies to improve health throughout the 
world. To accomplish this, the mHealth Alliance facilitates the sharing of tools, knowledge, 
experience and lessons learned, as well as advocates for more and better quality research and 
evaluation. The mHealth Alliance also builds capacity throughout the ecosystem, promotes 
sustainable business models, and supports systems integration goals by advocating for 
standardization and interoperability of mHealth platforms. 
The UN Commission on Life-Saving Commodities 
for Women and Children (Commodities Commission) A brief note about methodology 
aims to increase access to life-saving medicines and 
The findings and case studies within this 
health supplies for the world’s most vulnerable report are based on three sources of data: 
people. As part of the Every Woman Every Child resident knowledge, in-depth interviews and 
movement and efforts to meet the health-related third-party secondary data.  Seventeen in-
millennium development goals (MDGs), the depth interviews were conducted with leaders 
Commission promotes efforts to reduce barriers that of non-profit and philanthropic organizations, 
block access to essential health commodities. The executives in the mobile telecommunications 
Commodities Commission recently released the UN and pharmaceutical industries, and key 
Commission on Life-Saving Commodities for stakeholders in Nigeria. 
Women and Children report, which indicates that  
mHealth has a significant role to play in increasing access and demand to quality care and essential 
commodities.  
The Commodities Commission report provides a good use case for this Sustainable Financing for 
Mobile Helath (mHealth) report, as it addresses a cross-sector stakeholder audience, the continuum of 
care for maternal and child health in multiple countries, and is oriented for scale. As such, the 
mHealth Alliance determined that 5 of the 10 recommendations identified in the Commodities 
Commission report are addressable by mobile solutions. Fit within the mHealth applications 
Sustainable Financing for Mobile Health (mHealth):  
10 Options and opportunities for mHealth financial models in low and middle-income 
countries 
 © 2013 
taxonomy, the five categories of opportunity are: 1) Demand & Awareness; 2) Performance & 
Accountability; 3) Quality Monitoring; 4) Supply Chain Awareness; and 5) Financial Barriers. 
There are a number of technological, regulatory and organizational challenges that have slowed the 
march to scale, but the lack of viable financial models that would allow innovative programs or 
implementations to reach national or regional scale has been consistently cited as one of the biggest 
barriers. The vast majority of mHealth implementations have cost and revenue structures that would 
be unsustainable if they were to expand beyond a pilot stage, as well as rely too heavily on short-term, 
grant-based funding.  
This Sustainable Financing for Mobile Health (mHealth) report focuses on the use of mobile technologies to 
improve health care; it is not an exhaustive list of projects and potential applications of mHealth 
solutions. Rather, it is an assessment of how mHealth products and services in a specific set of 
application areas can be financed sustainably. It offers practical guidance for project managers and 
donors who see the real (or potential) value of an mHealth solution, but are struggling to keep it alive. 
New mHealth products and services face many challenges that can lead to failure; they can be too 
complicated, incompatible with other systems, under-funded, unsupported by a key government 
agency, or lacking a corporate champion that is willing to fund an expansion from a small pilot project 
to a national or regional service. Fortunately, there are many ways to help a new mHealth solution 
thrive. This report provides a clear view of best practices and strategies for financial models of 
mHealth in low and middle-income countries and analyzes the actual or potential use of mHealth with 
respect to the Commodities Commission recommendations.  
Section 1 of the report explores the definition of financial sustainability in the context of a value 
chain analysis, at the stakeholder or implementation level. Section 2 defines critical success and risk 
factors for achieving financial sustainability and scale. Section 3 investigates sustainable financing 
case studies for each of the five mHealth application categories identified. Given the pioneering role 
that the Nigerian Ministry of Health has played in both the work of the Commodities Commission 
and the use of mobile phone-based technologies to improve health outcomes, Section 4 explores 
Nigeria as a use case. Section 5 builds on the cases explored to detail strategies for implementers that 
are seeking to attain financial sustainability. The Conclusion summarizes actionable 
recommendations from the report for implementers, funders and various economic buyers through 
the lens of the solution development lifecycle.  
 
  
Sustainable Financing for Mobile Health (mHealth):  
11 Options and opportunities for mHealth financial models in low and middle-income 
countries 
 © 2013 
SECTION 1: Financial Sustainability and Value Chain Analysis  
At present, the vast majority of mHealth implementers in low and middle-income countries are 
dependent on short-term, grant-based funding to develop their applications, launch their activities 
and continue to operate. This model of financing is typically viewed as unsustainable because of the 
lack of certainty that funding will be renewed when the current grant cycle is over, and because the 
amount of funds committed is usually designed to allow a project to operate in its pilot phase, not in 
a fully scaled state. All too often, mHealth implementations – even those showing positive changes 
in behaviors or health outcomes – do not survive because of their dependence on this form of 
financing.   
This Sustainable Financing for Mobile Health (mHealth) report provides a clear view of the options and 
opportunities for strengthening and improving financial models of mHealth in low and middle-
income countries. Through an analysis of the actual or potential use of mHealth with respect to 
Commodities Commission recommendations, and in the context of Nigeria, the report identifies and 
describes financial models and frameworks that may advance the financial sustainability of mHealth 
activities.  Figure A provides a graphical representation of the focus area of analysis that is 
documented in this report. 
Figure A: Area of Analysis 
Applications that will serve 
specific Commodities 
Commission recommendations Commodities 
identified by the mHealth Commission
Alliance, and the financial Recommendations
models that show promise for 
sustainability
• Demand and Awareness
• Performance and 
Accountability
• Quality Monitoring
• Supply Chain Awareness mHealth Financial 
• Financial Barriers Applications Models
 
The framework for analysis in this report is the value chain – the full range of activities by individuals 
and organizations to bring a product from its conception to its end use. For each of the five 
application categories described by the Commodities Commission, stakeholders and their associated 
set of contributions (“gives”) and benefits (“gets”) are identified and mapped across the value chain 
during the development, delivery and use of mHealth products and services. These stakeholders 
Sustainable Financing for Mobile Health (mHealth):  
12 Options and opportunities for mHealth financial models in low and middle-income 
countries 
 © 2013 
include: end users, implementers, funders, influencers, economic buyers, component providers and 
channel organizations.   
The end user is defined as the individual(s) that need and are intended to use the mHealth service. 
For example, end users may include individuals, households and health workers. mHealth value 
chains often have a project implementer who develops, initiates and manages a project.  This 
project manager can be a single entity or a collection of organizations working in partnership.  
Influencers are not directly involved in 
Key Link in the Value Chain: The Economic Buyer the delivery of mHealth but may play a 
critical role in influencing the 
 Funders pay to set up mHealth operations  development, delivery or uptake of 
 Economic buyers pay for, or purchase, the mHealth solutions.  For instance, 
actual mHealth products or services regulators shape the rules that mHealth 
 While mHealth projects usually involve funders providers must follow, affecting the price 
at the formative or early stages of service of a mobile service or the possible uses of 
development, long-term financial health data. Policy makers can promote or 
sustainability requires viable economic buyers stifle the delivery of mHealth through 
budgeting and official support.  
Component providers develop or provide essential component parts of the mHealth solution.  
This can include mobile operators, handset makers, application developers and content providers, 
among others.  Channel organizations are intermediaries aiding the delivery of goods and 
services to customers.  In the M-PESA model in Kenya, for example, a network of 40,000 agents 
form the channel that registers customers and handles cash deposits and withdrawals for the end 
user.    
In considering the financial sustainability of mHealth solutions, it is important to consider the 
activities of both funders and economic buyers. Funders pay to set up mHealth operations. 
Economic buyers (who can also be thought of as “payers” or “purchasers”) are individuals and 
entities that have the willingness and ability to pay for the actual products and services delivered 
through the mHealth application, usually because of the potential for the application to improve 
health outcomes. While mHealth projects usually involve donors or funders at the formative or early 
stages of service development, long-term financial sustainability requires viable economic buyers. 
It is also important to distinguish between economic buyers and end users. For instance, Voxiva 
sells its TRACnet service to the government of Rwanda, the economic buyer, who in turn provides 
services to health care workers, the end users.  In some cases, the economic buyer is also the end 
user.  For instance, in Switchboard’s closed calling network for health workers, the workers play 
both functional roles.  
Playing more than one role across the broader value chain is also fairly common for companies, 
governments or non-governmental organizations (NGOs).  Figure B, below, illustrates the different 
Sustainable Financing for Mobile Health (mHealth):  
13 Options and opportunities for mHealth financial models in low and middle-income 
countries 
 © 2013 
type of public, non-profit, for-profit and commercial entities that may be involved in the delivery of 
mHealth initiatives and the roles that they typically play in the value chain. 
Figure B: mServices Value Chain™ 
App 
Developer 
Hardware Vendors Platform 
Developer 
Influencers PDAs, 
Handsets Mobile Services User 
Provider 
Government 
Ministries and Laptops Channel Partners 
International  Voice, Data, 
User 
Bodies (e.g., Texting 
Regulators) 
Project Health User 
Implementers Workers, 
 Microfinance 
 Agents User 
Funders Vertical IT 
Systems 
Content Providers 
Banks User 
Content Financial or 
NGOs Aggregators Health Influencers 
Information Channel 
Donors Systems Funders 
Content Project Implementers Foundations Developers End User 
Economic Buyer 
Component Providers 
Content TM of Vital Wave Consulting  
Long-term financial sustainability rests on the balance of stakeholders’ “gives” and “gets” across the 
value chain. The “get” is the sum of all forms of utility (benefits or value) received from products or 
services produced and delivered, and includes financial, operational, social or political returns. The 
“give” is the perceived price of products, services or payments contributed to the value chain.  The 
perception of actual value of the stakeholders’ contribution will depend on factors such as the 
relative cost of the contribution to the stakeholder, the payment terms and the initial outlay vs. total 
cost of ownership.  The “gets” most often associated with mHealth implementations, especially for 
economic buyers and end users, are improvements in health outcomes or increased efficiency and 
cost savings in the delivery of health services. Typical “gives” include outright financing or financial 
contributions, the cost of component parts or services (including “in kind” contributions), the 
provision of technical or managerial support and training, and costs associated with partnerships or 
relationship development.  The “give” also includes foregoing the next-best opportunity.  When 
organizations commit resources to a project they forego investing these resources in another project 
or opportunity.    
Sustainable Financing for Mobile Health (mHealth):  
14 Options and opportunities for mHealth financial models in low and middle-income 
countries 
 © 2013 
Get Give = Comparative Net Utility
(aka Value Proposition)
Net value compared to all substitutes, direct competitors, and the option to do nothing. 
Impacted by:
• Level of country development
• Overall budget and resources for health
• Perceived scarcity of alternatives
• Cultural values Content TM of Vital Wave Consulting
  
The field of mHealth is relatively new and the application of mobile devices to health care has 
expanded so rapidly that it has been difficult to accurately measure the resulting social returns 
and cost savings. What is clear, however, is that many organizations that invest in mHealth 
applications have done so because of the potential to increase access to health services and 
improve efficiencies due to the rapid, wide-ranging spread of mobile networks. For many 
funders and economic buyers, this has tipped the balance of “gives” and “gets” – increasing the 
value and benefits of a solution while reducing the perceived price of a solution. 
This introduces the concept of comparative net utility.  This is the “get” minus the “give,” factoring in 
the perceived value and price of the contributions and benefits of engaging in mHealth value chains.  
The comparative net utility – also known as the value 
proposition – is the net value compared to all substitutes, 
direct competitors and the option to do nothing. It is the Improving health outcomes is a 
various forms of value that a product or service provides primary motivating factor many 
the stakeholders and is impacted by the level of country value chain players and is one 
development, the overall budget and resources for health, reason that building an 
and the perceived scarcity of alternatives. evidence base for mHealth is 
such an area of focus. 
Entrepreneurs and innovators determine and promote 
However, comparatively little 
the value proposition of their offering. But they do not 
always ask themselves if the net value of their offering is attention has been paid to the 
higher or better than the net value of competitive options other “gets” among players in 
(or of doing nothing). The fact that a given mHealth the value chain. This scarcity 
application has a compelling value proposition in the of analysis contributes to the 
market is important, but financial sustainability will lack of balanced and 
require that it has the right and highest value proposition sustainable financial models. 
(or net utility) for each player in the value chain.  
If, within a value chain, all players believe that they get more value out of the exchange than they put 
in, and what they get is greater than what they could get from investing their resources elsewhere, 
Sustainable Financing for Mobile Health (mHealth):  
15 Options and opportunities for mHealth financial models in low and middle-income 
countries 
 © 2013 
then the financial model is by definition sustainable – justification for continued participation and 
investment exists. Problems arise when the “give” is bigger than the “get” for at least some 
stakeholders in the value chain, or when stakeholders do not understand or are unable to identify the 
true value of their “give” and “get.” 
Figure C, below, identifies the common value propositions for public-sector players, non-profit 
players, for-profit players, health workers, patients and their families, while Figure D summarizes the 
“gives” and “gets” across the mHealth value chain. 
 
Figure C: Common mHealth Value Propositions TM 
Public Non-Profit For-Profit Health Worker Individuals & HH
• Improved health • Improved health • Increased • Improved health • Improved health 
outcomes (e.g., outcomes sales/revenues outcomes outcomes 
longer life, higher 
quality of life) • Efficiency gains • Efficiency gains • Efficiency gains • Efficiency gains 
and cost savings and cost savings in and cost savings and cost savings 
• Efficiency gains and in achieving delivering for health in seeking health 
cost savings for mission products and delivery care 
health delivery services
• Increased • Reputational • Reputational 
• Higher productivity donations/sales/ • Improved health benefits (i.e., benefits (i.e., 
levels for the overall revenues outcomes standing in standing in 
economy community) community)
• Note: Improved 
branding/PR is not • Higher 
a driver for long- productivity levels 
term participation for household
Content TM of Vital Wave Consulting
 
Figure D: “Gives” and “Gets” Across the Value Chain 
 
“Get” “Give” 
(benefits or value received) (contributions or value provided) 
Perceived price of products, services or payments contributed 
Sum of all forms of utility (benefits or value) received to the value chain, considering: 
Definition from products or services produced and delivered in • Relative cost (e.g., % of total budget),
the value chain. • Payment terms (impact on cash flow),
• Initial outlay vs. Total cost of ownership
Component parts provision
Social returns • Hardware
• Health outcomes • Software
• Social value or impact • Content
Financial returns • Infrastructure
• Direct payments: one-time or ongoing Value-added service provision
• Service revenues • Mobile services
Examples Operational returns • Advertising• Operational efficiency Capacity or technical support provision
• Cost savings • Capacity building
• Productivity levels • Technical support
Marketing/Political returns • Partnership/relationship development
• PR/brand equity Financing provision
• Political equity • Short or fixed-term
• Market intelligence • Perpetual (or beyond fixed period)
Foregoing next-best alternative  
Sustainable Financing for Mobile Health (mHealth):  
16 Options and opportunities for mHealth financial models in low and middle-income 
countries 
 © 2013 
Comparative Net Utility Stakeholder
 
The importance of health outcomes as a “get” for many players in the value chain emerges when 
looking at these summaries. Indeed, improving health outcomes is a primary motivating factor for 
value chain players including economic buyers, funders and end users. It is one of the principal 
reasons that evidence supporting the impact of mHealth on health outcomes is such an area of focus 
among promoters of mHealth (and speaks to the inability to identify the true value of the “get” 
discussed above). However, comparatively little attention has been paid to the other “gets” among 
players in the value chain, and the resulting scarcity of analysis contributes to the lack of balanced 
and sustainable financial models. 
  
Sustainable Financing for Mobile Health (mHealth):  
17 Options and opportunities for mHealth financial models in low and middle-income 
countries 
 © 2013 
SECTION 2: Success Factors for mHealth Financial Sustainability and Scale  
Long-term financial sustainability is not only about finding the right model; it is also about 
establishing a continual process of balancing the value chain, the “gives” and the “gets.”  Regardless 
of whether value chain players’ incentives are 
commercial or social – or a mix of the two – 
“If you’re being innovative, don’t be any more 
the project implementer needs to understand 
innovative than you have to be – especially when it 
(and continually update) what those 
incentives are and how much each value comes to money. Changing behavior is extremely 
chain member needs to “give” and “get” for difficult and changing the flow of money is even 
the project to function sustainably. harder. Don’t reinvent a whole business ecosystem, 
especially if you can fit into an existing one.” 
Below are critical success factors for — Chris Bergstrom 
ensuring the scale and financial sustainability Chief Strategy & Commercial  
of mHealth applications. Officer, WellDoc 
1. Know the Stakeholders: The characteristics of a value chain partner can influence how (and 
when) they engage in mHealth solutions and have a strong influence on financial sustainability. 
These characteristics include:  
• Organization Size – Larger organizations are more likely to engage when implementations 
begin to realize economies of scale. 
• Sector Membership – For-profit organizations are most likely to participate in mHealth 
value chains that can generate incremental sales or revenues. They will need business 
cases to justify those investments and financial return on investment (ROI) analyses to 
sustain them. Non-profits and philanthropic organizations will be motivated to engage in 
projects that help them achieve their mission and will require M&E that shows social or 
operational returns (including cost-effectiveness calculations) to continue their 
investments. 
• International vs. Local – Organizations with local presence are better suited to adapting 
models to local conditions and providing implementation support such as training and 
capacity building. International organizations are better suited to providing value-chain 
components, such as software or platform development, that are not location-specific.  
• Repeat vs. New Customer – New customers will need business cases or a projection of 
outcomes to warrant initial investments.  Repeat customers will need evidence of 
demonstrated returns – financial, social or operational – to sustain investments. 
• Short- vs. Long-term Time Horizon – Organizations that have short time-to-return 
horizons, such as for-profits, will need to see ROI within a shorter time frame and therefore 
are likelier to participate when projects have reached scale, whereas organizations with 
Sustainable Financing for Mobile Health (mHealth):  
18 Options and opportunities for mHealth financial models in low and middle-income 
countries 
 © 2013 
longer time horizons – such as donors – are better able to participate in early or start-up 
stages when time-to-return may be a few years out. 
2. Ensure the value proposition for all stakeholders: Understanding each player’s 
incentives along the value chain is a necessary part of engaging them. Implementers and 
their partners need to consider not just the player’s incentives, but also their strategies. For 
instance, both public and non-profit sectors need impact assessments, but they pursue them 
differently. In addition, attentiveness to engaging governments and Mobile Network 
Operators (MNOs) in critical parts of the value chain is essential. In thinking of the value 
chain as a system, the national government is a single point of failure in any model, because 
there are no available substitutes if the government declines to grant approvals or 
participate. If the government decides not to engage, in most implementations the entire 
system will stop working. MNOs, for their part, typically need justification that participation 
in a project will have a positive, tangible and long-term impact on their revenues, market 
share or public image. Relying on MNOs without providing these types of incentives may 
present a long-term risk factor to any model that aims to achieve national-level scale.  
 
3. Plan for a long-term economic buyer: Anticipating where money is going to come from, 
early on and later in the solution lifespan, is also a prerequisite for sustainability. Economic 
buyers will sustain the operation financially, but they need to have a strong comparative net 
utility when compared to the next-best alternative. For example, Sproxil, profiled below, 
aggregates their SMS drug verification service across multiple economic buyers – in this case, 
pharmaceutical clients – making it cheaper for pharmaceutical companies than the alternative 
(i.e., doing it themselves).  
 
Figure E, shows the potential attractiveness of mHealth applications to different economic 
buyers.  Sustainable revenue will come from economic buyers with the highest comparative 
net utility.  Performance & Accountability, Quality Monitoring and Supply Chain Awareness 
offer the highest direct or near-direct utility to potential economic buyers. Economic buyer 
incentives to purchase will ultimately depend on the specific business model, the value being 
provided and the local market needs and conditions.  Donors may be more inclined to provide 
longer-term support for projects where commercial forces are less likely to take hold, and the 
attractiveness to MNOs will vary significantly depending on the specifics of the model. 
  
Sustainable Financing for Mobile Health (mHealth):  
19 Options and opportunities for mHealth financial models in low and middle-income 
countries 
 © 2013 
Figure E: Prospects for Stakeholders’ Comparative Net Utility in mHealth Application Areas TM 
Public Non-Profit For-Profit Health Workers Individuals & Households
May be willing to pay if Non-pharma advertising to consumers; Pharma outreach to May pay for education or May pay for education or Demand & If mHealth results in improved mHealth yields better health worker. Will need scale product info that results in product info that results in Awareness health outcomes outcomes than next-best 
alternative to warrant continued 
better care or increased  better care or increased  
investments efficiency or time savings efficiency or time savings
Pharma interested in getting Affluent health workers pay to Performance & If mHealth results in improved Not target audience or 
Accountability operational efficiency closer to target audience (health 
be part of closed network via 
providers). non-network calls to family and 
stakeholder that directly 
friends (Switchboard model) benefits from category
May be willing to pay if it can be Pharma mfrs and distributors 
Quality shown that anti-counterfeiting Donor community and NGOs have high pain point for Private clinics or pharmacies Affluent may be willing to pay to 
Monitoring services improve health are not likely to become a counterfeit drugs and gain may be willing to pay for drug authenticate drugs and get 
outcomes long-term economic buyer.  revenues from anti- quality assurance peace of mindcounterfeiting services
Willing to pay where stock-out
Supply Chain avoidance will improve Willing to pay where stock-out Private clinics may be willing to Not target audience or 
Awareness healthcare delivery in critical avoidance will result in pay to reduce stock-outs and stakeholder that directly 
areas increased sales improve quality of care benefits from category
The poorest to whom these 
Financial May be willing to pay if health May be willing to pay if mHealth
Insurance providers are a Private clinics could benefit services are directed have need, 
outcomes are improved through yields better outcomes than potential participant, but need from higher traffic and improve but nominal ability to pay for Barriers
service provision next-best alternative financial returns at scale to service. Costs to stakeholder justify continued participation operational efficiency should be offset through 
alternative payers and models 
most least
Content TM of Vital Wave Consulting  
 
4. Localize the business model: When examining the “give” and “get”, organizations have to 
look at the environment, specific players and context.   For example, a financial model that 
works in a small, densely-populated country such 
as Rwanda may not necessarily work in a large and “I feel strongly that these solutions should 
extremely diverse nation like Nigeria.  The value be designed locally. It’s hard to ‘design 
chain players and assets that form the foundation from a distance’ or ‘lift and drop.’” 
of a specific mHealth business model will need to — Lisa Felton 
be in place when replicating that model in another Global Governance & Strategy Manager, 
country.  Vodafone (SMS for Life) 
 
5. Plan for capacity building, including monitoring and evaluation (M&E): Ensuring that 
there is a plan in place for capacity building will help to overcome the lack of financial, human, 
time and other resources that limit involvement in mHealth. Ongoing M&E is an important tool 
to support this effort. Communication of impact, cost savings, efficiency gains and ROI is 
essential to enlisting economic-buyer support. For-profit stakeholders, including MNOs, need to 
see a sound business case with a credible analysis on their ROI. Public and non-profit 
stakeholders must see a compelling impact assessment detailing the operational efficiencies and 
improvement in health outcomes achieved. 
Sustainable Financing for Mobile Health (mHealth):  
20 Options and opportunities for mHealth financial models in low and middle-income 
countries 
 © 2013 
6. Keep it simple: Simpler value chain models tend to have better prospects for success. Where 
multiple players are involved, keeping contributions within core competencies reduces the 
potential for conflicts of interest.  
Lessons Learned from MAMA Bangladesh 
MAMA's Aponjon service, launched in 2011 in Bangladesh, provides expectant and new mothers with voice and 
text messages customized to the stage of pregnancy or motherhood.   MAMA has embraced an economic 
approach and process to building a sustainable financial model. Their process breaks down into five key points:   
1. Define the business model, value proposition and business structure 
2. Identify demand-side and supply-side factors that influence the model 
3. Estimate costs and revenues; be creative identifying alternative sources of revenue 
4. Identify challenges and strategies to overcome them 
5. Identify the right balance between protecting your business model and fostering partnerships 
Through this process MAMA has determined an affordable service cost for mothers and identified alternative 
revenue streams to make up the difference to reach the breakeven price.  These revenue sources include 
message ads and a mix of philanthropic sources: Development Agency support, Global CSR Support, Local CSR 
Support and Gifts (Sponsorship) for Mothers.    
7. Understand the particular funding needs of mHealth application types: mHealth 
interventions have varying needs for funding depending on the type of application and the 
evolutionary stage of the intervention. Generally, all mHealth applications will require “seed” 
funding to support the pilot phase of an intervention and “gap” funding to take the intervention 
to national-level “scale”. In most cases, “seed” and “gap” funding will be required from donors, 
whereas “scale” funding will often be provided by – in part or in whole – the economic buyer.  
For the application categories of Quality Monitoring and Supply Chain Awareness, the value 
proposition is often quite strong for for-profit entities and they are likely to engage as the 
economic buyer. In Demand & Awareness and Financial Barriers, private-sector actors and end 
users may become involved as buyers if health services can take advantage of already successful 
business models or service platforms, although funding for some components of these programs 
may need initial or ongoing donor funding. For interventions that address Performance & 
Accountability, the value proposition is less strong for for-profit entities, and governments or 
funders may convert to become economic buyers to sustain ongoing interventions with long-
term financing commitments (if the value proposition or ROI is strong enough).  
 
  
Sustainable Financing for Mobile Health (mHealth):  
21 Options and opportunities for mHealth financial models in low and middle-income 
countries 
 © 2013 
SECTION 3: Sustainable Financing Case Studies   
This section presents five case studies to examine in-depth each of the mHealth application areas 
correlated with the Commodities Commission recommendations. Each case is viewed through the 
lens of the value chain assessment to illustrate best practices for financial sustainability.  Figure F 
provides definitions for the application categories and briefly describes each case. 
Figure F: mHealth Application Categories and Case Studies 
 
mHealth Application
Categories Description Case Studies
Village Reach 
Widespread dissemination of mobile phone based • Financial Model: Donor and MNO 
Demand & Awareness messaging that promotes demand and utilization of supported; seeking to evolve
health services and products. • Location: Malawi
Switchboard 
The use of mobile phone based point of care support • Financial Model: Service revenues from 
Performance & tools for health workers (e.g., Checklist and a closed network of health workers
Accountability protocols) • Location: Liberia, Ghana, Tanzania
Sproxil
Mobile phone technologies used to monitor essential • Financial Model: Service (drug 
commodities to cut down the number of authenticity, market intelligence, 
Quality Monitoring counterfeits on the market (e.g., mobile based bar advisory consulting) and ad revenues
code system) • Location: India, Nigeria, E Africa, Ghana
SMS for Life
Evidence based mHealth solutions that identify • Financial Model: Government pays 
Supply Chain Awareness where stock-outs are occurring and improve 
service fees to system provider
forecasts. (e.g., Supply chain management) • Location: plans to scale in Kenya, 
Ghana, Cameroon
Changamka
• Financial Model: End users or donors pay 
for health savings and insurance 
Financial Barriers Use of mobile phone based technologies to remove and/or address financial barriers services
• Location: Kenya 
 
  
Sustainable Financing for Mobile Health (mHealth):  
22 Options and opportunities for mHealth financial models in low and middle-income 
countries 
 © 2013 
DEMAND & AWARENESS CASE STUDY: VillageReach 
Demand & Awareness: Free MNCH Hotline and Mobile Tips and Reminders 
VillageReach offers women in Malawi a free Maternal, Newborn and Child Health (MNCH) Hotline 
and Mobile Tips and Reminders, which fall under the “Demand & Awareness” category. The 
hotline, known in the local language as Chipatala cha pa Foni (CCPF), or health center by phone, 
provides direct access to information, advice and health promotion regarding maternal, neonatal and 
child health issues to callers who may be out of reach of the health system.  Hotline callers can also 
enroll in a SMS-based tips and reminders service to receive personalized health education messages 
regarding pregnancy or child health. VillageReach’s vision is to attract both private and non-profit 
economic buyers for long-term sustainability.  Today this model relies on donor and MNO support, 
and it seeks to extend its services (e.g., emergency transportation) to bring in additional economic 
buyers. The project is currently being piloted through Concern Worldwide’s Innovations in 
Maternal, Newborn and Child Health initiative, and has received funding to begin scaling up 
nationally. 
Critical success factors for VillageReach include: “We use the term ‘Valley of Death’ to describe 
the time in between when innovation pilot 
 Diversify service to attract new economic buyers: funding dies off and longer-term financing 
VillageReach is considering enticing becomes available. In our experience it is a 
telecommunications companies, transport critical window to build on the momentum of 
providers, and enterprises looking to early successes, even before formal M&E 
reach the community with products or 
results come in, in order to scale.” 
services (and who have the ability to pay) 
— Emily Bancroft, 
by making the CCPF hotline service more Director Health Systems Group, VillageReach 
relevant to them.  
 M&E in order to increase the “get”:  VillageReach also sees potential to entice 
community groups and the Ministry of Health to pay for services by documenting 
the comparative cost-effectiveness of the service. By documenting cost gains with 
the implementation of CCPF such as improvements in health outcomes, time saved 
and transport costs averted, the Ministry of Health and community-based 
organizations could become more willing to support aspects of the service.   
 Careful government engagement:  The fact that VillageReach is not relying on the 
government as sole economic buyer is positive because it mitigates a potential single 
point of failure. The government is providing trained health workers, which could be 
a risk factor if the government discontinues this support. 
 Careful MNO engagement: The MNO should have a strong commercial incentive if it is 
to be a critical element of the value chain.  MNOs are a controlling player in 
mHealth value chains. They often require demonstrations of revenue enhancement 
Sustainable Financing for Mobile Health (mHealth):  
23 Options and opportunities for mHealth financial models in low and middle-income 
countries 
 © 2013 
(or controlling shares).  If they do not, their long-term participation in the value 
chain is at risk.    
 Bridge funding is key:  VillageReach is appropriately concerned about the gap between 
donor funding and the transition to economic buyer participation – a time when 
many mHealth projects fail. 
Success Indications 
 In Malawi, 8,251 calls have been received by CCPF between the launch in July 2011 
and November 2012 (~500 calls/month). 
 A multi-year implementation plan and support (including M&E) is in place. 
 The service has high rates of client satisfaction. 77% of users report changing 
behaviors around pregnancy and childbirth, such as maternal nutrition and 
complementary feeding, and over 70% of subscribers report learning something new 
from the messages. 
Figure F, below, provides a graphical overview of the VillageReach value chain analysis. 
Figure F: Value Chain Analysis – VillageReach TM 
Potential new 
economic buyers
Telcos Future
Transport Funders eHealth Tech 
providers (Concern VillageReach Provider Community 
Enterprises WW, mHA) (nonprofit) MoH (Baobab) MNO (Airtel) Members
CBOs 
• Model
“Give” • Start-up and 
• Biz case • Trained hotline 
bridge funding • Technology operators (health • Technology
• Free airtime to end • Nothing
• Partnerships workers) users
• Training
• Quality
“Get” • Impact • Impact potential, • Impact potential,potential, story story • Impact potential story • CSR/brand value service/advice• Time savings
• M&E in order to 
Critical increase the “get” • Careful government • Careful MNO 
Success Factor • Bridge funding • Attracting new economic buyers engagement (risk engagement (risk 
(CSF) into the value chain factor) factor)
to increase “give”
Channel          Funders Project Implementers         End User Economic Buyer          Component Providers Content TM of Vital Wave Consulting  
  
Sustainable Financing for Mobile Health (mHealth):  
24 Options and opportunities for mHealth financial models in low and middle-income 
countries 
 © 2013 
PERFORMANCE & ACCOUNTABILITY CASE STUDY: Switchboard 
Performance & Accountability: Free Calling Networks for Health Workers 
Switchboard is a Free Calling Network for Health Workers and therefore falls into the 
“Performance & Accountability” category. Switchboard has networked all of the doctors in Ghana 
and Liberia into closed user groups and is building the largest network of health workers in 
Tanzania. Switchboard’s financing model has been supported by initial, short-term funding from 
donors, but the organization is moving towards commercial sustainability through private-sector and 
end-user revenues.  
 Simple model with well-distributed “gives” and “gets”:  Switchboard has a simple value chain 
model with relatively few players.  Each player has an incentive to participate. 
 Careful MNO engagement: There is a strong 
commercial incentive for the MNO. In this 
“[Designing for scale] is the most central 
model, health workers are also the economic 
piece of our mission. You have to design for 
buyer. As nurses, doctors and community 
data collection and analysis up front. We 
health workers join the closed health worker 
structure our initial agreements with MNOs 
network and get free calls and texts to other 
and the Ministries of Health to include 
health workers, they also pay service fees for 
provisions for data collection and analysis. 
calls to family and friends outside of the 
It is a lot more difficult to get permission 
network.  The MNO therefore benefits 
once things are underway and it is critical 
from these additional revenues generated, 
to our own internal monitoring and 
reduced churn rates, and a network that may 
evaluation efforts to have access to this 
facilitate the delivery of future services.  
information.” 
 Capturing a high-value segment:  Switchboard is — Eric Woods 
CEO of Switchboard 
not going after the masses of patients in the 
health ecosystem; rather they pursuing a 
high-value segment that includes doctors and health workers.  
 Economic buyer with comparative net utility: Health workers and doctors get value (they get 
free calls and texts with other health workers) and they have the ability to pay. 
 Using data analysis to evaluate financial and social impact: Switchboard uses big data 
analytics to help build its business case.  For instance, they know the value of every 
doctor to the MNO.   
  
Sustainable Financing for Mobile Health (mHealth):  
25 Options and opportunities for mHealth financial models in low and middle-income 
countries 
 © 2013 
Success Indications 
 In Ghana and Liberia: 4 million calls have been made between health workers since 
2008. Separately, those same health workers have made paid calls to friends and 
family who are not practitioners that generated $1.5 million in revenue. 
  In Tanzania, Switchboard will help create the largest network of health workers in 
low and middle-income countries with 9,000 practitioners. 
Figure G, below, provides a graphical overview of the Switchboard value chain analysis. 
Figure G:  Value Chain Analysis – Switchboard TM 
Funders 
(Individual & in-
kind donors, Switchboard MoH MNO Health Worker
Google. Seeking (nonprofit)
grants
• Solution, technical skills 
• Startup and expansion and tools • Access to health worker • Free calls and text 
“Give” funding • Connection & within closed 
• $ for calls to family and 
• In-kind donations (e.g., negotiation support registries nationwide health- friends (outside of 
medical equipment) with MNO • Negotiation with MNOs worker network network)
• Verify health workers
• Revenues ($millions) 
• Network that enables • Money savings - Access • Technology test case • Improved info sharing 
“Get” • Impact (e.g., Capacity- • Impact potential, story between health workers other services (e.g., 
to “Nationwide support 
• Data mPesa) network”: free calls and building) (esp. urban and rural) • Reduced churn text to other health 
• CSR & Gov’t relations workers
• Capturing a high-value 
economic-buyer 
Critical Success segment • Careful government • Careful MNO • Economic buyer with 
Factor (CSF) • Using data to evaluate 
engagement (risk engagement (risk comparative net utility
financial and social factor) factor)
impact
Channel          Funders Project Implementers         End User Economic Buyer          Component Providers Content TM of Vital Wave Consulting  
 
 
  
Sustainable Financing for Mobile Health (mHealth):  
26 Options and opportunities for mHealth financial models in low and middle-income 
countries 
 © 2013 
QUALITY MONITORING CASE STUDY: Sproxil 
Quality Monitoring: SMS Drug Verification Service 
Sproxil is an SMS drug verification service, falling under the “Quality Monitoring” category. Sproxil 
enables end users to scratch off a one-time-use code on drug packages and text the code to verify 
the drug’s authenticity. In Sproxil’s model, the economic buyers – pharmaceutical manufacturers and 
distributors – have a high pain point for counterfeit drugs, and they benefit from supply chain 
visibility and sales recovery from reduced counterfeits. There is a strong comparative net utility for 
the economic buyers because Sproxil aggregates across multiple pharmaceutical clients, making the 
service cheaper than it would be if each company did it themselves. Sproxil is sustained by the 
revenues generated from its drug authentication services, but the organization is expanding its 
services to include market intelligence or advisory consulting. 
Critical success factors for Sproxil include:  
 Simple model: Sproxil has less need for complex partnerships or getting players to 
perform activities outside of core competencies.  
 Engages economic buyer with a high pain point (pharma): Sproxil engages pharmaceutical 
firms, which lose significant revenues due to counterfeit drugs and have a willingness 
and ability to pay for the solution.  
 Comparative net utility for the economic buyer: Sproxil aggregates across multiple 
pharmaceutical clients, making it cheaper than the alternative of doing it themselves. 
 Careful government engagement: In the countries in which Sproxil operates, governments 
are endorsing the service due to their recognition of the problems posed by 
counterfeit drugs.  
 Careful MNO engagement: MNOs do not have to engage outside their core activities, 
yet they still gain revenues from 
incremental SMS transmission.  “In five years I do not want to be talking to 
you about counterfeit drugs.  I want to talk 
 Service diversification and flexible model for 
to you about our data.” 
ongoing sustainability: The current focus is on 
— Ashifi Gogo 
anti-counterfeiting, but the organization is CEO of Sproxil 
moving towards monetizing the data 
obtained from use of its service. 
Success Indications 
 Geographic expansion: Sproxil has a presence in India, Nigeria, East Africa and 
Ghana. 
Sustainable Financing for Mobile Health (mHealth):  
27 Options and opportunities for mHealth financial models in low and middle-income 
countries 
 © 2013 
 Received early-stage equity injection of $1.8 million from Acumen. 
 One distributor saw a ROI of 100% in 3 months. 
 Ads increased sales by up to 10% in 3 months. 
 Now working with GlaxoSmithKline to protect Ampclox across Africa. 
Figure H provides a graphical overview of the Sproxil value chain analysis. 
Figure H:  Value Chain Analysis – Sproxil TM 
Funders Pharma –
(e.g., Mfr & 
Sproxil Gov’t 
Acumen) Distributors 
(social MNO Consumer
(BIOFEM) enterprise) 
(NAFDAC)
• Fees for drug 
authentication • Solution 
“Give” • Venture funding services, market • Solution, technical endorsement and 
• $ for sending SMS 
intelligence, or skills and tools acts as data 
to verify drug 
authenticity
advisory consulting clearinghouse
• Supply chain 
visibility and sales 
recovery from • Fees for drug 
• Repayment reduced authentication 
• Cost reductions in 
“Get” counterfeits services, market drug supply chain
• Revenues for • Safer drugs
• Social returns • Supply chain intelligence, or • ID of counterfeit 
incremental SMS 
transmission • Peace of mind
advisory advisory consulting incidences
• Local market data
• CSR/Brand value
Critical • High pain point and willingness and • Simple model • Careful government • Careful MNO 
Success ability to pay • Service engagement (risk 
• High comparative diversification
engagement (risk 
factor) factor)Factor (CSF) net utility
Channel          Funders Project Implementers         End User Economic Buyer          Component Providers Content TM of Vital Wave Consulting  
  
Sustainable Financing for Mobile Health (mHealth):  
28 Options and opportunities for mHealth financial models in low and middle-income 
countries 
 © 2013 
SUPPLY CHAIN AWARENESS CASE STUDY: SMS for Life  
Supply Chain Awareness: Essential Medicine Stock-level Tracking 
SMS for Life is a “Supply Chain Awareness” service that employs SMS messaging between the 
health facilities that dispense anti-malarials (artemisinin-based combination therapies, ACTs and 
quinine injectable) and district managers who are responsible for medicine availability in their 
districts to prevent medicine shortfalls or stock-outs.  Though private-sector players (e.g., Vodafone, 
Novartis) are partners, the end goal is to achieve a model driven by government ownership, 
including funding, at the national level. In the SMS for Life model, governments are the necessary 
economic buyer. Governments are required stakeholders to provide funding and staff to support the 
project, and in return receive stock-information that results in better data on drug usage for 
evaluating health outcomes and forecasting drug use to improve access to essential medicines and 
avoidance of stock-outs at the point of care. As the program has expanded from Tanzania to other 
countries, its implementers have recognized the critical nature of government involvement and 
adapted the scale up model accordingly in new geographies.  
Key lessons for SMS for Life include:  
 Economic buyer must commit resources (have willingness and ability to pay): This model 
demonstrates the importance of having the economic buyer on board and 
committed beyond an initial funding period.  Despite funding from the development 
community (e.g., NORAD, Malaria No More) and the private sector (e.g., Novartis, 
Vodacom, Vodafone), this project must be sustained 
over the long term by governments (Ministries of 
“If your system is becoming part 
Health, National Malaria Control Programs) as the 
of the national health system, 
economic buyer. If the government as the system 
you have to involve the 
and data owner decides not to participate the entire 
government and obtain their 
system will stop working. As a result, best practice 
commitment. It is important to 
dictates the need to secure financial contribution 
make sure that they contribute 
from the government as part of the scale up process. 
financial resources of their own 
  Cross-sector Engagement: The initial SMS for Life to scale up.” 
project team was an efficient partnership that — Rene Ziegler 
SMS for Life Project Manager, 
brought together requisite skills from a number of Novartis 
different stakeholders – IT and process knowledge 
from Novartis, a communications expert from Vodafone, a mapping person from 
Google, and a project manager from IBM. However, government is and will remain 
the single most important player, which the project cannot proceed without. 
  
Sustainable Financing for Mobile Health (mHealth):  
29 Options and opportunities for mHealth financial models in low and middle-income 
countries 
 © 2013 
Success Indications 
 The initial six-month pilot program in Tanzania saw stock-outs reduced from 79% to less 
than 26%; at the beginning of the pilot, 26% of the facilities had no dose form of  ACT, 
and by the end this figure had been cut to less than 1%. 
 In Ghana, following a successful pilot in six districts, planning is underway with the Ghana 
Health Service for a full country scale-up. Financial contribution from the government as 
an economic buyer is a prerequisite to move forward. 
 In Kenya, following another successful pilot, planning is underway with the Division of 
Malaria Control for a full country scale-up. Financial contribution from the government as 
an economic buyer is a prerequisite to move forward. 
 In Cameroon, planning is also underway for a full country scale up of malaria medicine 
tracking in addition to collecting patient surveillance data on the use of RDTs. Financial 
contribution from the government as an economic buyer is a prerequisite to move forward. 
Figure I provides a graphical overview of the SMS for Life value chain analysis. 
Figure I:  Value Chain Analysis – SMS for Life TM 
System 
Government Vendor (e.g., SMS for Life MNO
Donors Health (National Vodafone, Project Team NGOs (e.g., MTN, 
Malaria Control GreenMash, Workers(Sponsored by Vodafone)
Program) Minoxsys) Novartis)
•Pilot/scale-up •Staff/Project •Coordinate, •Training •Network to transmit •Inputs on  stock “Give” funding (short- Management •System facilitate, prepare •Scale up SMS messages levels and disease term) •Financial Commitment training materials •Data at favorable rate surveillance
•Stock information •Consistent drug 
• Opportunity for supply
•Success story intervention •Reputation •Opportunity to 
“Get” •Achievement •Better quantification •Payment for the and forecasting  of system provided •CSR/PR value •Payment for •CSR/brand value
treat patients 
against mission according to best drug use training services practices
•Improved access to •Improved health 
essential medicines outcomes
Critical •Financially viable 
•Government ownership arrangement
Success and commitment •Flexibility, speed, •Careful MNO 
Factor (human and financial security, innovation management (risk 
resources) (risk factor) factor)
(CSF)
Channel          Funders Project Implementers         End User Economic Buyer          Component Providers Content TM of Vital Wave Consulting  
 
  
Sustainable Financing for Mobile Health (mHealth):  
30 Options and opportunities for mHealth financial models in low and middle-income 
countries 
 © 2013 
FINANCIAL BARRIERS CASE STUDY: Changamka 
Financial Barriers: Savings, Voucher and Microinsurance programs 
Changamka is a service that makes health care more affordable; it thus fits in the “Financial 
Barriers” category. The service is evolving to include three components: 1) a savings program for in-
patient and out-patient services for maternal health; 2) a voucher program that assists users (poor 
women) with accessing and using government subsidies for health care; and 3) microinsurance. 
Changamka intends to be financially sustained through direct and indirect funding sources (via 
government subsidies for poor women) and end-user revenues. 
The Changamka case illustrates how models can be modified to increase net utility across the value 
chain. In its initial model, the end users were the sole economic buyer, providing savings for 
outpatient health care.  However, Changamka found that the cost of health care is not predictable, 
adverse selection is a challenge to profitability (i.e., those that opt in are those that need care the 
most), and that its savings product was not sufficient for in-patient treatments.  
As a result, Changamka is expanding the Health Savings offering to include in-patient services. The 
organization also recognized that they needed to offer insurance at scale to overcome adverse 
selection issues and bring value for the amount of 
money people were saving. After looking at several “We had to involve Safaricom because 
models and the challenges to each (lack of they have the largest database of 
understanding, affordability, access), they decided subscribers and they have mobile money 
to provide insurance in small pieces.  In addition, [mobile money + mobile health = mobile 
Changamka now offers Microinsurance, insurance] and they are also in pain from 
promoted on and linked to the M-PESA platform churn rates and they need value added 
via partnership with Safaricom, which users can services (VAS) – so we thought this was a 
purchase up front or over time with their health way to give them the stickiness they 
savings.  They also found, after segmenting the require.” 
market, that there are simply some users who — Sam Agutu 
cannot afford to save for their needed care, and CEO of Changamka 
these people would benefit from unused government health subsidies.  Changamka now offers a 
Voucher Program which provides a channel for governments to deliver subsidies to those who 
need them.  Expanding offerings and changing roles for value chain players has altered the balance 
of the gives and gets.   
Critical Success Factors for Changamka include:  
 Service diversification and flexible model for ongoing sustainability: Insurance companies, 
whose role previously was to manage the funds and pay providers, now not only 
manage the funds, but they also manage savings.  As soon as health savings reach a 
threshold, they are converted to premiums, bringing income for the insurance 
company.  
Sustainable Financing for Mobile Health (mHealth):  
31 Options and opportunities for mHealth financial models in low and middle-income 
countries 
 © 2013 
 Multiple economic buyers: Segmenting users in order to shift the economic buyer from 
users to donors, in cases where users do not have the ability to pay. Where there is a 
weaker commercial value proposition Changamka is using mobile technology to 
replace paper vouchers. Community Health Workers identify eligible women and 
assign them a registration number by phone. Women can use the number on their 
phones to redeem vouchers at various health facilities. Donor funding is used to pay 
the provider. Governments now get a channel for subsidies to reach end users. 
 Achieves economies of scale through strategic partnership with MNO: The MNO (Safaricom) – 
who always provided the subscriber and mobile money database, as well as the 
agent/distributor network – gets a needed value added service (VAS) to combat 
churn and additional revenues from the platform sitting on their cloud service. 
Additionally, Changamka gets a platform that will help them to achieve economies of 
scale required for sustainability. 
 Comparative net utility for the economic buyer: End users now have better options for their 
care – including savings and insurance to be applied to in-patient and out-patient 
care, appointments and reminders, education and awareness. 
Figure J provides a graphical overview of the Changamka value chain analysis. 
Figure J:  Value Chain Analysis – Changamka TM 
Changamka Insurance Government Donor Health Providers Community MNO Facilities
(Safaricom) End Users
• Subscriber and 
• Savings, voucher and • Participation in mobile money $ for savings and 
“Give” microinsurance • Manages fund, voucher program, • Pay for users that 
• Payment •
database insurance 
programs pays providers partnership for can’t afford it
processing
• Agent/distributor • Discounts premiumsmicroinsurance network
• Increased public • Needed VAS to 
• Revenue generated by Better health health • Increased health combat churn • Increased patient •
sale of insurance • care through in-“Get” $ via insurance service/facility service usage and • Revenues from 
traffic
premiums and subsidy premiums usage (and, as a care by poorest platform sitting • Reduced admin patient/outpatien
delivery t services and result, better individuals on their cloud costs and faster 
outcomes) service payments
microinsurance
Critical • Careful • Multiple • Achieves • Multiple 
government Economic Buyers economies of Economic Buyers Success 
engagement (risk based on careful scale based on careful 
Factor factor) market • Careful MNO market 
segmentation engagement (risk segmentation(CSF) factor)
Channel          Funders Project Implementers         End User Economic Buyer          Component Providers Content TM of Vital Wave Consulting  
  
Sustainable Financing for Mobile Health (mHealth):  
32 Options and opportunities for mHealth financial models in low and middle-income 
countries 
 © 2013 
SECTION 4: Nigeria Use Case  
As Africa’s most populous country and a nation that bears a heavy disease burden, Nigeria is a focal 
point for efforts to improve primary health care and health outcomes for its citizens. The Nigerian 
Ministry of Health has played a pioneering role in both the work of the Commodities Commission 
and the use of mobile phone-based technologies to improve health outcomes. In October 2012, 
Nigerian President Goodluck Ebele Jonathan, co-leader of the Commodities Commission, launched 
Saving One Million Lives, an ambitious and comprehensive initiative to scale up access to essential 
primary health services and commodities for Nigeria’s women and children.  
In December 2012, the mHealth Alliance announced a new partnership with the Nigerian Federal 
Ministry of Health, GSMA and Intel to leverage mobile computing and telecommunications 
technologies to support the initiative. For these reasons, Nigeria serves as a use case for the 
recommendations of this report. Because this new partnership intends to help mHealth applications 
to reach scale in an immense country, it is especially essential that the best practices and strategies 
that emerge from this report are used to guide implementations; it is equally important that the 
lessons that emerge from efforts in Nigeria inform the ongoing development and refinement of 
sustainable financial models elsewhere in low and middle-income countries.  
Figure K, below, provides an initial overview of current Nigerian mHealth Projects that are in line 
with the Commodities Commission areas of focus and mHealth application categories identified by 
the mHealth Alliance. 
Figure K: Examples of Nigerian Projects by mHealth Application Categories 
Demand & Awareness 
 Etisalat’s Mobile Baby – Monitors the condition of pregnancy, allows pregnant women 
or health extension workers to pay for education material via phone. 
 Abiye Project (Ondo State) – Pregnant women are given mobile phones to monitor their 
progress.  
Performance and Accountability 
 MADEX (Mobile Application Data Exchange) – A device is given to health workers 
around the country.  They use the MADEX application to transmit data from rural 
locations to the central office in the Federal Capital.  For example, a rural health 
worker would report the number of women attended, the number of babies born, 
the number of pregnancy complications, etc. The application was developed for the 
Midwife Service Scheme.  
Sustainable Financing for Mobile Health (mHealth):  
33 Options and opportunities for mHealth financial models in low and middle-income 
countries 
 © 2013 
Quality Monitoring 
 Sproxil: SMS-based system to verify the authenticity of drugs. In 2010, the Nigerian 
government endorsed the use of the Sproxil platform and it has since been used 
widely in Nigeria, attracting media attention in the process. 
Supply Chain Awareness 
 RapidSMS for ITN distribution – Piloted during the first phase of a 70-million 
insecticide-treated nets distribution campaign, RapidSMS was used in Kano state to 
capture and send commodities data from state stores to the Local Government Area 
(LGA) and distribution points. The program used logisticians in 21 selected LGAs 
and 4 pilot LGAs for mobilization and distribution of nets. Distributors who were 
not reporting were able to be identified and contacted immediately to follow up on 
distribution problems. After the successful pilot, the government recommended the 
program for scale up. 
  RapidSMS for polio vaccines tracking – UNICEF Nigeria tested Rapid SMS messaging in 
its current polio eradication initiative, a regional effort covering 19 countries in West 
and Central Africa. Text messages could be used to track and enable a fast response 
to non-compliance and vaccine shortages – both major challenges in the region.  
Financial Barriers  
 SURE-P – Women are tracked through the mobile phone and get reminder 
notifications about their appointment, when they are due for payment, or to follow 
up if they have not come in for antenatal visit. 
 
Mitigating Risk Associated with Economic Buyers – The Use Case of Nigeria 
As discussed throughout this paper, each player in the value chain needs appropriate and long-term 
incentives for an mHealth application to be sustainable.  Of all members of a given value chain, the 
economic buyer is the most critical.  Other levels of the value chain may be reengineered, if 
necessary, in order to secure a sustainable equilibrium.  However, without an economic buyer the 
rest of the value chain cannot be sustained.  Therefore, it is worthwhile to examine the various ways 
in which risks associated with the economic buyers of mHealth can be mitigated.  The evolution and 
proliferation of mHealth implementations in Nigeria provide a use case for such a discussion across 
a variety of mHealth application types.   
In Nigeria, there may be opportunities to entice various players into areas where they are able to 
reap direct or near-direct benefits for participation.  Figure L, below, and the detailed analysis that 
Sustainable Financing for Mobile Health (mHealth):  
34 Options and opportunities for mHealth financial models in low and middle-income 
countries 
 © 2013 
follows, illustrate where there may be opportunities to engage economic buyers across sectors in 
Nigeria.   
Figure L: Economic Buyer Opportunities in Nigeria TM 
Public Non-Profit For-Profit Health Workers Individuals & Households
May be willing to pay if 
Demand & Maternal /child health and mHealth yields better Value to Pharma limited, but other advertisers may have Etisalat Mobile Baby (already Etisalat Mobile Baby (already Awareness polio outcomes than next-best interest supported) supported)alternative
Performance & Pharma for MADEX, Not target audience or 
Accountability MADEX (already supported) Switchboard
Switchboard (open to moving 
into Nigeria) stakeholder that directly benefits from category
Quality Of interest, but may continue Donor community and NGOs Private clinics or pharmacies Affluent may be willing to pay 
Monitoring to let for-profit economic are not likely to become a Sproxil (already supported) may be willing to pay for drug to authenticate drugs and get 
buyers take lead long-term economic buyer.  quality assurance peace of mind
Supply Chain Polio vaccine tracking (already Pharma or other commodities Private clinics may be willing Not target audience or 
Awareness supporting) mfrs for polio vaccine / ITN to pay to reduce stock-outs stakeholder that directly tracking and improve quality of care benefits from category
Sure-P mHealth to extend May be willing to pay if Commercial models  that Private clinics may be Financial 
subsidy or microinsurance mHealth engage insurance sector should interested but are likely 
Commercial models  that 
Barriers
services to poor women yields better outcomes than catering to affluent patients 
engage end users as payers
next-best alternative be evaluated  long-term who don’t need services should be evaluated  long-term
most least
Content TM of Vital Wave Consulting  
Public-sector Participants – The majority of mHealth economic buyers in Nigeria are in the 
government sector (in many cases, the government is also the implementer).  The overarching 
factor influencing Nigerian government financial support of mHealth is that MNCH and polio 
eradication are priorities.  Any service or solution that can help Nigeria to achieve gains in these 
areas is of interest to the government, as a buyer whose primary concern is improvements in 
health outcomes. Therefore, Performance & Accountability, Supply Chain Awareness and 
Financial Barriers present the most opportunity for engagement because they most directly align 
with these aims. Nigerian officials say that the government is willing to support Financial Barriers 
solutions but needs capacity support to carry out programs.  
 Non-profit Participants – Non-profits, including funders, may in some circumstances act as 
economic buyers. As discussed in Section 4, in some instances, funders may determine that 
because of government inability or a chronic lack of resources, they have an interest in becoming 
a long-term economic buyer for a specific mHealth service or solution.  This may result from a 
funder’s interest in a specific disease or health area not supported by other actors. In general, 
funders and NGOs are not likely to become economic buyers in categories where the private or 
public sectors traditionally take the lead. Therefore, funders are more likely to participate as 
economic buyers in projects in the Demand & Awareness and Financial Barriers categories, 
where market forces may be insufficient to bring an application to scale, particularly if these 
investments yield health outcomes (impact) that are better than alternatives. 
Sustainable Financing for Mobile Health (mHealth):  
35 Options and opportunities for mHealth financial models in low and middle-income 
countries 
 © 2013 
For-profit Participants – Private companies are most likely to act as economic buyers in the 
Performance & Accountability, Quality Monitoring and Supply Chain Awareness categories, 
where opportunities and pain points are most salient. For instance, pharmaceutical companies are 
often interested in better access to their target audience (health providers), and as such they may 
be willing to participate in Performance & Accountability solutions that reach health care workers 
(e.g., MADEX, Switchboard) if they are able to provide services or messaging to health care 
workers that will result in improved sales ROI.  Similarly, counterfeit drugs are a pain point for 
pharmaceutical manufacturers and distributors, and this issue has typically been a concern in 
Nigeria. It is therefore rational to expect that these companies will continue to invest in 
implementations in the Quality Monitoring category.  Similarly, the pharmaceutical industry or 
other commodities manufacturers or providers are logical economic buyers for Supply Chain 
Awareness projects where stock-out avoidance may result in increased or more consistent sales 
and improved effectiveness of their products.  Vaccine producers may be willing to participate in 
ongoing polio vaccine stock-out reduction programs in Nigeria, for instance, since these 
programs could have a positive impact on their profitability and their understanding of 
distribution issues. 
Individuals and Households – Individuals and families benefit most from, and are therefore 
likely to be consumers and economic buyers of, Demand & Awareness programs.  For example, 
with Etisalat’s Mobile Baby and MAMA Bangladesh, end users are paying for education material 
via their mobile phones. Solutions related to Financial Barriers may also be of interest to 
individuals and households with some level of disposable income, if there are attractive offerings 
and clear communication of benefits. The poorest individuals will struggle to fully pay for 
services, so models should explore offsetting their costs. Individuals with the means to pay for 
mHealth services can be attracted by new offerings, multiple services or “freemium” models.  
 
UN Commodities Commission Implementation Planning for Nigeria 
As noted in a follow up to the Commission’s report, detailed implementation plans are being 
developed for each participating country, in line with existing national planning efforts. The draft 
implementation plan for Nigeria, released in December 2012, indicates a focus on six essential 
commodities: Misoprostol, Chlorhexidine, Amoxicillin, ORS, Zinc tablets and Family Planning 
commodities.  
The government’s specified commitments correlate to the five major mHealth application areas 
discussed in this report, and each has potential applicability in improving the distribution and 
availability of these identified commodities. Proposed action to develop an evidence-based toolkit to 
assess the impact of financial barriers on access to and use of life-saving commodities could help 
identify the most appropriate service for addressing Financial Barriers. The recommendation to 
focus on approaches that cut across communication channels such as mass media, community-level 
activities and interpersonal communication, as well as utilize emerging ICT approaches like new 
Sustainable Financing for Mobile Health (mHealth):  
36 Options and opportunities for mHealth financial models in low and middle-income 
countries 
 © 2013 
media and social network interventions, could lead to the development and leveraging of cross-
sector platforms to promote Demand & Awareness. In Supply Chain Awareness, an effort to 
develop a plan for strengthening supply chain systems in Nigeria by unifying the existing system into 
a single national service delivery distribution system, which will work both with government 
authorities and the private sector, could nurture the growth of solutions that could be used to track 
the distribution of six previously uncoordinated commodities. The creation of an evidence-
based guide on supply- and commodity-related checklists and other support systems to promote and 
monitor the use of clinical guidelines by public and private providers could foster the adaptation and 
growth of a new or existing checklist-based solution for improving workers’ Performance & 
Accountability. In Quality Monitoring, promoting certification of quality products through 
innovative approaches that better identify the quality risks, and help to define the levels of quality 
that must be enforced by manufacturers, might compel pharmaceutical companies to participate in 
programs that affect the market for their own drugs and services.  
Many of the steps described above identify the innovative use of ICT as a key component. This 
suggests that the government, with support from actors in the private sector and the NGO 
communities, could benefit from performing a robust value chain analysis on the commodities 
themselves. Such an in-depth assessment may itself point to the types of solutions that will best help 
the country reach its goals in these six commodities, with potential future implications for replicating 
these services.  
 
 
 
 
  
Sustainable Financing for Mobile Health (mHealth):  
37 Options and opportunities for mHealth financial models in low and middle-income 
countries 
 © 2013 
SECTION 5: Strategies for mHealth Financial Sustainability  
Achieving financial sustainability is characterized by the transition from operational dependence on 
funding to reliance on economic buyers.  This requires organizations or individuals who are motivated to 
purchase the mHealth product or service, and the design of a value chain with members who have 
incentives to remain part of the delivery process. Importantly, achieving financial sustainability is not 
a one-time event.  It requires proactive monitoring and rebalancing of the value chain.  As 
established in Section 2 and reinforced in Section 3, value chain members and market conditions are 
highly subject to change. Therefore, long-term financial sustainability is not only about finding the 
right model; it is also about establishing a process of regularly evaluating the “gives” and the “gets” 
along the value chain to ensure comparative net utility for all essential contributors.  As the market 
evolves, financial models or the value chain members themselves will almost certainly evolve, as 
well.  Managing this process requires a particular discipline and skill set.   
As seen in the case studies of this report, there are a number of strategies for both mHealth project 
implementers and funders who seek financial sustainability.  Additionally, there are key questions to 
address in order to establish and maintain a value chain that is compelling enough to attract the right 
economic buyers.  These questions include: 
 Does the application address a long-term challenge or pain point of the targeted 
economic buyer?   
 Does the economic buyer have the long-term resources to pay for the services 
provided? 
 Has more than one group of economic buyers been identified and engaged?  
 Are alternative partners available at each level of the value chain? Are there any 
“single points of failure” in the value chain?  
 Has the model been simplified as much as possible to provide the “minimum viable 
solution”? 
 Can the services offered through the mHealth solution be readily diversified in a later 
phase? 
 Is there a favorable competitive environment for the solution? Is the solution the 
best available solution (mobile or otherwise) in the intended market? 
A negative response to any of these questions represents a particular risk to the long-term viability 
and sustainability of the solution.  In such a case, the implementer and its partners would benefit 
from specific and directed action to address these risks.  Best practices for addressing these 
questions and risk factors include: 
Sustainable Financing for Mobile Health (mHealth):  
38 Options and opportunities for mHealth financial models in low and middle-income 
countries 
 © 2013 
 Development and application of ongoing, specific value chain analyses that 
provide detailed quantitative and qualitative information on each stakeholder. 
Regular analyses reveal changing perceptions of “gives” and “gets” due to regulatory 
changes, competition from new entrants to the market, the spread of new enabling 
technologies, falling prices and other factors. Crucially, these analyses also allow 
value chain players to justify their long-term participation in projects to their own 
constituents, whether they are voters, shareholders or customers.  
 Development of close and communicative relationships with every member of 
the value chain. This allows implementers to anticipate changing incentives and the 
resulting need to adapt the value chain over time, and provides implementers with a 
broader view of the market through the eyes of the value chain members. These 
relationships also allow implementers to understand when the interests of value 
chain members, which may be aligned at early stages of an implementation, begin to 
diverge as a program or solution moves toward larger scale.  
 Early, open discussion between implementers and funders about the areas of 
high risk in the value chain and specific barriers to long-term financial 
sustainability. Both implementers and funders benefit from specific plans for 
mitigating risks and addressing challenges. Changes to political environments, health 
system priorities or market dynamics can be disruptive but must be accommodated if 
a solution is to remain relevant. Constructing value chains that can respond to 
external shocks is necessary to obtain long-term commitments and ensure solution 
viability. 
 Development of alternative solutions that broaden the value chain when 
financial sustainability remains elusive.  Looking for ways to broaden the value 
chain can offer a solution when value chain analyses result in the conclusion that 
members are unlikely to sustain a program. mHealth solutions that operate on or 
leverage broader mobile service platforms (as Changamka does with M-PESA) or 
existing channels may alter the cost and benefit equation enough to improve the 
prospects for financial sustainability. 
  
Sustainable Financing for Mobile Health (mHealth):  
39 Options and opportunities for mHealth financial models in low and middle-income 
countries 
 © 2013 
Conclusion  
The field of mHealth is entering a new stage. While early phases have been marked by necessary 
experimentation, 2013 will see focused matriculation to sustainable financing models that can 
support these solutions in the long-term. Rigorous analysis of the incentive structures and needs of a 
variety of ecosystem partners must be evaluated along the value chain for each individual mHealth 
solution. Yet the following holds true for all implementations: if each player in a given value chain 
believes that they are getting more value out of the exchange than they put in, and what they get is 
greater than what they could get from investing their resources elsewhere, then the financial model is 
sustainable. As noted in Section 5, reaching a state of sustainability is not a one-time achievement.  It 
is a state that can only be maintained through a process of ongoing monitoring and evolution.  The 
following recommendations, explored in greater detail in Section 5, can be used to guide funders, 
economic buyers and implementers – at various stages in the solution maturity lifecycle – to achieve 
financial sustainability.  
 During the “development phase” of the solution lifecycle, funders and 
implementers lay the building blocks for achieving financial sustainability. 
Generally, all mHealth applications will require “seed” funding from donors or 
funders to support the pilot phase of an intervention. It is incumbent upon these 
funders to conduct a due-diligence process to ensure that the solution creates 
incentives for economic buyers to engage and will be differentiated in a competitive 
environment. For-profit organizations are most likely to play in value chains where 
they can generate incremental sales or revenues, while non-profit, public-sector and 
philanthropic entities will be motivated to engage where they can achieve their 
missions. However, all economic buyers – regardless of sector affiliation – will 
require implementers to demonstrate the returns that they are receiving in exchange 
for their investment. Therefore, during the development phase, funders can support 
the long-term financial sustainability of an mHealth solution by ensuring that plans 
and operational structures are in place for the capacity building and ongoing 
performance management that will be required to demonstrate data-backed value to 
economic buyers in the long-term. 
 Throughout the “introduction and growth stages” of the solution lifecycle, 
the economic buyer (or payer) supersedes the funder. Nearly all mHealth 
applications will require “gap” funding as part of the efforts to take a given 
intervention from a pilot phase to ongoing national-level “scale”. In most cases, 
“gap” funding will be required from donors, whereas “scale” funding will often be 
provided – in part or in whole – by the economic buyer. This crossover marks the 
most critical timeframe for any solution seeking to attain financial sustainability. 
During this formative scale-up process, funders and implementers are wise to ensure 
that economic buyers are, indeed, buying.  Special consideration must also be given 
to national governments during this time, because they are considered a “single point 
Sustainable Financing for Mobile Health (mHealth):  
40 Options and opportunities for mHealth financial models in low and middle-income 
countries 
 © 2013 
of failure” in any model (given that there are no available substitutes if the 
government declines to participate). In addition, implementers must be able to 
demonstrate to MNOs that the solution will have a positive, tangible and long-term 
impact on their revenues. Adeptly communicating the “get” (forms of value) for 
each economic buyer, based on ongoing M&E and data-backed performance 
management programs established in the development phase, is critical to ensuring 
the successful transition from funding to the ongoing engagement of economic 
buyers.  
 For the duration of the “maturity stage” of the solution lifecycle, 
implementers must be able to differentiate their products and services in the 
marketplace as well as measure and expertly communicate the value provided 
to economic buyers. On an ongoing basis, implementers will need to justify the 
continued involvement of for-profit economic buyers through data-backed analyses 
that help to illustrate the financial ROI. Non-profits, public-sector and philanthropic 
entities will require M&E that shows social or operational returns (including cost-
effectiveness calculations) to continue their investments. All economic buyers will 
require that mHealth solutions remain differentiated in the marketplace in order to 
sustain their involvement in the long term. Implementers that received well-
conceived support during the development phase will be able to draw upon trusted 
operational structures that support these core objectives. 
Transitioning from donor funding to the ongoing engagement of an economic buyer (or payer) 
requires organizations or individuals that have long-term incentives to purchase the mHealth 
product or service. Designing a value chain with members who are motivated to remain part 
of the delivery process on an ongoing basis is not a one-time event and requires proactive 
monitoring and rebalancing of the value chain to ensure long-term sustainability.  
Further investigation in the following areas would serve to support ongoing efforts by governments, 
industry, NGOs, academia and the many private philanthropies and bi-laterals that have catalyzed 
mHealth to achieve sustainable financing models for mHealth investments:  
 Identification of categories, types of evidence and toolkits that help quantify the true 
and overall utility of mHealth applications to various economic buyers. 
 Strategies for precision funding for various types of funders along the value chains of 
different mHealth applications. 
 Definition of repeatable, simplified methods of establishing and maintaining the 
sustainability of mHealth financial models over time. 
 Deeper analysis on the various control points in the value chain for the various 
mHealth application areas. 
Sustainable Financing for Mobile Health (mHealth):  
41 Options and opportunities for mHealth financial models in low and middle-income 
countries 
 © 2013 
 
 
  
1800 Massachusetts Ave., NW 555 Bryant St. #226  
Suite 400 Palo Alto, CA 94301-1704 
Washington, DC 20036 (650) 964-1316 
(202) 887-9040 vitalwave.com 
mhealthalliance.org 
Sustainable Financing for Mobile Health (mHealth):  
42 Options and opportunities for mHealth financial models in low and middle-income 
countries 
 © 2013 
