mHEALTH  
COMPENDIUM
SPECIAL EDITION 2016: 
REACHING SCALE
May 2016 
This publication was produced for review by 
the United States Agency for International 
Development. It was prepared by the 
African Strategies for Health (ASH) project 
implemented by Management Sciences 
for Health (MSH).
Cover photo, Nigerian mother and child, by Gwenn Dubourthoumie.
mHEALTH COMPENDIUM
SPECIAL EDITION 2016: 
REACHING SCALE
The authors’ views expressed in this publication do not 
necessarily reflect the views of the United States Agency for 
International Development or the United States Government.
The African Strategies for Health (ASH) project is a five-year project funded by 
the United Stated Agency for International Development (USAID) and imple-
mented by Management Sciences for Health (MSH). ASH works to improve the 
health status of populations across Africa through identifying and advocating for 
best practices, enhancing technical capacity, and engaging African regional insti-
tutions to address health issues in a sustainable manner. ASH provides informa-
tion on trends and developments in the continent to USAID and other develop-
ment partners to enhance decision-making regarding investments in health. 
May 2016
This document was submitted by the African Strategies for Health project 
to the United States Agency for International Development under 
USAID Contract No. AID-OAA-C-II-0016. 
Recommended Citation: Sherri Haas. May 2016. mHealth Compendium, Spe-
cial Edition 2016: Reaching Scale. Arlington, VA: African Strategies for Health, 
Management Sciences for Health. 
Additional information can be obtained from:
African Strategies for Health
Management Sciences for Health
4301 N Fairfax Drive, Arlington, VA 22203
www.africanstrategies4health.org  
as4h-info@as4h.org
Photo Credits: The photographs in this document are used for illustrative 
purposes only; they do not imply any particular health status, attitudes, 
behaviors, or actions on the part of any person who appears in the photographs. 
Acknowledgements
This compendium was produced by the African Strategies We extend our thanks to USAID and, in particular, Ishrat for Health (ASH) project in collaboration with the Z. Husain from USAID’s Africa Bureau, as well as Peggy 
US Agency for International Development’s Africa Bureau D’Adamo from the Global Health Bureau, for their support 
(USAID/AFR). Funded by USAID/AFR, the overall and inputs. 
objective of ASH is to contribute to improving the health Our gratitude goes to the organizations and individuals 
status of populations across Africa through identification of who took the time to share their knowledge and experiences 
and advocacy for best practices, enhancing technical capacity, by contributing the mHealth program profiles featured 
and engaging African regional institutions to address health in this report. They are pioneers in creative and useful 
issues in a sustainable manner. ASH provides information mHealth applications that are designed to improve health 
on trends and developments across the continent to USAID systems and achieve health goals. We realize that there are 
and other development partners to enhance decision-making many more people worldwide who are actively involved in 
regarding investments in health. mobile applications for health. While time and budgetary 
Sherri Haas, Sarah Konopka, JoAnn Paradis, Stephanie constraints did not permit a more extensive review, we would 
Rotolo, and Cindy Shiner contributed to the production of like to acknowledge them for their own contributions to the 
this document. Report design was by Erin Dowling Design. field.
mHEALTH COMPENDIUM  SPECIAL EDITION 2016  n  v

Acronyms
AEFI  adverse events following immunization ITU  International Telecommunication Union
API  application programming interface IVR  interactive voice response
ASH  African Strategies for Health JICA  Japan International Cooperation Agency
BCC  behavior change communication JSI  John Snow International, Inc.
BTRC  Bangladesh Telecommunications Regulatory KEMRI  Kenya Medical Research Institute
Commission mACM  Mobile Alert Communication Management
CBMNH  community-based maternal and neonatal MAMA  Mobile Alliance Maternal Action
health
MCH  maternal and child health
CDC  U.S. Centers for Disease Control and 
Prevention MCTS  Maternal and Child Tracking System
CHW  community health worker MNCH  maternal, newborn, and child health
CHMI  Center for Health Market Innovation MNO  mobile network operator
CSR  corporate social responsibility MOH  Ministry of Health
DFID  UK Department for International MOHFW  Ministry of Health and Family Welfare
Development MOTECH  Mobile Technology for Community Health
DHIS2  District Health Information Software 2 MSH  Management Sciences for Health
DOH  Department of Health NAC  National AIDS Council
DPAT  district product availability team NGO  non-governmental organization
DSRU  Disease Surveillance and Response Unit NHM  National Health Mission
EM  enhance management NPAT  national product availability team
EPT  efficient product transport OGAC  Office of the U.S. Global AIDS Coordinator
FAQ  frequency asked questions PBF  performance-based financing
FHIR  Fast Healthcare Interoperability Resources PRSP  premium rate service provider
HC  health center RMNCH+ A reproductive, maternal, newborn, child and 
HIP  high-impact practice adolescent health
HIS  health information system S4CCM  Supply Chains for Community Case Management Project
HISP  Health Information Systems Program - SA
SDG  Sustainable Development Goal
HSA  health surveillance assistant 
SMS  short message service
HRIO  health records information officer
SOP  standard operating procedure
HRIS  human resources information system
TOT  training of trainers
iCCM  integrated community case management
USAID  United States Agency for International 
ICT  information and communication technologies Development
IEC  information, education, and communication USAID/AFR  United States Agency for International 
ICT4D  information and communication technologies Development’s Africa Bureau
for development USSD  unstructured supplementary service data
IDSR  integrated disease surveillance and response WASH  water, sanitation, and hygiene
IHSSP  Integrated Health Systems Strengthening WHO  World Health Organization
Project
IMCI  integrated management of childhood illnesses
IT  information technology
mHEALTH COMPENDIUM  SPECIAL EDITION 2016  n  vii
Photo by mHBB
Table of Contents
EXECUTIVE SUMMARY  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  . 1
INTRODUCTION .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  . 2
FEATURED CASES  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  . 11
Airtel Insurance  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  . 12
Aponjon  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .18
cStock .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  . 24
iCCM  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .30
Kilkari, Mobile Academy, & Mobile Kunji  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  . 36
mHERO  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .42
Mom Connect  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  . 48
mSOS  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .54
RapidSMS Rwanda  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  . 62
U-Report  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .68
ANNEX  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .A:1
NOTE:
This special volume of the mHealth compendium features ten scale-up cases, offering project 
descriptions, publication references, and contact information for making further inquiries. 
When using in a PDF format, resources and contacts can be accessed with a simple click on the 
email or website address appearing in both text and references.
Afghanistan, photo by MPaisa
Executive Summary
MHealth is the use of mobile and wireless technologies to important results or evaluation findings; lessons learned; and support the achievement of health objectives. The rapid conclusion. In addition, each case study includes a summary 
growth in access to mobile phones and networks in Africa of the geographic coverage, implementation partners, donor 
has created opportunities for health programs and systems to name(s) and contact(s), as well as contact information for the 
harness these technologies to positively impact the health of implementing partner. 
Africans. mHealth programs have the potential to contribute As the mHealth landscape has evolved and more programs 
to innovative solutions to health system challenges including: and countries look to establish scaled, sustainable programs 
(1) disparities in access to health services; (2) inadequacies of utilizing digital technology, the need for in-depth profiles of 
health infrastructure; (3) limited human resources for health; mHealth interventions or programs which have successful-
(4) cost to the individual of accessing health services; and (5) ly grown in scale has increased. This Special Edition 2016: 
challenges in health financing. Reaching Scale was developed to provide greater detail on the 
The United States Agency for International Development’s development and experience of mHealth programs which 
Africa Bureau project, African Strategies for Health (ASH) have successfully grown in scale. The ten profiles featured 
has produced five volumes of the mHealth Compendium to in this volume were submitted by the programs. They were 
help USAID missions, governments, and health implement- selected following a survey of current intervention status sent 
ing organizations access information on a range of mHealth to previously featured programs, with an intention to select a 
example programs. mHealth Compendium Volumes 1-5 range of intervention types, locations, and partner organiza-
document over 150 case studies of mHealth programs and tions. This list is not exhaustive of scaled mHealth programs.
applications being implemented mainly throughout Africa, Profiles of programs featured in the mHealth compendiums 
but also in other regions of the world. The compendium vol- can also be accessed on ASH’s online mHealth Database. The 
umes offer project descriptions, publication references, and database facilitates a quick and targeted search for applications 
contact information for making further inquiries. based on health area, application type, and location. The com-
mHealth Compendiums Volumes 1–5 include two-page case pendiums, database, and additional digital health resources 
studies of current or closed mHealth applications or pro- can be downloaded at www.africanstrategies4health.org.
grams with an introduction to the health area or problem; 
a description of the mHealth intervention; a snapshot of 
mHEALTH COMPENDIUM  SPECIAL EDITION 2016  n  1
INTRODUCTION Photo by Aponjon

What is mHealth? 
MHealth is the use of mobile and wireless technolo- reminders, community mobilization and health promotion, gies to support the achievement of health objectives. treatment compliance, mobile patient records, information 
mHealth can be utilized for a wide variety of purposes, access, patient monitoring, health surveys and data collec-
including health promotion and disease prevention, health tion, surveillance, health awareness-raising, and decision-sup-
care delivery, training and supervision, electronic payments, port systems. The five volumes of the mHealth Compendium 
and information systems. A 2009 global survey conducted feature mHealth case studies representing each of these 14 
by the World Health Organization (WHO) in 114 member categories. For the purposes of this compendium mHealth 
states found that 83 percent of them were implementing includes mobile phones, personal digital assistants (PDAs), 
mHealth services that fell into 14 distinct categories: health tablets, mobile applications, and wireless medical devices.  
call centers, emergency toll-free telephone services, managing 
emergencies and disasters, mobile telemedicine, appointment 
4  n  INTRODUCTION
Photo by David Rochkind, USAID
The Rapidly Evolving mHealth Landscape
The mHealth landscape is consistently and increasingly Standards for mHealthevolving, growing out of the early stages of isolated and 
often short-lived pilots to a focus on scale, sustainability, 
interoperability, and integration of mHealth and eHealth One of the most promising aspects of mHealth is its potential 
interventions. According to GSMA’s Mobile Economy 2016 for enhancing the smart integration of health services and the 
report, there are over 7.6 billion mobile connections world- continuity of care across provider, place, and time by making 
wide, representing 4.7 billion unique subscribers.  With the information available at the right place and the right time. 
rapid growth of mobile technology access, many believe that Strengthening patient management and health systems in 
mHealth has the potential to transform the face of health this fashion can only be achieved if the various mHealth and 
service delivery across the globe by offering new means of health information system (HIS) platforms have sufficient 
when, where, how, and by whom health services are provided common ground to reliably exchange messages in a way that 
and accessed. minimizes errors and misunderstandings. Known as interop-erability, this ability of diverse systems and organizations 
Evidence for mHealth to communicate and work together (interoperate) requires the establishment of and adherence to standards. Much like 
speaking a common language enables communication, using 
Although still limited, the amount of evidence around the common standards for how data is structured and exchanged 
effectiveness or efficacy of mHealth interventions is increas- enables mHealth platforms and HIS to share data.
ing. In recent years, there has been a significant upsurge in 
mHealth-focused health outcomes research—including sev- mHealth interventions are significantly more powerful when 
eral studies published in the Lancet—and reviews that aimed health sector actors make their information systems interop-
to synthesize the evidence. Additionally, the mHealthevi- erable. Through close cooperation, governments, donors, and 
dence.org website, which was developed by the Knowledge private health care providers can achieve interoperability by 
for Health (K4Health) project as a resource for cataloging, applying the same standards. These actions will maximize 
categorizing, and grading mHealth evidence, currently con- the power of mHealth as a tool for coordinating individual, 
1,2
tains more than 7,500 sources from peer- patient-level services and public health programs.
reviewed and grey literature.       
mHEALTH COMPENDIUM  SPECIAL EDITION 2016  n  5
Aponjon
Principles for Digital Development
The following set of principles are intended to serve as 3.  Design for Scale“living” guidelines to help development practitioners 
n Design for scale from the start, and assess and mitigate 
across sectors integrate established best practices in the use of dependencies that might limit ability to scale
information and communication technologies. The Princi-
ples for Digital Development were written by and for inter- n Employ a “systems” approach to design, considering 
national development donors, multilateral organizations, and implications of design beyond an immediate project
implementing partners to capture the most important lessons n Be replicable and customizable in other countries  
learned in the implementation of information and commu- and contexts
nications technology for development (ICT4D) projects, and 
n Demonstrate impact before scaling a solution
are freely available for use by all.  
n Analyze all technology choices through the lens of 
These principles serve as a set of guidelines that are meant national and regional scale 
to inform, but not dictate, the design and implementation 
of technology-enabled development programs. They have n Factor in partnerships from the beginning and start 
been endorsed by over 50 development donors, multilateral early negotiations
organizations, and implementing partners. From Principle to 
Practice: Implementing the Principles for Digital Development, 4.  Build for Sustainability
released in February 2016, captures the experience, insights, n Plan for sustainability from the start, including plan-
questions, and recommendations of practitioners working in ning for long-term financial health, e.g. assessing total 
digital development. This report, as well as more information cost of ownership
on the Principles for Digital Development can be found at 
digitalprinciples.org. n Utilize and invest in local communities and developers 
by default and help catalyze their growth
n Engage with local governments to ensure integration 
1.  Design with the User into national strategy and identify high-level govern-
n Develop context-appropriate solutions informed by ment advocates
user needs
 Include all user groups in planning, development, 5.  Be Data Drivenn
implementation, and assessment n Design projects so that impact can be measured at 
n Develop projects in an incremental and iterative manner discrete milestones with a focus on outcomes rather  
than outputs
n Design solutions that learn from and enhance existing 
workflows and plan for organizational adaptation n Evaluate innovative solutions and areas where there are 
gaps in data and evidence
n Ensure solutions are sensitive to, and useful for, the 
most marginalized populations: women, children, n Use real-time information to monitor and inform 
those with disabilities, and those affected by conflict management decisions at all levels
and disaster n When possible, leverage data as a by-product of user 
actions and transactions for assessments 
2.  Understand the Existing Ecosystem
 Participate in networks and communities of 6.  Use Open Standards, Open Data, Open  n
like-minded practitioners  Source, and Open Innovation
n Align to existing technological, legal, and  n Adopt and expand existing open standards
regulatory policies n Open data and functionalities and expose them in 
documented application programming interfaces 
(APIs) where use by a larger community is possible
6  n  INTRODUCTION
n Invest in software as a public good n Ensure equity and fairness in co-creation, and protect 
n Develop software to be open source by default with the best interests of the end-users
the code made available in public repositories and 
supported through developer communities 9.  Be Collaborative
n Engage diverse expertise across disciplines and  
7.  Reuse and Improve industries at all stages
n Use, modify, and extend existing tools, platforms,  n Work across sector silos to create coordinated and 
and frameworks when possible more holistic approaches
n Develop in modular ways, favoring approaches  n Document work, results, processes, and best practices 
that are interoperable over those that are monolithic and share them widely
by design
n Publish materials under a Creative Commons license 
by default, with strong rationale if another licensing 
8. Address Privacy and Security approach is taken
n Assess and mitigate risks to the security of users and 
their data More information on the Principles for Digital Develop-
n Consider the context and the needs for privacy of ment can be found at http://ict4dprinciples.org 
personally identifiable information when designing 
solutions and mitigate accordingly
mHEALTH COMPENDIUM  SPECIAL EDITION 2016  n  7
 Photo by Kendra Helmer, USAID
Other Key mHealth Tools and Resources
A number of tools, guidelines, and databases have been n GSMA mHealth Tracker: Captures and presents developed to disseminate information and best practices mHealth products and services around the globe. It 
on mobile and digital health. The following list presents a tracks solutions in planning and deployment phases. 
short summary of a range of resources available, but should (www.gsma.com/mobilefordevelopment/m4d-tracker/
not be considered exhaustive. mhealth-deployment-tracker)
mHealth Repositories n mHealth Evidence Database: Includes searchable peer-reviewed and grey literature on mHealth activities 
n African Strategies for Health mHealth Database: in developed and developing countries and is curated 
Compiles the more than 150 mHealth project and ap- with sources proactively identified or included based 
plication profiles featured in the mHealth Compendium on request. Material is classified using a harmonized 
series into a single database. Information can be filtered taxonomy, scored using objective criteria, easily fil-
by type of application, health area, and location. Profiles tered, and searchable to facilitate the identification of 
include intervention descriptions, important results or evidence-based, high-impact mHealth practices. (www.
evaluation findings, lessons learned and contact informa- mhealthevidence.org) 
tion for both implementers and donors. (africanstrate- n mHealth Knowledge: Connects global health pro-
gies4health.org/mhealth-database.html) fessionals to the people, products, and ideas needed to 
n Center for Health Market Innovation (CHMI):  work effectively in mHealth. Managed by K4Health, 
Includes over 1,500 programs in a downloadable data- this platform connects users to mHealth resources 
base of health innovations. Over 450 of the programs including: applications and platforms, communities of 
list mobile phone or tablet use as a program component. practice, capacity building and learning opportunities, 
Results can be filtered by program type, health focus, tools and guides, and sources of relevant news. (www.
country, target population, legal status, reported results, mhealthknowledge.org)
funders, and technology used. (healthmarketinnova-  
tions.org/programs) 
8  n  INTRODUCTION
 Photo by David Dorey/MicroEnsure
Guidelines, Toolkits, and Learning n Mobile Technology to Strengthen Family Planning 
Programs: Commissioned by the USAID High Impact 
Resources Practices (HIPs) in Family Planning series, this brief 
highlights evidence in mHealth and family planning 
n Global Digital Health Network: Formerly the programs to date and synthesizes lessons learned for 
mHealth Working Group created in 2009 as a network- implementation of mHealth programs. (www.fphighim-
ing forum for members to share information, engage pactpractices.org/resources/mhealth-mobile-technolo-
with the broader community, and provide leadership in gy-strengthen-family-planning-programs) 
digital health for global public health. (www.mhealth-
workinggroup.org) n The mHealth Planning Guide: Key Considerations 
for Integrating Mobile Technology into Health Pro-
n Integrating Mobiles into Development Projects: This grams: An interactive online guide intended for global 
handbook is intended as a practical and actionable guide health practitioners,  program managers, and staff work-
to help USAID staff and others consider the challenges ing to implement mHealth solutions in low-resource 
that can impede the realization of a more sustainable settings. (www.k4health.org/toolkits/mHealth-plan-
and equitable future powered by mobile technology ning-implementation-guide)
and other digital solutions, and to think critically about 
when and how to deploy mobile solutions. (www.usaid. n National eHealth Strategy Toolkit: Produced by the 
gov/sites/default/files/documents/1861/M4DHand- WHO and International Telecommunication Union 
book_August_2014.pdf ) to provide guidance to governments, ministries, and 
other stakeholders in how to develop and implement a 
n Making the Journey from Cash to Electronic  national eHealth vision, action plan, and monitoring 
Payments: This toolkit was created for USAID imple- framework. (www.who.int/ehealth/publications/en/)
menting partners and development organizations to 
guide them in their journey of transitioning from using n SDG ICT Playbook: From Innovation to Impact: 
cash payments to electronic payments in all operational A resource for development organizations providing 
and program payment streams. (solutionscenter.nethope. actionable information on leveraging information and 
org/programs/c2e-toolkit) communication technology (ICT) tools against the Sus-
tainable Development Goals (SDGs). It includes a port-
n The MAPS Toolkit: mHealth Assessment and Plan- folio of recommended technologies as well as insights on 
ning for Scale: A self-assessment and planning guide to governance, partnerships, and strategies for affordable 
help mHealth implementers successfully and sustainably access. (solutionscenter.nethope.org/toolkit/view/sdg-ict-
scale-up their innovations. The toolkit assists mHealth playbook-from-innovation-to-impact)
project teams to critically assess their mHealth project as 
they move from piloting to planning their next steps for 
overcoming the challenges inherent in scaling up. (who.
int/reproductivehealth/topics/mhealth/maps-toolkit/en/)
n mHealth Basics: Introduction to Mobile Technol-
ogy for Health: A three-hour, self-paced eLearning 
course available on the USAID Global Health eLearn-
ing Center provides an introduction to mHealth and 
an overview of best practices for mHealth solution 
development. (www.globalhealthlearning.org/course/
mhealth-basics-introduction-mobile-technology-health)  
n mHealth Field Guide for Newborn Health: This 
guide explains how mHealth can be used for improving 
newborn health through referral and tracking of moth-
ers and infants, decision support for community health 
workers (CHWs), CHW supervision, scheduling and 
tracking postpartum and postnatal visits, and teaching 
and counseling for mothers and families. (www.core-
group.org/resources/420-mhealth-field-guide-for-new-
born-health)
mHEALTH COMPENDIUM  SPECIAL EDITION 2016  n  9
Photo by Julia Ruben, D-tree International
Photo by Lisa Hoashi / Mercy Corps
FEATURED CASES
Delivering health microinsurance at  
scale across Africa
POWERED BY MICROENSURE
A maternity nurse with a mother and her two newborn twins. Marangu Hospital, Moshi, Tanzania. Photo by David Dorey/MicroEnsure.
12  n  AIRTEL INSURANCE AND MICROENSURE
AIRTEL INSURANCE
The Airtel/MicroEnsure partnership aimed to introduce millions 
of emerging consumers to their first health insurance products 
by offering simple cover, for free, aimed to establish trust through 
transparent, reliable operations. It then offered products for 
customers to increase options, creating a path to greater health 
insurance coverage.
Health insurance penetration in Africa remains under 3%, serving fewer than 3 million people, even though more than 
400 private and nonprofit health insurance schemes operate across the continent, according to the Landscape of 
Microinsurance in Africa 2012. Moreover, these health insurance schemes on average are unsustainable, paying out 
more in claims than they attract in premiums.
By contrast, all other forms of insurance operating on the continent have less than half as many products active, yet in 
aggregate they serve 17 times the number of people.
The reasons for low penetration of health insurance are multifaceted, but a key issue has been the high expense of 
traditional health insurance, which keeps it out of the hands of the mass market. While public health insurance projects 
are underway in many markets, MicroEnsure decided to pursue a complimentary private solution with Airtel, a pan-
African telecommunications company, in order to deliver a sustainable health product to the emerging customer.
The Airtel/MicroEnsure partnership aimed to introduce millions of emerging consumers to their first health insurance 
products by offering simple cover, for free. By introducing consumers to a basic health insurance product, MicroEnsure 
aimed to establish trust through transparent, reliable operations. It then offered intuitive up-sell products to allow 
customers to increase their coverage by paying for more cover for themselves and/or their families, which created a 
path to greater health insurance coverage.
About Airtel/MicroEnsure
M icroEnsure and Airtel launched their first simple health a lump sum of up to US$300 paid to them via mobile mon-insurance product in Ghana in January 2014, and even- ey if they spent three nights or more in any hospital across 
tually launched in seven African markets. The product was the nation, for any medical reason, with no exclusions. This 
relatively straightforward: Airtel would reward loyal custom- wide-open claims model was designed to eliminate the fine 
ers (who registered for the product by dialing a shortcode) print traditionally associated with insurance and to demon-
with free insurance as long as they spent a minimum amount strate a reliable product.
of airtime (usually US$2). The more customers spent with Furthermore, while it might seem naïve to a typical, devel-
the telecom, the more free health insurance (and life and oped-market health insurance consumer that a lump sum of 
accident insurance as well) they could earn. Customers were $50, for example, would be attractive, MicroEnsure knew 
educated as to how the product works via an unstructured from its 12 years of experience in the mass market that, when 
supplementary service data (USSD) menu showing policy there is no health insurance available at all, even a small 
information and through monthly SMSs informing them amount of health cover represented a massive improvement 
the amount of insurance they had earned for the following over the status quo, and provided a stair-step into health 
month based on their airtime usage in the previous month. financing. In other words, $50 of hospital cash is viewed by 
The health insurance offered a simple benefit: qualifying the mass market in Africa as an excellent cover, especially 
customers received one month of hospital cash insurance— when the cover is accessible for free.   
mHEALTH COMPENDIUM  SPECIAL EDITION 2016  n  13
Due to SIM-card swapping and a low level of brand loyalty 
for many African telecoms, this product was designed to 
increase loyalty as well as revenue for the telecom, hence it 
paid the premiums to MicroEnsure and its partner insurance 
companies in various markets. The customer’s airtime was 
not deducted but rather the cover was provided for free and 
paid by the telecom on the basis of the overall increase in 
value to the core business (airtime spent) from the portfolio 
of insured customers.
This business model therefore offered a win-win-win for the 
patient, distributor, and insurer alike. The patients received 
free and reliable means of mitigating their risk; the distributor 
received a product to grow revenue and loyalty; and the insurer 
saw millions more customers become policyholders on a finan-
cially viable basis—as premiums exceeded the cost of claims.
Program Design Process 
MicroEnsure had previously delivered mobile insurance 
through a “freemium” strategy, with Tigo in Ghana and 
Tanzania (2010–2013). In its partnership with Airtel 
MicroEnsure focused product design efforts on bringing a 
simple, valuable health insurance product to the mass market 
through the mobile channel.
commit fraud; 2) by providing a small sum assured for most 
MicroEnsure found from its experience that a traditional of the telecom’s customers (i.e. the lower spenders), reducing 
health insurance model was unlikely to be sustainable. It their motive for a large payday; and 3) by providing a lump 
could not build a panel of hospitals and clinics and still meet sum benefit instead of a per-day benefit, thereby reducing 
the telecom’s requirements to serve all of its customers across the incentive for customers with genuine claims to overstate 
Africa within a year; nor could it operate a third-party pay- the size of their claim.
ment scheme to health providers without experiencing the 
fraud that dooms many health insurance schemes. Once MicroEnsure had determined that hospital cash was 
the correct approach from the supply side, it had to identify 
When MicroEnsure looked into provider insurance fraud, it whether there was demand for hospital cash insurance.
found that mutual distrust between providers and insurers 
is likely an unsolvable problem for now in Africa, where de- MicroEnsure’s research illustrated that nearly 30% of 
veloped information technology (IT) systems are few and far health-related expenditure in these markets is for costs other 
between—doctors resent being paid less by an insurer than than the medical expenses themselves. These costs include 
the service cost them to provide, and so they over-charge transport, food, lost income, and other foregone expenses, 
knowing the insurer will pay less; then, the insurer sees the such as children’s school fees. Furthermore, the research 
overcharge and charges the provider with fraud. This vicious showed that customers who had never been insured did 
circle dooms many health insurance products in Africa. not expect a full indemnity product, as traditional health 
insurance operates; rather, if they received a $50 payout from 
MicroEnsure resolved, therefore, to use a hospital cash MicroEnsure, they perceived it to be valuable, as it was great-
product, paying the patient directly instead of paying the er than $0—the amount of insurance they had ever received 
provider. However, many other hospital cash schemes had before. With this knowledge, it appeared as though custom-
experienced problems with fraud as well. MicroEnsure decid- ers would value the product as designed.
ed to work to limit fraud in three ways: 1) by providing the 
product for free, thereby reducing the claimant’s incentive to 
14  n  AIRTEL INSURANCE AND MICROENSURE
 Sample Nigerian promotion
Growth in Scale 
MicroEnsure designs its products, systems, and distribu- n Airtel Kenya launched in August 2015, reaching 
tion strategies for large-scale implementation. MicroEnsure 173,000 by March 2016.
launched with Airtel Ghana in January 2014, and grew the In aggregate, these products had enrolled 3.74 million 
enrolled customer base to 1.2 million within its first year. customers into hospital cash insurance in seven countries by 
Once the product had demonstrated success, other countries March 2016, a little over two years after the initial product 
launched in quick succession: launch.
n Airtel Burkina Faso launched in August 2014, reaching MicroEnsure’s board approved significant growth in its IT de-
231,000 within its first year. velopment and African regional team, as well as local teams to 
n Airtel Nigeria launched in September 2014, reaching deliver the product on the ground. Despite these investments, 
1.02 million within its first year. by the end of the roll-out phase it was clear to MicroEnsure 
n Airtel Madagascar launched in December 2014, reach- that it did not plan enough expenditure on technology—es-
ing 57,000 within its first year. pecially the process of integrating its systems with the local 
telecom. Experience showed that it should have planned for 
n Airtel Niger launched in December 2014, reaching more cost in recruiting, training, and development.
194,000 within its first year.
n Airtel Malawi launched in May 2015, reaching 163,000 
by March 2016.
mHEALTH COMPENDIUM  SPECIAL EDITION 2016  n  15
Photo by MicroEnsure
Evaluation and Results
The major objectives for the project concerned: scale of mobile insurance model in 2017. Customer surveys across its 
health microinsurance, financial sustainability, and creation operating markets have indicated that for 86% of its customers, 
of new market penetration by offering customers their Airtel Insurance was their first insurance policy of any kind.
first-ever health insurance policies. Unfortunately, there are no assessments of health outcomes, 
As of March 2016, MicroEnsure had enrolled 3.74 million as MicroEnsure does not track patients beyond the submis-
customers into hospital cash insurance in seven countries, a sion of a claim, nor does it track any additional information 
little over two years after launch. Airtel’s continued expan- about their health, including the cause of hospitalization. 
sion and the fact that no insurance companies dropped the However, with a large-scale footprint, MicroEnsure expects 
product indicate overall financial success of the product. to be able to have a much more significant impact on health 
MicroEnsure expects to break even on its investment in the outcomes, as it has built the customer base. 
Lessons Learned in Program Implementation and Scaling 
Low health insurance penetration is often assumed to be a Furthermore, mobile channels offer important assets to en-
function of low demand for insurance in general. MicroEn- hance an mHealth service, but the telecom will only unleash 
sure has found that low penetration of traditional insurance those assets if they will directly benefit in their own core 
is more likely a function of: high cost, low trust, poor access, business growth; if this is not clear to them they will not lend 
and product complexity. If these barriers can be overcome, their brand and footprint to the initiative.
enrollment numbers indicate that mass-market consumers MicroEnsure experienced several challenges during the rapid 
are very eager to be protected from health risk. growth of the program. For example, due to Airtel’s em-
MicroEnsure research shows that a simple health insurance phasis on rapid expansion across markets, MicroEnsure did 
benefit is perceived as better than having no health insurance not invest in client education and impact to the degree that 
at all; it is not necessary—or financially viable—for the unin- it might have with a slower roll-out. This underinvestment 
sured customer to enroll in full health coverage from the start. led to lower uptake in some markets than initially expected, 
16  n  AIRTEL INSURANCE AND MICROENSURE
Photo by MicroEnsure
and to fewer claims than expected as well. Additionally, the drive value for the customer. MicroEnsure learned that in 
overhead and administrative cost as well as the day-to-day future multinational roll-outs, it should move more deliber-
operational headaches of expanding in market after market ately in order to ensure each project is performing according 
often served as a distraction from the key program focus—to to best practice prior to the next product being rolled out.
Future Plans 
MicroEnsure’s main plans for Airtel Insurance are currently higher-value products with greater health benefits. Micro-
centered on transitioning from a free product to a product Ensure is currently prototyping telemedicine and health 
that customers pay for in order to make the product sustain- education products in Kenya and is designing other mHealth 
able for the long term. The free product was successful in solutions, which it expects to make available at scale near the 
generating additional revenue and reducing customer churn end of 2016 and early 2017.  n
for Airtel, but the company will not pay for free insurance in 
perpetuity. MicroEnsure has launched a prototype of a paid Snapshot: Airtel Insurance powered by MicroEnsure
product in Ghana, which more than 100,000 people have Geographic Burkina Faso, Ghana, Kenya, Malawi, Madagascar, 
purchased to date. It expects to roll out the lessons learned Coverage Niger, Nigeria
from the prototype to other Airtel markets throughout 2016. Implementation 2014 to present
Dates
MicroEnsure does not expect that all Airtel Insurance prod-
ucts will remain live, as telecoms’ priorities change; however, Implementation MicroEnsure (product design, mobile Partners implementation, insurance arrangement, field 
it expects 3-4 of the products to remain live, including in engagement, back office support)
its largest markets of Ghana and Nigeria. By year-end 2017 Airtel Africa (marketing and distribution)
it expects to have more than 2 million paying customers on Various insurers (risk underwriting)
Airtel Insurance overall. If it successfully converts a sufficient Donor(s) N/A
number of customers from free to paid products, MicroEn- Contact Peter Gross, Marketing Director, MicroEnsure, 
sure plans to seek to drive additional value through Information peter.gross@microensure.com
References & Additional Resources
1. McCord, Michael J, et al. The Landscape of Microinsurance in Africa 2012. Munich/Eschborn, Munich Re Foundation and GIZ. March 2013.
2. Mulupi, D. How to sell insurance to low-income earners in Africa. 2015.  http://www.howwemadeitinafrica.com/how-to-sell-insurance-to-
low-income-earners-in-africa/51547/. 
3. Chrispinus, J. MicroEnsure: Providing microinsurance to the mass market. 2015.  http://www.biasharaleo.co.ke/index.php/en/2014-10-19-18-
25-47/techie/item/116-microensure-providing-microinsurance-to-the-mass-market.
4. Jarvis, E. Microensure. 2015. http://www.africaoutlookmag.com/outlook-features/microensure. 
mHEALTH COMPENDIUM  SPECIAL EDITION 2016  n  17
Photo by David Dorey/MicroEnsure
In Bangladesh, the power of health in  
every mother’s hand 
Photo by Aponjon
18  n  APONJON
APONJON
Aponjon (meaning “dear one(s)” in Bangla) aims to help to 
substantially reduce maternal and newborn deaths by improving 
health-seeking behaviors and preventive care among pregnant 
women, new mothers, and their families. 
The Mobile Alliance Maternal Action (MAMA) program launched nationally in December 2012.  A Bangladeshi social 
enterprise, Dnet, implements Aponjon in partnership with the Ministry of Health and Family Welfare (MOHFW) and 
with support from the US Agency for International Development. 
Although under-five child mortality has decreased considerably in Bangladesh, neonatal mortality has decreased at a 
slower rate, with neonatal deaths a larger share of infant mortality. Greater progress was needed at that stage. Given 
that newborn survival and health are intrinsically linked with the health of women before conception, during pregnancy, 
and around the time of birth, and recognizing limitations in human resources for health, Aponjon developed as a 
mobile-based behavior change communication (BCC) program to increase health-seeking behavior at the household 
level and use of health facilities to prevent neonatal deaths.
The service is designed for women between 6 and 42 weeks of pregnancy and mothers with a child under one year of 
age. It features critical health information and reminders based on gestational stage and age of baby in the form of text 
and voice messages. The messages also address “gatekeepers” such as the women’s partners, mothers, and mothers-
in-law. In addition, Aponjon also launched a mobile application “Shogorbha” for pregnant women and redesigned its 
website as a host of web services.
About Aponjon
G lobally, Aponjon is a unique mHealth initiative be- Figure 1.  cause it functions through all of the country’s telecom Aponjon has two major components:  
operators—six. About 81% of Aponjon users are from rural content (voice/text) and call center (counseling). 
areas; 60% of women users have their own mobile phones. 
Technology stakeholders in the program include the telecom 
operators and value added services platform aggregator.
Aponjon has two major components: content (voice/
text) and call center (counselling). The primary audience 
(expecting and new mothers) are delivered two messages, 
either by SMS or interactive voice response (IVR), a week 
while the secondary audience (partners, in-laws, parents, 
etc.) receive one, with each message costing about US.03 
cents. The voice messages are a mix of direct messages and 
mini-skit messages, with local actors playing the roles of 
a doctor, pregnant woman, mother, and mother-in-law. 
Gatekeepers’ information reinforces messages provided to 
the mother and encourages family involvement in healthy 
decision-making around pregnancy, birth, and infant care. 
mHEALTH COMPENDIUM  SPECIAL EDITION 2016  n  19
All Aponjon content complies with the government’s BCC to subscribers, serving as a direct channel to communicate 
guidelines. Content is identified, designed, and adapted with a doctor about health problems. Aponjon partners 
based on ethnographic research; semi-structured content with the field forces of BRAC, Infolady (Dnet’s program), 
surveys; a review of national guidelines and international MaMoni, Social Marketing Company, Smiling Sun, and 
literature on maternal, newborn, and child health (MNCH); several local nongovernmental organizations and agencies for 
and an expert review by a panel of Bangladeshi physicians, customer acquisition. Customers can also register themselves, 
researchers, and communications professionals. Followed by and provide information to ensure that the messages are in 
feedback from BabyCenter, the messages are approved by the sync with the gestational stage or baby’s age. Users are also 
Information, Education, and Communication (IEC) Com- able to select a preferred time of day for message delivery so 
mittee of the MOHFW. The service is available in Bangla that the message is received when it is most convenient. 
and two local dialects. Aponjon also offers a counseling line 
Program Design Process 
Dnet carried out extensive formative research from Septem- Aponjon received support from the Access to Information Pro-
ber 2011 through May 2012 before launching the service gram II (A2I-II) hosted by the Prime Minister’s Office, which 
nationally. The research included 1,403 subscribers from five facilitated coordination among various government agencies 
divisions, including 349 pregnant women (25%), 575 moth- for the program. Aponjon actively participates in the district 
ers of children under age one (41%), and 479 other household health information system initiative of the Directorate General 
decision-makers (e.g. husbands, mothers-in-law) (34%). Areas of Health Services-Management Information Services office 
of interest included: gender and mobile phone ownership; and has already streamlined its system data landscape. 
effective strategies for enrollment and promoting user aware- Another important public sector contribution comes from 
ness; acceptable cost models; user satisfaction of the content the Bangladesh Telecommunications Regulatory Commis-
and tech platform; influence of content on MNCH-related sion (BTRC), which helped secure approvals for differential 
health-seeking behaviors; and the involvement of family mem- charging and approved the short code and Aponjon counsel-
bers in the service. Data collection included a pretest focus ling line. Aponjon’s partners in the private sector have also 
group, registration forms, deregistration data, payment status included Johnson & Johnson, Agora, Lal Teer, and Beximco 
data, structured interviews, field observations, and phone which contributed through corporate social responsibility 
surveys. The Johns Hopkins School of Public Health mHealth (CSR) funds and sponsorships and helped in brand propa-
Initiative jointly produced a  report with Dnet that examines gation. Telecom operators also complied with the mode of 
and analyzes Dnet’s formative research. differential charging and made it possible for Aponjon to 
Aponjon conducts widespread bi-annual phone surveys. reach people across the socioeconomic spectrum.
Apart from tracking health-seeking knowledge and practice On the technical side, SSD-Tech provides the technical 
indicators, the surveys query users if the service benefitted platform for service delivery with “MT charging,” meaning 
them and what could have been done better in terms of clients are charged when messages are received. Synesis IT 
content and design of service delivery. serves as the call center service provider that developed a 
customer relationship management system and a separate 
system for the counseling line. 
Growth in Scale
After the national launch, Aponjon acquired 100,000 gladesh. A core research team had evaluated various aspects 
subscribers by July 2013. The subscriber base hit 750,000 in of the service before national roll-out. Community health 
August 2014, 1 million in September 2014 and 1.5 million workers from BRAC and USAID’s MaMoni project assisted 
in December 2015. In addition to standard SMS and IVR, in enrolling most of the initial subscribers. Popular cam-
the service has made content available through a mobile paign strategies were executed in select urban locations and 
application, “Shogorbha”, for pregnant women. Aponjon their contribution in the overall growth of subscription was 
aims to reach 2 million subscribers by September 2016 and reviewed. Using local leaders and spokespeople to increase 
launch newer products. awareness of Aponjon while also forging greater trust in the 
During its pilot phase, Aponjon served 1,403 subscribers brand, building partnerships with more community-based 
in a few urban and rural areas across five divisions of Ban- organizations, including more detailed messages on nutri-
tion, arranging for refresher trainings for call center agents 
20  n  APONJON
and initiating a ticketing system for better management of panies interested in using the messaging for advertising make 
service issues by vendors are some major pilot phase out- up slightly less than 1% of Aponjon’s funding. 
comes that paved the way to a large-scale implementation. Aponjon has faced some vital challenges in the process of 
Dnet uses innovative financing models, leveraging CSR scaling up its operations. Lack of funding for above-the-line 
funding at local and global levels, and providing the service campaigns crippled the program’s ability to sustain its brand 
for the poorest subscribers free of charge while charging communication efforts. In spite of co-branding efforts with 
the better-off users the full price. Dnet also uses advertising products of high rural market penetration, the program never 
and sponsorship donations. Aponjon is financed primarily overcame the need for launching above-the-line campaigns as 
though support from development agencies (88%), name- the rate of self-registration was persistently low. Also, mostly 
ly USAID. The next largest portion of Aponjon’s funding due to the former, Aponjon had to heavily rely on customer 
comes from local CSR (7%), followed by the Sponsor-a-Ma acquisition led by community-based agencies that had to be 
campaign (4%). Together, user fees and fees charged to com- paid more than some leading nongovernmental organizations. 
Evaluation and Results 
Aponjon conducts periodic surveys to understand the impact interviewed. User feedback and preferences on message length, 
of the intervention and to gather feedback for further modifica- content type, message frequency, and usability were translated 
tion of the service. Annual sample surveys have been conducted into actionable recommendations. Some of the major actions 
since 2013 to understand how the service impacted users both based on findings included the introduction of content in two 
in knowledge and practice, if at all. Reasons behind non-com- major local dialects, incorporation of content specific to the 
pliance with content instructions and the process of and barriers rural version, and advanced messages on pregnancy care and 
to behavioral changes are explored. Two sample surveys have home remedies.   
been done so far, reaching 799 expecting and new mothers. Aponjon performs regular bi-annual phone surveys to track 
These surveys revealed that about half (54%) of Aponjon users the status of 11 health milestone indicators, including ante-
are first-time mothers, while 66% of them reported having been natal and postnatal care visits, exclusive breastfeeding, and 
actively using some form of family planning. About 14% of users BCG (TB) vaccination, and to gauge customer satisfaction 
reported to have spaced previous births by at least 3 years. When and loyalty through net promoter scores. The outcomes of 
users were asked about their level of satisfaction with Aponjon these health indicators are then compared to national level 
services, 91% indicated they were “satisfied” and 35% gave the values (see Figure 2 below).
services the highest possible rating.
A third-party mixed methods evaluation of the program was 
Aponjon also conducted a content survey in 2013 to better conducted by the USAID-funded TRAction project. Results 
understand user acceptability and comprehensibility of mes- indicated that respondents who had used Aponjon for a 
sages received. A total of 335 women and 88 gatekeepers were 
Figure 2.  
Evaluation results for health-seeking behavioral indicators  
(Sources: *National Data Source: BDHS 2014,  WHO 2013, and Unicef 2012); **Aponjon subscriber phone survey VII, July 2015)
4 or more ANC visits 31% 67%
Family-based delivery 37% 62%
Home-based delivery by SBA 42% 65%
Use of safe delivery kit at %
home-based delivery 88 100
%
Post natal care visit rate 32% 68%
Early initiation of breastfeeding 57% 93%
Exclusive breastfeeding to 6 mo. 55% 85%
Vaccinated BCG 98% 100%
Vaccinated Pentavalent 91% 93%
Blood group detection 70%
Improved water source 83% 87%
0 20 40 60 80 100
NATIONAL* APONJON SUBSCRIBER**
mHEALTH COMPENDIUM  SPECIAL EDITION 2016  n  21
minimum of six months, received at least three messages ing or carefully listening to all messages. (Chowdhury, 2015) 
per month and carefully listened to most of the messages Other findings indicated that some non-eligible clients were 
showed both increased knowledge and practice of maternal registered by agents, and also that users demanded another 
and newborn health care. Study recommendations included service on early childhood development. Based on this re-
that the program should emphasis continued use of services search, Aponjon formed an in-house quality control unit and 
for a longer duration, and to explore reasons for not receiv- content for early childhood development is being developed.
Lessons Learned in Program Implementation and Scaling
One of the main challenges Aponjon faced was to gather all December 2015, MAMA helped Aponjon broker instrumen-
mobile network operators under one umbrella. Given that tal partnerships with international donors and corporations 
Grameen Phone was the only operator during the pilot, areas such as Johnson & Johnson. Johnson & Johnson offered 
such as Chittagong—which had low Grameen Phone cover- sponsorships covering the entire service package for over 
age—had much fewer subscribers. After a lengthy process of 5,000 mothers in fiscal year 2015-16.
negotiation and technological integration with each operator, Although the initial program delivery commitment was for 
four operators were added before the national launch. 500,000 expecting women and pregnant mothers, Aponjon 
Receiving the right and disaggregated service delivery metrics went on to cater to over 1.6 million subscribers to date. This is 
from the technology platform vendor SSD-Tech posed an- not only due to support from USAID but also because of part-
other challenge for the program. Aponjon needed to be able nerships across the public and private sectors that Aponjon has 
to track message acceptability  by content area and monitor forged over the years. Furthermore, some major outgrowths 
fluctuations of deregistration by exposure to content. from the initial structure of project deliverables are as follows:
Over the last two years, revenue from local CSR funds has n Aponjon’s official website has been redesigned with the 
decreased alarmingly as local companies are increasingly introduction of a diverse host of web services, including 
channeling their CSR funds through in-house charity foun- articles on food and medicine in pregnancy to breast-
dations. This tendency has limited the program’s ability to feeding practices, a growth tracker, event calendar, 
extend the service to ultra-poor families for free.  estimated due date calculator, ovulation calendar, and a 
Aponjon devised a workaround, where possible, to each of social timeline called Mothers’ Forum.
the abovementioned obstacles. Soon after the pilot, the team n Aponjon launched the first mobile app in the Bangla 
built on the partnership with the BTRC and brought all language with a range of comprehensive information for 
six of the country’s telecom operators (including the state- expecting mothers. Features include week-by-week gesta-
owned Teletalk) aboard. Dnet redesigned service metrics and tional information, an expected due date calculator, event 
ensured routine tracking of service delivery based on disag- calendar, nutrition routine, weight chart, and kick-tracker.
gregated measures. Lastly, the decline in CSR funding from 
n The Aponjon counseling line features 16 doctors/general 
local companies has been tackled with increased sponsorship physicians who are available with first-line medical coun-
and fundraising efforts globally. Prior to its dissolution in seling for registered subscribers.
22  n  APONJON
Images provided by Aponjon
Future Plans
Aponjon, based on a tested sustainability model approved Activities recently launched or in development include:
by USAID, will transform into a for-profit business called 
n Aponjon Shoishob: Weekly mobile content in the form 
Lifechord. All organizational formalities and legal paperwork of IVR/SMS. It will target parents of children aged 1–5 
have been completed. Initial capital for Lifechord includes years and address issues pertaining to early childhood 
program income from non-USAID funds, CSR funds, and development. 
Dnet’s own investment. Lifechord will be able to explore 
radical cost-cutting and income-generation options begin- n Aponjon Koishor App: Mobile application targeting 
ning with the launch of Dnet’s own technology platform in adolescents aged 10–19 years and their parents. Features a 
March 2016. This marks an important transition in the pro- counseling line and live web chat. Launched April 7, 2016. 
gram; running the service from its own technology platform n Aponjon New Mother App: A mobile application which 
means greater control over service delivery metrics, stronger will target mothers of children aged under one year.  n
negotiation with mobile network operators as a content 
provider, as well as opportunities for generating revenue from Snapshot: Aponjon
diverse service innovations. This systemic changeover will Geographic Bangladesh
translate into efficiency gains, broader developmental leeway, Coverage
and fewer challenges to exploring new market segments and Implementation December 2012 to present
replicating in different contexts. Dates
However, as an initially donor-funded program, one major Implementation Dnet: a social enterprise that designs innovative 
roadblock to working out the current transition and sustain- Partners products and service solutions for women, children, and youth in rural and urban settings to create 
ability plans is the limited opportunity to attract  angel and social impact, and for institutions to enhance 
impact investors, as investments arising from such initiatives capacity and productivity. It runs Aponjon in 
cannot be declared as assets for LifeChord going forward. partnership with USAID and the Government of 
Bangladesh.
Therefore, Aponjon has been busy crafting its service portfo-
lio with new developments paving a way to diverse reve- Donor(s) USAID
nue-generating activities. Contact Tahsin Ifnoor Sayeed, M&E Specialist, Dnet,  
Information tahsin.ifnoor@dnet.org.bd
References & Additional Resources
Understanding mHealth impact among Aponjon (MAMA Bangladesh) subscribers through a phone survey in Bangladesh.  
http://dl.acm.org/citation.cfm?id=2517920
M&E of MAMA’s mHealth program to improve quality of maternal health care.   
https://apha.confex.com/apha/141am/webprogramadapt/Paper294315.html
Improving health awareness through mobile-based health messages in Bangladesh.   
http://www.journalmtm.com/2012/improving-health-awareness-through-mobile-based-health-messages-in-bangladesh/
MAMA “APONJON” Formative Research Report.   
http://www.mobilemamaalliance.org/sites/default/files/MAMA%20Bangladesh%20Formative%20Research%20Report.pdf
References:
1. GSMA Data  
https://www.gsmaintelligence.com/markets/240/dashboard/
2. Bangladesh Demographic and Health Surveys 2014 
http://www.niport.gov.bd/wp-content/uploads/publication/1432536472-BDHS%202014%20KIR.pdf
3. Health Workforce Crisis in Bangladesh 
https://everyone.savethechildren.net/articles/health-workforce-crisis-bangladesh
4. MAMA Bangladesh: Lessons Learned on the Way to 500,000 Subscribers. http://mobilemamaalliance.org/sites/default/files/
BangladeshCaseStudy2014.pdf
5. Chowdhury, Mahbub Elahi. Key Findings Presentation: Evaluating accessibility, acceptability and effectiveness of Aponjon mobile health messaging for 
improved maternal and newborn health behaviors and practices in Bangladesh. September 2015. http://www.tractionproject.org/resources/key-
findings-mama-study-traction-supprted-study-conducted-international-center-diarrheal
mHEALTH COMPENDIUM  SPECIAL EDITION 2016  n  23
Using mobile technology to improve 
community health supply chains in Malawi
Photo by cStock
24  n  CSTOCK
cSTOCK
The combination of mobile technology, user-friendly dashboards, 
and quality-improvement teams have improved the reliability of 
supplies of life-saving commodities in community-based health 
programs.
In 2015, nearly 6 million children under the age of five died from treatable causes such as pneumonia, diarrhea, and 
malaria.1 Integrated Community Case Management (iCCM) is one strategy for reducing childhood mortality by having 
community health workers (CHWs) trained to treat children under five close to home. However, investments in training 
CHWs to treat these children are often undermined by weak supply chains which are unable to consistently deliver 
medicines to CHWs. 
The Supply Chains for Community Case Management Project’s (S4CCM) goal was to find proven, simple, and 
affordable solutions for the supply chain challenges faced by CHWs in Malawi, Rwanda, and Ethiopia. iCCM was 
first introduced in Malawi in 2008. Two years later, John Snow International, Inc. (JSI)’s SC4CCM project conducted 
a baseline assessment that revealed poor medicine availability, with only 23% of CHWs having in stock the four key 
lifesaving medicines needed to treat all three targeted childhood illnesses on the day of the survey. A lack of visibility 
into stock levels at the community level and weak coordination and management practices used to respond to the 
needs of the CHWs were identified as the primary causes of the weak supply chain. However, the survey results also 
identified an opportunity, with 94% of CHWs owning simple mobile phones and 85% having network coverage at least 
some of the time.2
About cStock
In collaboration with Malawi’s Ministry of Health (MOH), feedback to the CHW when the order is ready or if they JSI designed the Enhanced Management (EM) approach. are out of stock. Urgent matters, such as stock-outs or 
EM was developed to promote superior team performance low stock levels, are communicated through SMS alerts.
practices and the use of data to inform decisions and im-
2. A user-friendly dashboard: The web-based dashboard 
prove supply chain performance to increase the availability provides visibility of real-time CHW logistics data 
of medicines for community health programs. The following 
three key components ensure the program’s success: for district- and central-level managers. The system transforms two reported data elements into more than 
1. cStock: The overall goal of cStock is to improve 10 supply chain indicators that are displayed on the 
reporting and visibility of community health logistics dashboard as easy-to-use, relevant graphs and reports 
data. It is a RapidSMS-based reporting and resupply that facilitate rapid decision-making. These data can be 
system that facilitates timely data transmission and used for coordination, planning, and identification of 
communication between the CHWs and the facility stock issues. 
that supplies them with medicines. Using a streamlined, 3. District product availability teams (DPATs): They 
demand-based reporting and resupply process, stock complement cStock, building strong leadership and 
data reported by the CHW triggers the re-order creating teams of CHWs that work together to support 
process, whereby cStock automatically calculates the goals of the intervention. They are comprised of 
resupply quantities and transmits a request via SMS to district management, health center (HC) staff, and 
supervisors at health facilities. The facilities then send CHWs. DPATs have a common goal of improving 
mHEALTH COMPENDIUM  SPECIAL EDITION 2016  n  25
availability of essential medicines, and are designed All cStock users received a two-day training at the launch of 
to regularly use data provided by cStock to monitor the pilot. In addition, quarterly monitoring and implemen-
community supply chain performance and address tation support were provided throughout the pilot period 
supply chain challenges. HC staff meet CHWs every and feedback received was used to refine cStock and other 
month when they come to HCs for resupply; districts accompanying tools and training.
meet with CHW supervisors every quarter. 
Program Design Process
Formative research, including quantitative and qualitative In designing the system and workflows, consideration was 
assessments, was conducted from May to June 2010 in 10 given to ensure that key stakeholders have access to the data 
districts across Malawi’s three geographical regions. Based on they need, and in a format that is easily accessed and in-
the results of the assessment, the project explored and con- terpreted. User inputs during the initial design phase were 
sulted stakeholders on many different intervention options, limited mainly to defining the workflows in terms of the 
focusing on transportation, motivation, and technology, and recipients, content, timing, and format of the messages. The 
considered issues of affordability, scalability, and sustainabil- initial design of the dashboard was rudimentary, with limited 
ity as criteria for selection. Two intervention packages were time invested, and included only the basic supply chain 
then designed and piloted over 18 months (see evaluation metrics identified by the supply chain experts. The decision 
and results). to begin with a simple dashboard was based on users’ lack 
The design and development of cStock is based on a us- of experience with receiving, visualizing, and acting upon 
er-centered and iterative approach that combines the knowl- real-time supply chain data. After the users gained experience 
edge of supply chain experts with user experiences. The core in using online reports, and a better understanding of how 
principles of the design are to keep it simple; design with the they could use logistics data to measure and monitor supply 
end-user in mind; focus on feasibility, practicability, rele- chain performance, the project engaged the users for input 
vance, and usability; build ownership from all stakeholders on the dashboard design.
throughout the process; and plan for scale and sustainability Monitoring data were also used to design some targeted in-
from the outset. The system was also designed to align and tervention-support activities, including sending group SMS 
integrate into the current system by including workflows messages to users on common data entry errors and con-
that streamlined existing procedures and practices, reducing ducting extra training sessions for HC staff on how to run 
workloads rather than increasing them. effective meetings. Throughout the pilot, monitoring data 
were also shared with stakeholders, including MOH central 
staff and implementing partners, to get their input and ideas 
on addressing challenges.  
Figure 1.  
Sample cStock dashboard 
Growth in Scale 
The scale-up approach was defined by four primary strategies 
over two years (2013–2014). Strategies included gaining 
MOH endorsement, maintaining close engagement and 
coordination with partners, creating a dedicated cStock task-
force, and developing a national product availability team. 
In this way, the necessary political will, buy-in, continuous 
engagement, and ownership was in place to maximize the 
potential for sustainability over time. 
1. MOH endorsement: The MOH initially endorsed 
scale-up of cStock (but not DPATs) before the project 
had completed a full evaluation. The endorsement 
was triggered by enthusiasm for the unprecedented 
levels of access to community logistics data, positive 
26  n  CSTOCK
feedback from users, and high adoption of the system. conducted the trainings with MOH, while the project 
After conclusion of the pilot, the evaluation data provided technical support and quality control. 
clearly showed that although supply chain performance 3. Creation of a taskforce: An MOH-led taskforce that 
improved with the implementation of cStock, includes key stakeholders was set up to monitor the 
performance was significantly better with the EM progress of the scale-up, assist in resource mobilization, 
package that combined both cStock and the DPATs. and contribute to the development of a five-year 
Based on these findings, the MOH endorsed the full transition plan. The plan outlined a structured and 
EM package. deliberate process on how to sustain cStock and DPATs 
2. Continued engagement and coordination with for the next five years and build capacity within the 
partners: A vital part of planning for scale entailed the MOH to take full ownership of the system so that EM 
project’s ongoing engagement and coordination with becomes a core business practice of the health system. 
local partners, led by the MOH. This served to broaden 4. Development of the National Product Availability 
ownership for the intervention and avoid duplication. Team: The MOH also established a National Product 
As a result, multiple partners financed and supported Availability Team (NPAT) to manage the EM approach. 
the scale-up of cStock and DPATs to districts outside This team meets to review data on performance and 
the original pilot districts. cStock, with DPATs, is now provide leadership and support as needed to ensure all 
implemented and used in all of Malawi’s districts. districts can realize the full benefits of the EM approach. 
During the scale-up phase, partners financed and jointly 
Evaluation and Results
The project tested two different intervention packages: EM and strengthening key supply chain processes. The evaluation 
(cStock plus DPATs) and Efficient Product Transport (EPT) compared results from baseline to midline and compared 
(cStock plus bicycle maintenance) over 18 months (2011– each intervention group with the non-intervention compari-
2013). Each package was tested in three districts, and four son group. cStock proved to be feasible and acceptable in all 
districts from the baseline assessment were used as a compar- six districts; however, combining cStock with DPATs (three 
ison group. The monitoring and evaluation strategy includ- districts) resulted in significantly better supply chain perfor-
ed three large mixed-method evaluations, one at baseline mance and supply reliability.3-5
(2010), a second after the testing phase (midline—2013), 
n Data visibility improved from baseline in all districts 
and a third after the scale-up phase (endline—2014). where cStock was implemented, but improved more sig-
The midline evaluation compared the effectiveness of the two nificantly in EM districts: Results showed average CHW 
intervention groups (EM and EPT) in reducing stock-outs reporting rates of 94% in EM districts and 79% in EPT 
mHEALTH COMPENDIUM  SPECIAL EDITION 2016  n  27
Photos by cStock
100%
98% 99% % % %97% 97% 98% 98% 99 99 99 99
% 99%
% %
93%
96 96
90% % % 91
% 91% %
88 88 90%
80 %% 85 84% 8683
79% 79% 80%
75% 75% 76%
% 73%71 %
60 67
% 69
63% 63%
40 Figure 2.  
Mean reporting rates to 
20 cStock by HSAs, on all 
commodities in EM (n=393) 
and EPT (n=253) districts, 
January 2012–June 2013 
Jan Feb Mar Apr May Jun Jul Aug Sep Oct Nov Dec Jan Feb Mar Apr May Jun
2012 2013
AVERAGE EPT (EFFICIENT PRODUCT TRANSPORT)= 79%
AVERAGE EM (cSTOCK PLUS DPATs)= 94%
districts over the testing period (January 2012–June The endline evaluation assessed scale, sustainability, and 
2013). At baseline, only 43% of CHWs interviewed institutionalization. The evaluation consisted of qualitative 
reported that they submit some kind of logistics report case studies and quantitative analysis of cStock data in two 
(see Figure 2 above). original districts and two new districts. The results proved 
 Supply reliability was found to be significantly higher in that cStock is easily scaled and provides a simple process for n
EM districts compared to EPT districts. Supply reliabil- reporting on and resupplying community-level products in 
ity was defined as the mean percent CHW stock-out a systematic way. In addition, the benefits (coordination, 
rates by product over 18 months (January 2012–June communication, and collaboration) and challenges(transport, 
2013). Stock-outs for all products ranged between 5–7% resources, and time) of the DPATs were quickly realized in 
in the EM group and between 10–21% in the EPT the new districts and highlighted the importance of intense 
group. These differences were statistically significant at implementation support at the initial stages.
6 
the p=0.000 level for all products (Figure 2).
Lessons Learned in Program Implementation and Scaling
The overarching lesson from this research is that mobile reduced rates as part of their corporate social responsibility 
health strategies in isolation cannot create a reliable and to the health sector. The efforts proved successful, with one 
robust public health supply chain. However, if these strat- MNO providing a three-year waiver for SMS costs and the 
egies are implemented as part of broader supply chain other reducing SMS costs by 40% and only charging for 
system strengthening activities that address the larger system incoming messages. 
constraints, mHealth solutions can be game changing. Other Achieving broader ownership beyond a few champions: 
implementation challenges during development, deploy- Turnover of district champions, staff who were the primary 
ment, and scale-up ranged from issues related to setting up trainers and leaders for the EM approach at the district level, 
the technology to the question of government readiness to resulted in some loss of momentum for the uptake of cStock 
assume ownership of the system after the initial implement- and for conducting DPAT meetings. It is important to plan 
ing project ends.  for new staff training to ensure continuity and quality of 
Setting up a mobile information technology system: The two intervention implementation. Training should also build a 
mobile network operators (MNOs) initially charged com- sense of ownership and develop champions. For instance, 
mercial rates for SMS messages. Recognizing the difficulties finding opportunities for district staff to attend larger 
that the MOH would have in sustaining these costs without meetings where they can proudly present their successes at a 
continued donor support, the project engaged in intensive national level or across districts can motivate champions. To 
advocacy efforts with both MNOs, urging them to provide mitigate staff turnover effects, trainings during the scale-
28  n  CSTOCK
up phase included more district-level staff and all program Fund grant, and MOH staff have taken full responsibility 
coordinators whose programs extend to the community level for all system administration for cStock and support for the 
were included as DPAT members. DPATs. JSI no longer has staff dedicated to cStock and only 
Developing MOH readiness for system maintenance and provides ad hoc support to the MOH as needed. cStock con-
data storage / server hosting: Building capacity within the tinues to operate at full scale and is integrated into existing 
MOH to manage the cStock system has taken time and re- structures and processes for the CHWs.  n
sources. The capacity to host the data in the private sector is 
still emerging. Therefore, the decision was made to outsource 
data storage and software maintenance to US-based compa-
nies. While outsourcing is the appropriate choice at present, Snapshot: cStock
in-country capacity for hosting and maintenance should be 
Geographic Malawi
revisited as the program scales. Coverage
Future Plans Implementation 2011 to presentDates
Implementation Malawi Ministry of Health (MOH)(implementing)
While most innovation projects strive to move from pilot Partners JSI (design, pilot, and scale-up) 
to practice, achieving goals of scale-up and sustainability are Dimagi (software developers)
often a challenge. Over the project period EM achieved full Save the Children (scale-up)World Health Organization (scale-up)
scale and began the journey toward being integrated as an 
Donor(s) Bill & Melinda Gates Foundation (pilot)
organizational practice. Following the close of the SC4CCM mHealth Alliance International Working Group 
project in 2015, JSI placed a secondee in the MOH for 12 Grant (sustainability)
months to transfer skills in managing cStock and the DPATs. USAID/President’s Malaria Initiative
The secondee worked closely with MOH staff to fully estab- Global Fund
lish the NPAT and institutionalize national support for the Contact Sarah Andersson, Senior Technical Advisor, John 
innovation. cStock is now being funded through the Global Information Snow, Inc. (JSI), sarah_andersson@jsi.com
References & Additional Resources
Reports: 
Strengthening Supply Chains at the Community Level: findings from the SC4CCM project in Malawi, Rwanda, and Ethiopia http://sc-
4ccm.jsi.com/files/2015/01/SC4CCM-Findings-Report_FINAL.pdf 
From Pilot to Practice: lessons on scale, institutionalization and sustainability from the (in-progress) journey of the SC4MM project 
http://sc4ccm.jsi.com/files/2014/11/Pilot-to-Practice-Brief.pdf 
Malawi Intervention Strategy for Improving the Community Health Supply Chain: Implementation and M&E Plan 
http://sc4ccm.jsi.com/files/2012/10/Malawi-Implementation-Plan.pdf 
References:
1. WHO. Child mortality rates plunge by more than half since 1990 but global MDG target missed by wide margin. 2015.  http://www.who.int/
mediacentre/news/releases/2015/child-mortality-report/en/
2. SC4CCM. 2010. Malawi Community Health Supply Chain Baseline Assessment Report.  Arlington, Va. SC4CCM. http://sc4ccm.jsi.com/
files/2013/10/Malawi-Baseline-Report_FINAL.pdf 
3. Chandani Y, Andersson S, Heaton A, Noel M, Shieshia M, Mwirotsi A, et al. Making products available among community health workers: 
Evidence for improving community health supply chains from Ethiopia, Malawi, and Rwanda. J Glob Health [Internet]. 2014 Dec;4(2). 
Available from: http://www.jogh.org/documents/issue201402/Chandani_FINAL.pdf
4. Shieshia M, Noel M, Andersson S, Felling B, Alva S, Agarwal S, et al. Strengthening community health supply chain performance through an 
integrated approach: Using mHealth technology and multilevel teams in Malawi. J Glob Health [Internet]. 2014 Nov 4(2). Available from: 
http://www.jogh.org/documents/issue201402/Shieshia_FINAL.pdf
5. SC4CCM. Malawi Community Health Supply Chain Midline Evaluation Report [Internet]. Arlington, VA: JSI Research & Training Institute, Inc.; 
2013 [cited 2014 May 21]. Available from: http://sc4ccm.jsi.com/files/2013/11/Malawi-Midline-Report_FINAL.pdf 
6. SC4CCM. Malawi SC4CCM Project Endline Evaluation Report [Internet]. Arlington, VA: JSI Research & Training Institute, Inc.; 2014. Available 
from:  http://sc4ccm.jsi.com/files/2014/11/Malawi-Endline-Report.pdf 
mHEALTH COMPENDIUM  SPECIAL EDITION 2016  n  29
Improving the quality of child health care  
in Malawi at the primary level through  
decision-support tools
Hotensia Dzuwa, HSA, Mlangali Health Centre, Dedza
30  n  INTEGRATED COMMUNITY CASE MANAGEMENT
iCCM
Integrated Community Case Management is used in hard-to-
reach areas to complement facility-based services. In this project, 
health surveillance assistants use a mobile application to assist in 
providing health services to children under five years.
Malawi is among the nine low-income countries that reduced their under-five mortality rate by 60% or more between 
1990 and 2011.  Despite this progress, many children continue to die from conditions that are easily preventable and 
treatable. 
-A large proportion of children in Malawi are still at increased risk of mortality due to common childhood infections. 
The leading causes of under-five mortality in Malawi are malaria (13%),  AIDS (13%), pneumonia (11%), diarrhea 
(7%), and neonatal conditions (31%).  The Ministry of Health (MOH) and its partners have been scaling up a package 
of high-impact interventions to reduce under-five child mortality since 2007 under the Accelerated Child Survival and 
Development strategy.  These efforts have included integrated Community Case Management (iCCM) in hard-to-reach 
areas to complement fixed or scheduled facility-based services. D-tree International is the partner providing mHealth 
solutions to support the implementation of iCCM to improve the quality of care provided to children under five.  
About iCCM
In this project, health surveillance assistants (HSAs), a cadre The second component links the iCCM application to the of community health workers, use a mobile application to logistics management system to improve the availability of 
assist them in providing health services to under-five chil- needed drugs to the rural clinics where HSAs see patients. 
dren (2-59 months) in line with the MOH-approved iCCM This work has been coordinated with the MOH cStock pro-
protocol. The iCCM mobile application is a Mangologic gram to improve its use in tracking drug inventories. D-tree 
application which runs on an Android platform.  developed a simple user interface within the application for 
The components of the mobile application strengthen the the health workers to use to report stock levels, which is then 
ability of HSAs to deliver effective and efficient care. These submitted to cStock via structured SMS.
components are synergistic in providing a comprehensive array The third component of this project is the supervisory tool 
of tools and a supportive supervisory framework for the HSA. for those who are managing and supervising HSAs. The tool 
The first component of the iCCM application captures all is based on the new paper-based routine supervision checklist 
the elements of the village register used by the HSA. The developed by the MOH and Save the Children. It focuses on 
application supports HSAs to make the appropriate decisions key performance indicators for the HSAs. The tool facilitates 
on treatment. HSAs are also enabled to accurately report on both collection and interpretation of data and also has a 
their work in a timely manner. The iCCM mobile applica- dashboard so users can see the status of the work being done 
tion therefore enforces adherence to clinical protocols and by HSAs; it will also provide information for project-related 
iCCM holistically. decision-making.
mHEALTH COMPENDIUM  SPECIAL EDITION 2016  n  31
Program Design Process
The algorithm for the application was developed using the UNICEF, Support for Service Delivery Integration, and the 
MOH’s approved iCCM protocol. After the development World Health Organization.
and design of the application, D-tree trained six HSAs from D-tree employs a number of avenues to solicit feedback to 
Ntchisi District to use the application in their respective improve the application. D-tree has set up a chat group on 
village clinics. The six HSAs were engaged to solicit feedback Whatsapp which serves as a community of practice among 
about the functionality, relevance, and user friendliness of the HSAs in their respective health facilities to share informa-
the application to refine it. The refinement process took two tion on the usage and difficulties they may be facing. HSA 
months. The district health management team and Integrated supervisors also have a chat group on Whatsapp where they 
Management of Childhood Illnesses (IMCI) Unit were then share ideas and give feedback on the use of the application. 
informed and permission was granted to roll out the appli- There is a dedicated helpline, which is available to all HSAs to 
cation to all HSAs conducting iCCM in the district. D-tree call during working hours. D-tree interacts with IMCI experts 
trained MOH officials to train the HSAs. MOH officials were who have the mandate from MOH to make changes to the 
used as trainers with the objective of ensuring sustainability, protocols and to give feedback which is incorporated into 
support, and easy management of mobile application use. the application. As part of project implementation, there are 
To keep the MOH and other relevant stakeholders informed scheduled review meetings at the district and health facility 
about the progress of the implementation, presentations on levels where HSA supervisors and HSAs review progress and 
the application functionality and roll-out were made during give feedback on use of the application. When feedback has 
IMCI technical working group meetings, which are hosted been incorporated into the application, a new version is cre-
by the MOH and attended by partners such as the Malar- ated and deployed remotely to the users. Users are informed 
ia Control Program, Central Monitoring and Evaluation through their respective chat forums and/or through SMS 
Department in the Ministry of Education, Save the Children, about the changes.
Growth in Scale
After initial development and refinement, the iCCM application was expanded to HSAs in Dedza and Ntcheu 
mHealth application was rolled out in Ntchisi District with districts in 2014 and in Mzimba North District in 2015. 
about 20 HSAs in 2013. By December 2014, 138 HSAs and By February 2016, 128 HSAs and 33 HSA supervisors in 
15 HSA supervisors in Ntchisi District had been trained. The Dedza, 116 HSAs in Mzimba North, and 133 HSAs and 38 
Figure 1.  
Number of children seen by quarter 
80,000 Dowa
Machinga
60,000 Ntchisi
Ntcheu
40,000
Mzimba 
North
20,000
Dedza
Q3 Q4 Q1 Q2 Q3 Q4 Q1 Q2 Q3 Q4 Q1
2013 2014 2015 2016
32  n  INTEGRATED COMMUNITY CASE MANAGEMENT
Flackson Chibwato, HSA, Chinguluwe Health Centre, Ntchisi
supervisors in Ntcheu had been trained to use the iCCM and application to support the work of the HSAs. The current 
supervisory applications. The HSAs have dedicated two to iCCM application was integrated with CBMNH protocols to 
three days a week to running the village clinics. However, they have an integrated CCM/CBMNH application. This appli-
see children who come to the village clinic even outside the cation was rolled out to 350 HSAs in Dowa District and 166 
dedicated days. On average, 75% of the HSAs are consistently HSAs in Machinga District in 2015. In total, the program 
using the mHealth application when assessing and treating has trained and equipped 1,031 HSAs and 84 HSA supervi-
children at the village clinics. sors since 2013. The total number of clients seen as of March 
HSAs are responsible for a number of health services, in- 2016 is 307,762 (see Figure 1). 
cluding family planning; community case management; During 2016, D-tree will also add a family planning com-
community-based maternal and neonatal health (CBMNH); ponent to the application and add coverage to at least one 
nutrition; and water, sanitation, and hygiene (WASH). more district.
D-tree plans to integrate as many services as possible into one 
Evaluation and Results
D-tree International carried out an evaluation to determine treatment given depends on the availability of the drugs and 
the clinical effectiveness of the electronic CCM. A mixed supplies recommended. Sixty percent of cases were referred 
approach was used to collect both quantitative and qualitative appropriately in the intervention (phone) group while 48% of 
data. The results showed higher scores in assessment, identi- the cases were referred correctly in the control (paper) group. 
fication of danger signs referrals (diagnosis), treatment, and Counseling and treatment advice were seen to be higher 
counseling. These are the key elements in the management of among the phone users (93%) than the paper users (87%).
illnesses in children under-five. From the HSA and caregiver interviews, considerable pos-
Adherence to assessment using the eCCM app was 100% itive feeling and feedback were recorded. HSAs felt more 
compared to 91% for those using paper. With the phone confident in using the iCCM application. They also felt that 
application, all questions are asked and recorded before going there was a reduction in the frequency of visits by the same 
on to the next phase to encourage the HSA to go through the children as compared to before, which they attributed to the 
complete assessment. Paper users correctly identified 60% comprehensiveness of the assessment and care given to the 
of the danger signs compared to 100% of the phone users. child when using the phone. HSAs expressed knowledge gain 
Treatment of cases with no danger signs was higher in the pa- in using the application from the prompts and advice as well 
per users (79%) compared to the phone users (74%). While as counseling messages they get from the phone. HSAs also 
the phone provides the recommended treatment, the actual expressed improved follow-up rates for cases. However, they 
mHEALTH COMPENDIUM  SPECIAL EDITION 2016  n  33
were concerned with the double entry of data as they use both “The phone enables me to conduct a comprehensive assessment 
the phone and paper registers. of the child. The phone makes a diagnosis for me, so it makes 
Quotes from the district health team and HSAs include: my work easier, unlike before where I had to make sense of the 
symptoms to make a diagnosis.” —Daniel Mandevu, Bembeke 
“It is better to use the phone than the paper, because the phone has Health Centre, Dedza
everything you need to do CCM.” —District IMCI coordinator
Lessons Learned in Program Implementation and Scaling
n It takes effort to train and generate stakeholder in- iCCM system, when there are drug stock-outs, the 
terest in using data arising from the implementation of HSAs tend to close the village clinics, so a mobile tool 
a mHealth application; simply building program dash- will only have limited effectiveness. Therefore, contin-
boards is not enough. We have now worked to ensure ued supervisory support is needed for both eCCM and 
that the results from each district’s activities are reviewed non-mobile sites to help the HSAs feel confident to still 
and presented at the quarterly program meetings. For see sick children even if they lack medication, as they 
instance, based on the usage levels from Dowa District should be able to successfully diagnose them and identi-
in 2016, D-tree was able to establish that the HSAs fy those who need home care and those who need to be 
faced acute drug shortages and therefore were unable to urgently referred.
operate the village clinics at full scale. This was brought 
n When scaling up, it is important to have clear and 
to the attention of the IMCI unit, which sent a team to sustainable follow-up and support processes in place. 
try to resolve the situation. It is more helpful to avoid creating parallel structures and 
n The involvement of communities in managing the instead use existing structures to provide the support. 
phones is critical to their sustainability. There have 
n In order to enhance coordination efforts between pro-
been occasions when an HSA’s phone was stolen and grams at the MOH and to support the use of data for 
later returned by another community member, as they decision-making, D-tree placed a team member at 
saw this as a tool that belonged to the community and the IMCI unit to serve as mHealth coordinator.
not just an individual. This is because after the applica-
tion training, the HSAs sensitize the communities that n Although the mHealth application does not yet directly 
they will now be using the phone to assess and treat the connect into the District Health Information Software 2 
children. The community then sees the phone as a tool (DHIS2), the monthly reporting feature has shown 
for running the village clinic. to be useful as the districts using the mobile application 
have shown improved reporting rates into DHIS2. In 
n The implementation of the mHealth system is not the Central West Zone, for example, the mobile districts 
a panacea to fix all the problems of the health showed 100% reporting rates for the last 5 months with 
system. It is and should be part of an integrated system 89% reporting on time as compared to a 77% reporting 
to improve health care and outcomes. Specific to the rate and 53% on time in the non-mobile districts.
Future Plans
D-tree plans to develop a supervisory application for the With the continuous support to improve quality of care, the 
integrated CCM/CBMNH application, which will allow the next step for D-tree is to integrate family planning into the 
HSA supervisors to monitor the performance of their HSAs existing CCM/CBMNH application. This is another key 
from a mobile device. As the program has grown, we have component of the work of the HSAs and was identified as 
seen the need to engage HSA supervisors as well as assistant a priority following discussions with the MOH. With the 
environmental health officers as a way of extending the ability addition of family planning, the application will now serve 
of the program to identify HSAs who are struggling and to re- to support most of the functions the HSAs perform. The 
solve common issues. In addition, the supervisory application integration of applications is in line with the MOH strategic 
will improve interaction between the HSAs and their super- plan where standalone services are being integrated to ensure 
visors through remotely checking the HSAs’ performance. a holistic approach to health care given to clients whose health 
Currently, physical supervisions to check HSAs’ performance needs span across multiple services. 
are irregular due to financial constraints in the MOH.
34  n  INTEGRATED COMMUNITY CASE MANAGEMENT
Two HSAs doing a role play at a CCM mHealth app training in Ntcheu
D-tree, in collaboration with other partners, is working with Snapshot: iCCM
the MOH to put systems in place that will enable interoper-
ability of both systems to allow data from the mobile applica- Geographic MalawiCoverage Districts: Dedza, Mzimba North, Ntcheu, Ntchisi, 
tion to be sent to DHIS2. Currently, the health information Dowa, and Machinga
system (HIS) policy has been approved and standard operat- Implementation July 2012–March 2017
ing procedures (SOPS) are being developed. The SOPs will Dates
determine the process of interoperability. Implementation D-tree International (project design and 
While there is strong support from the MOH for contin- Partners implementation support)ThingsPrime (solutions architect)
ued use of the application and scale-up, the current funding Ministry of Health (implementer)
streams end in 2016 and 2017, presenting a challenge for the Save the Children (project partner)
future. This is an issue the MOH faces in other programs as Jhpiego Support for Service Delivery Integration (project partner)
well, as donors are directing funding through development 
partners rather than through the MOH, limiting the govern- Donor(s) Barr FoundationSave the Children Canada
ment’s ability to fund their priorities.  n Jhpiego Support for Service Delivery Integration
Contact Steve Ollis, Chief Operating Officer, D-tree 
Information International, sollis@d-tree.org
References & Additional Resources 
1. Agarwal Smisha, LeFevre Amnesty E, Lee Jaime, L’Engle Kelly, Mehl Garrett, Sinha Chaitali et al. Guidelines for reporting of health 
interventions using mobile phones: mobile health (mHealth) evidence reporting and assessment (mERA) checklist. BMJ. 2016.
2. UNICEF. Committing to Child Survival : A Promised Renewed. Progress Report 2012
3. Bryce J, Requejo JH. 2010. Countdown to 2015 Decade report (2000–2010): Taking stock of maternal, newborn, and child survival. New York, 
Countdown to 2015 for Maternal, Newborn and Child Health.
mHEALTH COMPENDIUM  SPECIAL EDITION 2016  n  35
KILKARI, MOBILE ACADEMY, 
& MOBILE KUNJI
Photo by BBC Media Action
36  n  KILKARI , MOBILE ACADEMY, AND MOBILE KUNJI   
mHEALTH FOR MOTHERS
Scaling up free mobile health education to 1 million community 
health workers and 10 million women in partnership with the 
Government of India
India’s maternal and infant mortality rates remain above the Sustainable Development Goal targets.  The Government 
of India is making considerable investments in this area and various innovative approaches and initiatives are evolving 
to bolster these efforts. Leveraging mobile phone technology (mHealth) to change people’s health-seeking behavior is 
key among them. 
In 2012, BBC Media Action, as a part of the Bill & Melinda Gates Foundation-funded Ananya program, designed, 
developed, and rolled out three mHealth services to increase the uptake of life-saving preventative maternal and child 
health behaviors by pregnant women, mothers of children up to two years old, and rural families in Bihar State.  Ananya 
is a collaboration between the Gates Foundation and the Government of Bihar to dramatically reduce maternal and 
infant mortality in the state.
n Kilkari (a baby’s gurgle) is an outbound service that n Mobile Kunji is a free audio-visual job aid that 
delivers weekly, time-appropriate audio messages brings together an interactive voice response (IVR) 
about pregnancy, childbirth, and childcare directly to mobile service with a printed deck of cards with 
families’ mobile phones from the second trimester of important health messages. It is designed to improve 
pregnancy until the child is one year old. engagement between community health workers 
 Mobile Academy is an IVR training course designed (CHWs) and families, thus leading to healthier n
to refresh CHWs’ knowledge of simple steps behavior by new and expecting mothers.
families can take to improve the health of mothers 
and babies, and to improve their ability to clearly 
communicate them.
Given the success of these services, on 15 January 2016 the Government of India launched Kilkari and Mobile 
Academy nationally to train one million health workers and help nearly 10 million new & expecting mothers make 
healthier choices.
About Kilkari, Mobile Academy, and Mobile Kunji 
K ilkari, Mobile Academy, and Mobile Kunji all use IVR At the national level, both Mobile Academy and Kilkari have technology that is already being used by the commer- been integrated with the government’s Maternal and Child 
cial mobile industry to make audio content available to any Tracking System (MCTS). Currently 1.3 million pregnant 
mobile phone across India. No new handsets, software, or women and mothers across six states who have registered 
technical skills are required for target groups to use the proj- mobile numbers on MCTS are automatically subscribed so 
ect’s services, allowing accessibility at scale from the outset. that they begin receiving weekly calls. Similarly, only CHWs, 
A robust, open source mobile health platform called Mobile who are registered in MCTS can dial into Mobile Academy 
Technology for Community Health (MOTECH) powers all and access the four-hour training course. They dial a 12-digit 
three services. for access; bookmarking technology allows them to return to 
the exact location in the course whenever they like. 
mHEALTH COMPENDIUM  SPECIAL EDITION 2016  n  37
Program Design Process
When the three services were first being designed for rollout began to conceptualize and design the services. This involved 
in Bihar, the goal was to create mHealth services that are technological design and development, checking health 
scalable across the state and eventually across the country.  content, and conducting several rounds of user-testing and 
Bihar alone has a population of 108 million people, includ- content pretesting.
ing 27 million women of childbearing age, and over 80% of A user-centric design approach was employed during devel-
the population is rural with limited access to traditional me- opment involving feedback and inputs from CHWs. Mobile 
dia (TV and radio). However, 83% of women have access to Kunji, Mobile Academy, and Kilkari (user interface and con-
mobile phones, but most of these are low-end basic phones. tent) went through four rounds of rigorous user-testing and 
The aim was to use low-end technology for high-end gains, pretesting with CHWs and families to assess comprehension, 
sustainably scale the solutions for millions of people, and usability, and perceived value. The services were modified 
create services that did not require smartphones, software, or based on the results of each round of user-testing and then 
technical skills to use. tested again until satisfactory results were achieved.
The solution was found through Kilkari, Mobile Academy, BBC Media Action collaborated with the Ministry of Health 
and Mobile Kunji. All services are handset agnostic and em- and Family Welfare (MOHFW), the National Health System 
ploy easy-to-use familiar IVR technology. Mobile Academy Resource Centre, and National Health Missions (NHMs) in 
empowers CHWs to access affordable standardized training the states and experts in the field of reproductive, maternal, 
content on their own terms; Kilkari delivers time-sensitive newborn, child, and adolescent health (RMNCH+A) to 
audio messages directly to the mobile phones of families; and compile the technical health content for all three services. 
Mobile Kunji gets around the challenge of delivering audio Before services were launched, the technical health content 
and visual content without distributing expensive hardware. went through a rigorous vetting and approval process at 
BBC Media Action began by researching its audiences: MOHFW. This ensured that health content was aligned 
CHWs, pregnant women, and mothers of young children with national guidelines. In addition, a plan for periodically 
and their families. It conducted a landscaping study to updating content was developed to ensure that it remains 
understand their mobile ownership and usage patterns and accurate and relevant to the audiences. 
Growth in Scale
The rollout and scale-up of the three services in individual in January 2016. The services will be rolled-out in three 
states has involved working with the MOHFW at the na- phases to train 1 million community health workers and help 
tional level, the NHMs at the national and state level, and  nearly 10 million new and expecting mothers make healthier 
an alliance of donors (Gates Foundation, USAID, Barr choices and lead longer, healthier lives. In phase one of the 
Foundation, and UK Department for International Develop- national scale-up, Kilkari was rolled out in six Empowered 
ment (UKAid)). Action Group states (Jhakrhand, Madhya Pradesh, Odisha, 
In May 2012, BBC Media Action launched Mobile Academy Rajasthan, Uttarakhand, Uttar Pradesh) and Mobile Acad-
and Mobile Kunji in Bihar as part of the Ananya program. emy was rolled out in Jhakrhand, Madhya Pradesh, Rajas-
In August 2013, BBC Media Action then launched Kilkari than, and Uttarakhand. In phase two, the two services will 
in Bihar under the same program. In 2014, Mobile Academy be scaled to an additional three states (planned for 2017); 
and Mobile Kunji were launched in Odisha with funding in phase three, the services will be scaled across the country 
from UKAid and the state government, and in 2015, with (planned for 2018 onwards).  In 2015, the Barr Foundation 
funding from the Gates Foundation and the state govern- and USAID joined the national scale-up effort. BBC Media 
ment, the two services (Mobile Kunji and Mobile Academy) Action has worked in partnership with the Grameen Foun-
were launched in Uttar Pradesh. dation since 2011 to scale MOTECH to power the services. 
MOTECH continues to be the engine for the national 
In 2014, the MOHFW expressed interest in rolling out deployment. BBC Media Action, in partnership with state 
Mobile Academy and Kilkari nationally. At that time, BBC governments, is also scaling Mobile Kunji in Bihar, Odisha, 
Media Action and the Gates Foundation began working with and Uttar Pradesh, and rollout is planned in Jharkhand later 
MOHFW to take the services to scale. The national launch in 2016.
of Mobile Academy and Kilkari by the MOHFW took place 
38  n  KILKARI , MOBILE ACADEMY, AND MOBILE KUNJI   
Mobile Kunji (left) and Mobile Academy (right)
Evaluation and Results
Kilkari is being rolled out in six states currently to reach content has been played to families (in what volume and 
approximately one million families, with a goal to rapidly with what frequency). Tracking these indicators over time 
scale to reach 10 million families a year. Mobile Academy provides key insights that enable on-ground project staff and 
is now being rolled out to 432,000 health workers in Bihar, government officials to make timely decisions about imple-
Jharkhand, Madhya Pradesh, Odisha, Rajasthan, Uttara- mentation and planning.
khand, and Uttar Pradesh. The MOHFW plans to scale Indicators to monitor the usage of Mobile Academy include 
Mobile Academy to reach nearly a million health workers the uptake of the service by CHWs—this includes the num-
over the next three years. Mobile Kunji is being rolled out on ber of unique users, the minutes consumed, progression and 
a state-by-state basis to more than 282,000 CHWs in Bihar, competition by CHWs in the four-hour course. This data 
Odisha, and Uttar Pradesh, with plans to scale to Jharkhand can be aggregated for each block (smallest administrative 
soon. unit in a state), district, and state. Project staff and govern-
The results of a usage and engagement study, commissioned ment officials at these levels can monitor this data and use it 
by BBC Media Action and carried out by the Indian Market to support and encourage CHWs in low-performing blocks 
Research Bureau in Bihar in 2014, indicate that exposure to to complete the course and help them if they have run into 
Mobile Kunji is positively associated with: significant increas- difficulties. 
es in the knowledge, confidence, and credibility of CHWs; The indicators to assess the uptake of Kilkari include the 
positive significant difference in the quality of CHWs’ inter- number of users called by the service, the number of success-
actions with new and expecting mothers; positive significant ful calls, minutes of content heard. The data generated can 
difference in levels of knowledge of life-saving preventative be aggregated, analyzed, and used by project and government 
health behaviors among new and expecting mothers; and staff to understand why the duration of messages listened to 
positive significant difference in adoption of life-saving in one block, district, or state is lower than another. 
preventative health behaviors by new and expecting mothers. 
A limited evaluation of Mobile Academy was also carried out Indicators for Mobile Kunji include the number of CHWs 
as part of the usage and engagement study. It showed that using the service, how many minutes heard, and specific 
Mobile Academy had a positive impact on the knowledge health information accessed. This data can be used by project 
and confidence of CHWs, improved their standing in the and government staff to understand why CHWs are not dis-
community, and resulted in recognition from their peers. cussing a particular behavior. Based on this information, field 
staff can provide additional support in the form of training 
Mobile usage data provides real-time information about or mentoring.
Kilkari usage patterns by beneficiaries as well as CHWs’ 
progress through Mobile Academy and which Mobile Kunji 
mHEALTH COMPENDIUM  SPECIAL EDITION 2016  n  39
Photo by Priyanka Dutt
Lessons Learned in Program Implementation and Scaling
n Demonstrate sustained adoption at scale, as well as Essentially, it reduced the total cost of government 
health impact. One of the biggest challenges that state ownership. However, when deciding to use open source 
and national governments face is in scaling mHealth solu- software, it is critical for the development community to 
tions beyond pilot stage. It is necessary to plan for growth acknowledge the risk in using open source technology. 
early to figure out the significant financial, technical, Firstly, open source software may be created by organiza-
operational, and legal challenges involved in scaling. tions that might not have the capacity required to support 
 Take the path of least resistance. Modify the ap- the software to industry standard service level agreements n
proach to reduce government procurement challenges. after launch at scale. In addition, although open source 
In India, as in many other countries, the government technology can be adoptable by anyone, in many cases the 
must first go through a procurement process to adopt a people who know best how to fix or further develop an 
technology, product, or service. This can be a time con- application are those who built it. 
suming process. To help avert delays, BBC Media Action n Localize content, test that it works, and keep tech-
set up a toll free centralized long code platform, where nical information relevant and up-to-date. Under-
shortcodes and integration with multiple operators’ stand who the target audience is and ensure that content 
billing systems were not required, and government only is relevant, understandable, and engaging. It’s vital that 
needed to contract one operator via a standard competi- the technical health content is reviewed periodically and 
tive process. updated as required. It’s best to set up a process that 
n To generate wider interest, demonstrate demand for ensures that key stakeholders review and update content 
services not just from users, but from state gov- periodically.
ernments. The national government’s interest in BBC n Content licensing protects quality. BBC Media 
Media Action’s services grew after it scaled beyond Bihar. Action is licensing its mobile health content, developed 
The launch in Odisha with support from UKAid and the with funding from the Gates Foundation, DFID, and 
state government in February 2014, and further program the Barr Foundation, to the government of India at 
growth in other states drew attention at the national level. no cost. However, the content is not open source—it 
 Be prepared to cope with the challenges of scaling cannot be downloadable by anyone under a Creative n
and supporting open source software. Open source Commons license. BBC Media Action licenses its health 
software is used to power Kilkari, Mobile Academy, and content—usually royalty free—on a case-by-case basis 
Mobile Kunji because by investing in  an open source to ensure that it remains factually accurate, complies 
mobile health platform, the financial hurdles that the with government policies and guidelines, is used in the 
government faces in adopting the system are limited. context it was designed for, and is being used with the 
consent of the people featured.
Future Plans 
National launch of Mobile Academy and Kilkari by the na- MOTECH) so it can handle calls to and from 35 states, 
tional government took place in January 2016. The services and to support software for a period of three years (through 
will be rolled-out in three phases, adding states in phase one December 2018). Support from USAID and the Gates 
and two during 2016 and 2017 dependent on feedback from Foundation contributes to the national scale-up effort over 
users and successful adoption of the services in the phase the next two and a half years. Further investment is required 
one states. In 2018, there are plans to begin scaling the two for developing different language versions of the two services, 
services to the rest of the country, reaching a total of 1 mil- to carry out monitoring and evaluation of the project, and 
lion CHWs and 10 million pregnant women and mothers of to document the five-year learning journey from research 
children under one year of age. BBC Media Action, in part- and development to national scale-up. BBC Media Action is 
nership with state governments, is also scaling Mobile Kunji currently working to design impact-evaluation studies and a 
in Bihar, Odisha, and Uttar Pradesh, and rollout is planned cost-benefit analysis of all three services to assess the value of 
in Jharkhand later in 2016. delivering free health education to millions of beneficiaries 
The Gates Foundation’s investment has covered the cost of and health workers.   n
scaling the software for the two services  (including 
40  n  KILKARI , MOBILE ACADEMY, AND MOBILE KUNJI   
Snapshot: Kilkari, Mobile Academy, Mobile Kunji
Geographic India
Coverage Mobile Kunji: Bihar, Odisha, Uttar Pradesh
Mobile Academy: Bihar, Odisha, Uttar Pradesh, 
Rajasthan, Madhya Pradesh, Jharkhand, and 
Uttarakhand
Kilkari: Odisha, Uttar Pradesh, Rajasthan, Madhya 
Pradesh, Jharkhad, and Uttarakhand
Implementation May 2012 to present: Mobile Kunji and Mobile 
Dates Academy
May 2013 to present: Kilkari
Implementation BBC Media Action (implementing organization)
Partners Pathfinder Intl. (Dec 2010-Mar 2016) 
(implementation partner)
Grameen Foundation; OnMobile; Onion 
Development Technologies; IMIMobile; GSMA 
(technology partners)
Government of India Ministry of Health & Family 
Welfare, State National Health Missions (partners)
Donor(s) Bill & Melinda Gates Foundation; USAID; Barr 
Foundation; UKAid
Contact Sara Chamberlain, Director, Digital, BBC Media 
Information Action, India  
sara.chamberlain@in.bbcmediaaction.org
References & Additional Resources
Yvonne MacPherson and Sara Chamberlain. “Health on the Move: Can Mobile Phone’s Save Lives?” February 2013.  
www.bbc.co.uk/mediaaction/publications-and-resources/policy/briefings/asia/india/policy_mhealth
Sara Chamberlain. “A Mobile Guide Toward Better Health.” Innovations. MIT Press. 2014.   
mitpressjournals.org/userimages/ContentEditor/1415302178306/INNOVATIONS_DIGITAL-INCLUSION.pdf
Video: Design thinking behind Mobile Kunji and Mobile Academy: youtu.be/IUIDhU_Zjcc
Video: Impact of Mobile Kunji and Mobile Academy: youtu.be/KtI-XgCuhTg
Priyanka Dutt. Six Lessons I learnt while Trying to Reach 10 Million Women in India with Life-saving Health Information. April 2016. 
blogs.worldbank.org/publicsphere/blog-post-month-six-lessons-i-learnt-while-trying-reach-10-million-women-india-life-saving-health
Bihar project website: www.rethink1000days.org
References
1. Impact of Audio-Visual Job Aid on Influencing Family Health Outcomes in Bihar: Findings from the Usage and Engagement study on Mobile 
Kunji. www.rethink1000days.org/wp-content/uploads/2016/02/Detailed-presentation_-study-on-effectiveness-of-Mobile-Kunji.pdf
2. Priyanka Dutt. “Technology saving millions of lives.” Huffington Post. January 2016. www.huffingtonpost.co.uk/priyanka-dutt/technology-
saving-millions-of-lives_b_9058016.html
mHEALTH COMPENDIUM  SPECIAL EDITION 2016  n  41
Connecting ministries of health with frontline 
health workers via SMS
Photo by Emily Nicholson for IntraHealth International
42  n  MHERO 
mHERO
MHero is a two-way, mobile phone-based communication 
platform that uses basic text messaging, or SMS, to connect 
ministries of health and health workers. mHero operates  
on simple talk-and-text mobile devices—no smartphone or 
tablet required. 
MHero is not a new technology. It’s a way to connect data from existing health information systems (HIS) to allow 
targeted, real-time communication. mHero brings together components of a country’s HIS using open international 
interoperability standards for health information exchange.  Health officials can use mHero to:
n communicate critical messages to health workers and informal indicators, one-time assessments, and 
during a crisis; validation of health worker and facility data; and 
n target messages to health workers based on cadre, n support surveillance systems for real-time report-
location, or skill set; ing on active cases and potential outbreaks and to 
 collect critical information that supports resilient reinforce health workers’ skills—part of a country’s n
health systems, including stock levels, routine formal solution for Integrated Disease Surveillance and 
Response (IDSR).
Harnessing the principles for digital development—guidelines that can help development practitioners integrate 
established best practices into technology-enabled programs—IntraHealth International and UNICEF created mHero in 
August 2014 to support health sector communication during the Ebola outbreak in Liberia.1 mHero is currently being 
scaled up in Liberia, piloted in Guinea and Sierra Leone, and deployed in Mali and Senegal as part of the Global Health 
Security Agenda to support IDSR use cases. 
About mHero
MHero combines iHRIS, an open source human resourc- What makes mHero work at national scale is rigorous es information system (HRIS) developed by Intra- adoption of open international standards for health in-
Health, and RapidPro, UNICEF’s SMS platform that allows formation data exchange. These include the Care Services 
users to create SMS messages in a “workflow” through a Discovery (CSD), Mobile Alert Communication Manage-
website. mHero supports one-time messages to health work- ment (mACM), and HL7 Fast Healthcare Interoperability 
ers or two-way communication between health workers and Resources (FHIR) standards for sharing health worker and 
the ministry of health. Health workers can initiate messages health facility data and to provide standards-based commu-
themselves by sending a standardized SMS to the mHero nication protocols for health workers. The open source and 
phone number. open standards approach means that the mHero platform is 
The technology behind mHero includes interoperability with not tied to any specific piece of software and allows minis-
other systems, such as DHIS2, through OpenHIE, an archi- tries of health to readily integrate mHero into their HIS.   
tecture that supports mHero as HIS expands and evolves. A variety of tools support the mHero platform.2 These 
Using these open source systems, ministries of health are able include video tutorials on operating the platform; operations 
to efficiently leverage health information technologies, many and management tools to support implementation; and a 
of which they have already invested in scaling to improve wiki to guide developers and program implementers setting 
their own HIS. up their own instances of the platform.3,4
mHEALTH COMPENDIUM  SPECIAL EDITION 2016  n  43
Program Design Process
The mHero platform is designed by facilitating interoper- rica, Johns Hopkins Center for Communication Programs, 
ability of existing HIS.   Linking iHRIS and RapidPro via International Medical Corps, Dimagi, the Clinton Health 
an interlinked health worker registry, information on health Access Initiative and many others.
workers (including cadre, facility, location), as well as their The most important stakeholder, however, is the ministry 
mobile numbers, are pulled from iHRIS and attached to the of health in the country in which mHero is implemented. 
workflow developed in RapidPro. mHero was also created to mHero is fully integrated into and operated directly by the 
be interoperable with District Health Information Soft- ministry. The ministry decides which use cases to prioritize 
ware 2  (DHIS2) and interlinked facility registries to ensure and which health workers to target with messages, and de-
standardized facility data are part of the mHero platform. velops and sends the workflows. IntraHealth works with the 
Security, access control, and data synchronization services are ministries and partners in the respective countries to align 
provided through the OpenHIM software. mHero with national policies and strategies so the platform 
mHero’s initial development was supported by UNICEF, can be utilized to support the existing (or future) HIS and to 
the US Agency for International Development (USAID) respond to priority health needs.
through the K4Health Project, and Johnson & Johnson. IntraHealth and UNICEF are building the capacity of 
The design process engaged a number of partners, including mHero implementers at ministries of health in Liberia, 
Jembi Health Systems, Thoughtworks, USAID, and others. Sierra Leone, and Guinea. This includes collaboration to 
An intentional multistakeholder approach was undertaken in strategically integrate mHero into existing data collection 
the development and implementation of mHero to include and reporting structures, training in RapidPro to create 
as much collaboration as possible to ensure the platform workflows and in operation of the platform through iHRIS, 
aligned with other digital efforts to reach health workers, establishing interoperability between RapidPro and iHRIS, 
especially during the Ebola response. These stakeholders and developing standard operating procedures and other 
have expanded to include the World Health Organization, critical management processes to integrate mHero into the 
MEASURE Evaluation, Jhpiego, Management Sciences for existing HIS framework.5 
Health, mPowering Frontline Health Workers, eHealth Af-
Growth in Scale 
The first mHero use cases were developed to help Libe- The success of mHero in Liberia can be attributed to the 
ria’s Ministry of Health and Social Welfare determine the ministry mHero team’s ownership of the platform and 
location of health workers during the Ebola response and commitment to ensuring mHero is aligned with Liberia’s 
which facilities were open. After a successful pilot in four HIS and that the platform is successful in responding to the 
facilities in four counties, the mHero team at the ministry ministry’s information and communication needs.As mHero 
began raising awareness of the platform among county-level scaled in Liberia, ministries in Guinea and Sierra Leone 
stakeholders.  began planning implementations. Officials from the three 
Interest in the system grew as officials realized the platform’s countries met through iHRIS and mHero trainings to share 
accessibility and flexibility, allowing for new use cases to experiences developing and deploying the platform, includ-
be developed. These included collecting information about ing integration into ministry and HIS structures and best 
mental health services, conducting an assessment of anthro- practices for strategic development of meaningful use cases. 
pometric nutrition tools, alerting new staff to their payroll As of March 2016, the ministry in Sierra Leone had planned 
IDs, and collecting information from health workers on their its use cases and was close to piloting the platform. Efforts 
level of family planning training, commodities supply, and to build a sustainable base for mHero in Guinea are gaining 
service provision.6 To date, 22 distinct use cases have reached momentum as the ministry develops its HIS strategic plan. 
over 5,000 health workers throughout the country. The min- USAID has supported scale-up of mHero in the three coun-
istry is now engaging external partners in the development tries through the Ebola Grand Challenge Innovation Grant 
and sending of use cases, demonstrating its role in leading through the Global Health Bureau.
health worker communications in Liberia. 
44  n  MHERO 
In Mali, IntraHealth is working with the Ministry of Health reinforcement of health workers’ skill sets during the surveil-
to develop and deploy mHero in both SMS and interactive lance process. In Senegal, the Ministry of Health is deploying 
voice response (IVR) formats to support the surveillance a version of mHero across its health regions. 
system, including enhancements in real-time reporting and 
Evaluation and Results
In November 2015, one year after the initial pilot, a baseline associated with Liberia’s Ministry of Health and Social Wel-
assessment was conducted in Liberia to measure frontline fare. The largest factor contributing to awareness of mHero 
health workers’ awareness of, use of, and attitudes toward was exposure, as 81% of those who knew of the platform 
mHero. Ten-question phone surveys were administered to had received an SMS sent via mHero. Health workers iden-
266 randomly selected recipients who fit the definition of tified various factors motivating them to respond to these 
a frontline health worker. A randomly selected subsample messages, with the most frequent reason being that they had 
of 20 health workers responded to an extended survey. This been told about mHero prior to receiving the text. Responses 
survey featured additional queries that elicited more detailed to the extended survey indicate that health workers almost 
information about respondents’ phone use, including mobile universally bring their phones to work each day, and more 
technologies such game playing, accessing social media, use their phones for connecting to social media than they do 
and taking online courses. The extended survey also probed for playing games or taking courses. Health workers report 
participants’ phone use patterns, such as preferred times for receiving a wide variety of health-related texts each month of 
receiving and responding to text messages. varying origin.
Overall, survey findings at baseline proved very preliminary An endline assessment using the same questions will be con-
due to a lack of awareness of mHero among respondents. ducted in Liberia in July 2016 toward the end of the USAID 
Out of the 266 respondents, only 7.9% of the health workers Ebola Grand Challenge Project.
had heard of mHero, and even fewer knew that mHero was 
mHEALTH COMPENDIUM  SPECIAL EDITION 2016  n  45
Photos by Emily Nicholson for IntraHealth International
 
Lessons Learned in Program Implementation and Scaling
A number of key insights and lessons learned have emerged working with other implementing partners to improve 
since mHero’s initial pilot in late 2014. These include: infrastructure in Liberia, Guinea, and Sierra Leone. 
 Ministry of health leadership and ownership: mHe- The needed infrastructural investments are not extreme n
ro’s success depends on the ministry stakeholders who and can support other subsystems of an HIS and basic 
utilize and implement the platform. It can take time operations of the ministry. This includes basic Internet 
to build a sense of ownership, to identify the strategic connection, procuring laptops for ministry staff, and 
“home” for mHero within the ministry, and to integrate provision of servers and backup servers for data and en-
mHero into the HIS architecture. suring security of mHero and iHRIS data. Working with 
other partners and donors to ensure a strategic approach 
n Awareness-raising with health workers: To encour- to infrastructure improvement is important, especially 
age their active engagement, health workers need to during an emergency response when coordination of 
know that mHero messages are legitimately from the investments is challenging.
ministry and that their responses are important for 
decision-making. Flyers, brochures, and other commu- n Implementation capacity: Though mHero harnesses 
nication tools can help spread the word. existing technology, the processes for implementing 
mHero are new. Ensuring ongoing capacity-building 
n Infrastructure: mHero’s functionality depends on a for mHero team members to not only facilitate the 
number of infrastructure components, including ade- interoperability of the systems but also establish proce-
quate software and hardware to operate the platform and dures that fit within their local context is important, as 
mobile network service throughout the country. Inade- is building capacity to manage and use data. Through 
quate infrastructure has delayed mHero implementation, ongoing training and mentorship, both from a distance 
in some cases more so than expected, but IntraHealth is and through short-term technical assistance, IntraHealth 
46  n  MHERO 
Photo by Emily Nicholson for IntraHealth International
continues to work with mHero teams in the respective n Engaging other external partners: Many other donors 
ministries to foster skills-building in systems operations and implementing partners have been operating in 
and data use. Staff turnover and non-mHero work Liberia, Guinea, and Sierra Leone to support the Ebola 
demands have posed challenges, thus an organizational response and rebuilding efforts, creating an additional 
development approach must be taken in capacity-build- but important layer of collaboration and commitment 
ing efforts. for mHero implementation to be successful.
Future Plans 
The future of mHero focuses on thoughtful steps toward the n Streamlined integration for communication with a 
full integration of the platform into ministry of health HIS health facility’s point of contact
plans and procedures, ensuring strategic use of the platform 
n Integration with other communication platforms as 
to support the needs of health workers and ministries, and alternatives to RapidPro (e.g., CommCare) for countries 
raising awareness to encourage message response. Future that are comfortable with their existing platform
trainings on both iHRIS and mHero have been planned, as 
well as workshops on the strategic use of data to inform pro- n Expanded analytics capabilities  n
grammatic and policy decisions. Discussions about interop-
erability are underway to ensure mHero can directly support 
other HIS subsystems. Pilot messages will be initiated in 
Sierra Leone, Guinea, and Liberia in the coming months, Snapshot: mHero
demonstrating full regional scale of the platform. In addi-
Geographic Guinea, Liberia, Mali, Senegal, Sierra Leone, Tanzania
tion, the Liberia ministry is interested in decentralizing use Coverage
of mHero so that county human resource officers can use it Implementation November 2014 to present
to communicate with health workers in facilities.  Dates
Other future plans to expand the capability of the mHero Implementation IntraHealth (co-founder of platform);
platform include the following: Partners UNICEF (co-founder of platform)
mHero is implemented by Ministries of Health
n Providing mHero functionality at the level of the Inter- Donor(s) USAI
linked Health Worker Registry, rather than iHRIS, for Johnson & Johnson
countries or programs that do not use iHRIS UNICEF Global Innovation Centre
UNICEF Liberia
n Tighter integration with DHIS2 for routine data col-
lection as well as alerts and reminders to support the Contact Amanda Puckett BenDor, Technical Advisor, Information IntraHealth, apuckett@intrahealth.org
routine data-collection process
References & Additional Resources 
1. “The Principles.” Principles for Digital Development, accessed March 15, 2016. http://digitalprinciples.org/
2. “Toolbox & Resources.” mHero.org, last modified April 19, 2016, http://www.mhero.org/toolbox-resources
3. Leitner, Carl. “mHero Videos by Carl.” YouTube.com, last modified September 1, 2015, https://www.youtube.com/playlist?list=PLVS-
gzqqaj15C4JEF-_GD5n8553ZgO_Nc
4. “MHero Installation and Configuration.” ihris.org, last modified March 1, 2016. https://wiki.ihris.org/wiki/MHero_Installation_and_
Configuration
5. “RapidPro Table of Contents.” RapidPro.io, accessed March 21, 2016. http://docs.rapidpro.io/
6. Puckett BenDor, Amanda; Nicholson, Emily. “Spotlight: mHero Connects Frontline Health Workers with Mental Health Services in Liberia. “ 
IntraHealth.org. December, 2015. http://www.intrahealth.org/page/mheromentalhealth
 
mHEALTH COMPENDIUM  SPECIAL EDITION 2016  n  47
Promoting maternal and child health in South 
Africa through mobile health messaging and 
feedback on services received
Photo by MomConnect
48  n  MOM CONNECT 
MOM CONNECT
The MomConnect technical solution has a number of linked 
elements that enable pregnant women to receive information 
about their own health and also that of their infants. Women can 
both ask for more information and supply feedback to improve 
the quality of health care.
In 2014, the South African Minister of Health, Dr. Aaron Motsoaledi, launched an initiative (MomConnect) to use 
mHealth technology as part of a suite of interventions, such as increased access to contraception and improved 
coverage of breastfeeding, to address the relatively high maternal mortality ratio (MMR) and child mortality rate in 
South Africa. The Medical Research Council estimated the MMR in the country at 155 deaths per 100,000 live births 
in 2013. South Africa’s Sustainable Development Goal (SDG) for MMR is 70 deaths or less per 100,000 live births by 
2030. Similarly, the child mortality rate of 39 deaths per 1,000 births in 2014 has an SDG target of 25 or less deaths 
per 1,000 by 2030.
MHealth projects in a number of countries have successfully used mobile phone technologies to enhance interventions 
which have been shown to improve maternal and child health (MCH) outcomes. In South Africa, virtually every 
pregnant woman has either her own mobile phone or access to one. Because of this virtual universal access, 
MomConnect was introduced.
MomConnect aims to improve both the demand for MCH services, through providing pregnant women with 
information via messages, and the supply side through impacting on quality via user feedback.  
About MomConnect
The MomConnect technical solution has a number of with other national information systems under develop-linked elements that enable pregnant women to receive ment. The women can choose one of the 11 official languag-
information about their own health and also that of their in- es for messages.
fants. They also enable interaction with a helpdesk. Women There are 150 messages in the full suite. These include hard 
can ask for more information and give feedback to provide health messages that address hypertension, HIV, and immu-
impetus for the supply side of the health system to improve nization for the baby. There are also softer messages about 
the quality of care. the growth of the baby and importance of bonding.  These 
Women who think they are pregnant subscribe to Mom- messages continue until the infant is one year old.
Connect using a free of charge unstructured supplementary Several components allow women to give feedback to the 
service data (USSD) number on their phones (*134*550#). helpdesk located in the national Department of Health 
This number works on all mobile networks in South Africa. (DOH). These include: frequently asked questions (FAQs); 
They initially receive messages encouraging them to register a five-question service quality rating survey the day after 
their pregnancy at an antenatal clinic. women register their pregnancy; and a compliments and 
Women attending the antenatal clinics are registered into complaints system which the women can use at any time. 
a central database. Based on the estimated gestational age MomConnect sends information via a national health infor-
of the fetus, stage-based messages are sent to the pregnant mation exchange to a central database in the DOH, where it 
woman. Similar messages linked to the age of the infant are can be linked with other information in the DOH.
sent after delivery. Variables linked to the identification of 
the women and the facilities allow MomConnect to link 
mHEALTH COMPENDIUM  SPECIAL EDITION 2016  n  49
Program Design Process
Between 2008 and 2013, a number of small-scale pilot The feedback mechanism has a number of discrete components.
mHealth projects were started in South Africa, many of 
n FAQ service: Pregnant women, who are registered for 
these dealing with maternal health. After reviewing these the service, are able to ask question via SMS. The Mom-
projects, the DOH set up a task team to design a national Connect helpdesk, with a professional nurse in charge, 
mHealth program to register all pregnant women and send responds by giving standard approved answers or directs 
them messages. the women to a clinic for further assistance.
The team was made up of DOH staff as well as people with n Service Rating: The day after registering her pregnancy 
expertise in various aspects of mHealth, including those with on MomConnect, the pregnant woman is sent an SMS 
links to mobile network operators; expertise in the back-end which prompts her to complete a free survey. This survey 
of data systems, databases, and information interoperability; covers friendliness of staff, patient privacy, facility clean-
prior experience of sending mHealth messages; and links to liness, and waiting times. A single follow-up message is 
the international mHealth community. The DOH gave lead- also sent if women do not complete the survey.
ership and ownership to MomConnect, which enjoyed con-
siderable political support as a ministerial flagship project. n Compliments and Complaints: Women are able to send a complaint or compliment via a free SMS. 
While the team developed the technical aspects of Mom- These are logged at the helpdesk. Each of the 52 health 
Connect, the political mandate was to make it a nationally districts in South Africa has a focal person in charge of 
scaled-up project to be implemented throughout South MCH. After sorting the complaints into the relevant 
Africa. In addition, the political mandate was to incorporate health district, based on the clinic where the complaint 
a feedback mechanism so that the voices of pregnant women arose, these are sent to focal persons. They are expected 
could be heard loudly and clearly. to act on these and give feedback to the helpdesk within 
Because the task team was chaired by a senior manager of the 10 days. If no action is taken the complaint is escalated 
DOH, national managers are consulted in all aspects of the to the provincial health management.  
project to ensure that it aligns fully with the overall direction 
of the DOH. For example, a message set was initially devel- Growth in Scale
oped by the task team. Several managers in the DOH then 
reviewed all of the messages to ensure that they were fully There are about 4,000 public sector facilities in South Africa, 
aligned with DOH policies and guidelines. so implementing the MomConnect technical solution on 
a national scale required partnerships and a considerable 
Figure 1.  
Scale-up model for MomConnect 
National Department of Health
Central Coordination Trainin
Provincial & District Health g 
MCH coordinators
M&E PEPFAR
Implementation Partners Partners
C Po ro to v tri
c tio
n
rd inin c
s a
a i
i
a D in
t lio Coo
rd
n
e ini
ng
s Tra
FACILITIES
Hospitals, Clinics, CHWs
50  n  MOM CONNECT 
Reporting
 and TA
ers
Tra
in
of 
i
vit
 Ac
ti
M&E
amount of coordination. The scale-up approach is shown  ing the announcement campaign by the Minister, each of the 
in Figure 1. district support partners funded by the President’s Emergen-
 The DOH provides overall leadership and coordination of cy Plan for AIDS Relief were trained to support the facilities 
MomConnect. A project manager was appointed, reporting to in the districts in which they work. This enabled wide-scale 
the senior manager in the DOH responsible for MCH. The training (2–3 hours) on how MomConnect works and how 
project manager, based in the DOH, coordinates all MomCon- to register pregnant women. 
nect activities and acts as the central point of responsibility. Between August 2014 and February 2015, over 30,000 
MomConnect was rolled out in a high-profile campaign health care workers were trained to register women on Mom-
across South Africa in 2014. This followed a visit by the Connect. Nearly all (95%) of public sector facilities have 
Minister of Health to each of South Africa’s nine provinces registered women on MomConnect. However, the numbers 
where he gave a presentation on MCH in South Africa and of registrations are still not optimal. Operational research has 
the potential impact of MomConnect. identified that lack of connectivity and timeouts as two ma-
jor constraints. Also, in some places the registration processes 
To register, pregnant women go to one of the country’s 4,000 could be streamlined. New methods have been designed to 
health facilities and receive assistance from health care work- overcome these difficulties and retraining of health workers 
ers who have been trained in the registration process. Follow- that take these factors into account has begun. 
Evaluation and Results
As of March 2016, over 34,000 health workers have been Of the respondents to this survey, over:  
trained to register pregnant women in the system. They work 
n 98% (1,962) felt that MomConnect messages had 
in 95% of all government health facilities in the country. helped them.
During the first year and a half of MomConnect they regis-
tered 663,513 women. This represents nearly half of all the n 80% (1,611) had shared the messages with friends or 
pregnant women attending antenatal care. their partners.
More than six times as many compliments (4,924) were n 80% (1,606) reported that the messages helped them to 
received compared to complaints (788) since the launch of remember their clinic visits.
MomConnect in August 2014. The compliments give positive n 75% (1,531) reported that the messages had helped 
feedback on MomConnect generally, as well as on particular them feel more prepared for childbirth and delivery.
facilities or staff. The complaints fall into three main catego-
n 70% (1,414) actually wanted more messages than the 
ries: health systems issues (e.g. lack of drugs and vaccines); 100-plus they already receive during their pregnancy and 
health services issues (e.g. long waiting times), or those related the first year of the child’s life.
to individual health workers (e.g. rude treatment). 
An overall impact assessment interviewing women before and 
In July 2015, a telephone survey was conducted with 10,000 after getting messages has been developed. It has received ethics 
registered users of MomConnect. There was a response rate approval from the University of Stellenbosch and the US Cen-
of approximately 20% (1,980 respondents). ters for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC) and is awaiting 
final approval from the Office of the U.S. Global AIDS Coordi-
nator (OGAC). This will be conducted in May and June 2016.
mHEALTH COMPENDIUM  SPECIAL EDITION 2016  n  51
Service ratings were submitted by 30% of all women regis- 2015. Client satisfaction with facility cleanliness and respect 
tered on MomConnect since March 2015 when a reminder of privacy received a satisfaction rate between 74 and 85% 
to complete the survey was introduced. The MomConnect for cleanliness and 82 and 85% for privacy. The clients were 
clients’ satisfaction with the friendliness and helpfulness of least satisfied with waiting time length which ranged between 
the staff varied between 85 and 88%, and was the highest of 71 and 76% satisfaction.
all the categories rated for the period January to December 
Lessons Learned in Program Implementation and Scaling 
The most important lesson is that to ensure scalability and sus- along the implementation chain. This requires a management 
tainability there has to be political support and leadership. Be- structure that is flexible and able to make quick decisions to 
cause MomConnect is championed by the Minister of Health, respond to the various needs of different stakeholders, in-
it is automatically given endorsement by many stakeholders, cluding donors, mobile network operators, and other interest 
who would otherwise not give their active support, including groups, such as the private sector, which want to be included 
managers in the national and provincial DOHs. Having a in MomConnect activities.
senior manager in the DOH responsible for leading the imple- MomConnect is constantly monitored, and opportunities for 
mentation also gives MomConnect the necessary authority to improvement are continually assessed. These include moni-
attract support from a range of stakeholders. toring of costs, and the project is continuing to assess more 
Another key lesson is the importance of partnerships economical ways of providing certain services. New alterna-
and harnessing capacity and skills from all stakeholders.  tives, such as instant messaging, are being explored to reduce 
MHealth is a burgeoning field and no one party has all the the costs related to messaging. Local innovations are adopted 
knowledge and experience to implement complex projects for national scale-up. For example, one province introduced 
at scale. Much of the success of MomConnect has been the a sticker which is placed on the outside of the woman’s ante-
ability to integrate and harness the skills and contributions natal folder. This bright sticker indicates that the woman is 
from a number of players.  This has been done by having an registered on MomConnect and serves a dual purpose: other 
inclusive task team, as the key advisory body for the project, women are stimulated to get a sticker, and health workers 
meet regularly to discuss implementation and augmentation immediately have another chance to motivate the women 
of MomConnect. The team has brought continuity to imple- without stickers to register on MomConnect.
mentation and ensured that the program has been oriented One of the challenges to MomConnect is paradoxically due 
around its initial plans. Also, MomConnect has had a trans- to its success. A number of stakeholders want to use this 
parent process from the outset and welcomed contributions success for their own areas of interest. For example, a number 
from all stakeholders. of researchers want to add particular messages in which they 
As MomConnect is the first mHealth project of national are interested.  
scale in South Africa it has had to break new ground all 
Future Plans
This work serves as an important foundation that can be built opportunities to both reduce costs and improve the service by 
upon to reach new audiences. Processes are in place to extend expanding the content available for women.  
MomConnect to provide additional support to HIV-positive MomConnect has a component (NurseConnect) aimed at 
mothers and partners and to lengthen the period of messag- supporting and empowering frontline nurses with mHealth 
ing until children reach age five. MomConnect is also being messaging and information so that they are better equipped 
extended to the private sector, as there is anecdotal evidence to give high--quality MCH service. NurseConnect has been 
that many women first book with private general practitioners piloted and will be rolled out nationally by August 2016. 
but then deliver in public health facilities. These efforts will 
strengthen the continuum of care between reproductive, ma- One long-term challenge is the cost of information transfer, 
ternal, newborn, child, and youth health, while facilitating the in particular SMS costs. The mobile network operators are 
development of high-quality, accountable health services. being asked to zero-rate these costs as a public good and at 
the same time alternatives to cheaper forms of data transfer 
In addition, new technology approaches, such as using instant are being explored.  n
messaging services, are being explored. This is expected to give 
52  n  MOM CONNECT 
Snapshot: MomConnect
Geographic South Africa
Coverage
Implementation August 2014 to present
Dates
Implementation National & Provincial Departments of Health
Partners Praekelt Foundation;
Health Information Systems Program/SA
MEASURE Evaluation
mHealthEnabled
Universities of Stellenbosch and Western Cape
Donor(s) USAID
Johnson & Johnson
Elma Philanthropies
Discovery foundation
Contact Dr. Yogan Pillay Deputy Director-General HIV/AIDS, 
Information TB & MCHW, pillay@health.gov.za
References & Additional Resources
SA DoH, Health Enabled, MomConnect: One Year of Operation: A Case Study August 2014 - August 2015 http://www.healthenabled.org/
resources/momconnect_case_study.pdf 
Vumi is an open source mobile messaging platform project, developed and maintained by Praekelt Foundation and individual contrib-
utors. The project is released under the BSD license. http://vumi.org/developers/
References:
1. Ngabo F, Nguimfack J, Nwaigwe F, Mugeni C, Muhoza D, Wilson DR, et al. Designing and Implementing an Innovative SMS-based alert system 
(RapidSMS-MCH) to monitor pregnancy and reduce maternal and child deaths in Rwanda. Pan Afr Med J. 2012; 13:31. 
2. Agarwal S,  LeFevre A, Lee J, L’Engle K,  Mehl G,  Sinha C, Labrique A for the WHO mHealth Technical Evidence Review Group.  Guidelines for 
reporting of health interventions using mobile phones: mobile health (mHealth) evidence reporting and assessment (mERA) checklist: BMJ 2016;352:i1174 
http://dx.doi.org/10.1136/bmj.i1174
3. Mendoza, G, Okoko L, Morgan M, Konopka S. May 2013. mHealth Compendium, Volume Two. Arlington, VA: African Strategies for Health project, 
Management Sciences for Health. http://www.jhsph.edu/departments/international-health/_documents/USAIDmHealthCompendiumVol2FINAL.
pdf (accessed 4 December, 2015)
4. United Nations Foundation. MomConnect: Launching a National Digital Health Program in South Africa. February 2016, Geneva.  Accessed 28 March 
2016. http://www.health.gov.za/index.php/mom-connect-docs
5. Peter J, Barron P, Pillay Y.  Using mobile technology to improve maternal, child, and youth health and treatment of HIV patients. S Afr Med J 
2016;106(1):3-4. DOI:10.7196/SAMJ.2016.v106i1.10209
6. National Department of Health (2011). “Towards Quality Care for Patients” National Core Standards for Health Establishments in South Africa. 
Department of Health. Pretoria, 2011.  http://www.rhap.org.za/wp-content/uploads/2014/05/National-Core-Standards-2011-1.pdf (accessed 6 
December, 2015)
7. National Committee for Confidential Enquiry into Maternal Deaths. Saving Mothers 2011-2013: Sixth report on the Confidential Enquiries into 
Maternal Deathsin South Africa. Short [Internet]. 2014. Available from: http://www.kznhealth.gov.za/mcwh/Maternal/Saving-Mothers-2011-2013-
short-report.pdf
8.  Victora CG, Requejo JH, Barros AJD, Berman P, Bhutta Z, Boerma T, et al. Countdown to 2015: a decade of tracking progress for maternal, 
newborn, and child survival. The Lancet [Internet]. 2015 Oct; Available from: http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/s0140-6736(15)00519-x
9. Dorrington RE, Bradshaw D, Laubscher R, Nannan N. Rapid mortality surveillance report 2014 [Internet]. Cape Town; 2015 Dec. Available from: 
http://www.worldcat.org/isbn/978-1-928340
10.  South African National Department of Health. Strategic Plan 2014/15 to 2018/19. Department of Health; 2014;1–53. Available from: http://
www.health-e.org.za/wp-content/uploads/2014/08/SA-DoH-Strategic-Plan-2014-to-2019.pdf
11. Mechael PN. The Case for mHealth in Developing Countries. Innovations [Internet]. :103–18. Available from: http://www.uio.no/studier/emner/
matnat/ifi/INF5761/v12/undervisningsmateriale/Mechael - 2009 - The case for mHealth in developing countries(1).pdf
12. Free C, Phillips G, Watson L, Galli L, Felix L, Edwards P, et al. The Effectiveness of Mobile-Health Technologies to Improve Health Care Service 
Delivery Processes: A Systematic Review and Meta-Analysis. PLoS Med [Internet]. Public Library of Science; 2013 Jan;10(1):e1001363+. Available 
from: http://dx.doi.org/10.1371/journal.pmed.1001363
13. Noordam AC, Kuepper BM, Stekelenburg J, Milen A. Improvement of maternal health services through the use of mobile phones. Trop 
Med Int Heal [Internet]. Blackwell Publishing Ltd; 2011 May;16(5):622–6. Available from: http://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1111/j.1365-
3156.2011.02747.x/epdf
14. Praekelt G. The Role of mHealth in South Africa. Stanford Soc Innov Rev [Internet]. 2013 Feb; Available from: http://ssir.org/articles/entry/
the_role_of_mhealth_in_south_africa
mHEALTH COMPENDIUM  SPECIAL EDITION 2016  n  53
Photo by MomConnect
Enhancing event-based disease surveillance 
and response efforts in Kenya through SMS 
reporting and web portal dashboards
Photo by Takeshi Kuno
54  n  MSOS 
mSOS
Mobile SMS-based disease outbreak alert system (mSOS) 
enhanced timely notification—and the technology can be used to 
enhance disease survellance in resource-limited settings. 
Disease outbreaks pose serious public health risks worldwide as seen in the recent SARS, Ebola, and Zika epidemics. 
Resource-limited settings lack strong disease surveillance mechanisms to quickly detect, diagnose, and contain 
outbreaks.1 This hinders a nation’s ability to fully comply with the World Health Organization (WHO)’s International 
Health Regulations (IHR 2005) and the Integrated Disease Surveillance and Response (IDSR) strategies.2-4
In Kenya, as in other African countries, paper-based reports or ad hoc information from the health facilities reach the 
authorities at the national and sub-national levels late, which in turn limits abilities to respond in a timely manner 
to control the outbreaks.4 To overcome these challenges, the Ministry of Health (MOH) and the Japan International 
Cooperation Agency, Japan Agency for Medical Research and Development, Science and Technology Research 
Partnership for Sustainable Development (JICA-AMED SATREPS) project piloted the mSOS (mobile SMS-based disease 
outbreak alert system) in 2012–2014.5-7 
A randomized controlled trial was implemented, which showed that mSOS enhanced timely notification and that the 
technology can be used to enhance disease surveillance in resource-limited settings.8,9 Based on recommendations from 
the stakeholders, a technical working group was formed at MOH, and the system is currently undertaking a series of 
modifications before a nation-wide rollout.10-13
About mSOS
Mobile SMS-based disease outbreak alert system (mSOS) 1. mSOS (text messaging): The text messaging function is a formatted text-message system that allows real-time allows health facility workers to input formatted text 
communication between health facility workers and disease messaging with patient-level information of suspected 
surveillance coordinators at the sub-county, county, and disease outbreaks. A text message is immediately sent 
national levels in line with the IDSR guidelines.5-7 to relevant health authorities at the national and sub-
At the time of the pilot, the IDSR guidelines recommended national levels with information on the place, time, and 
health facility workers completing and submitting paper- details of a patient with suspected disease that needs to 
based forms to the sub-county-level disease surveillance  be reported within 24 hours.
coordinators, and sub-county-level disease surveillance 2. mSOS web portal (dashboard): mSOS web portal 
coordinators electronically transmitting information to displays a dashboard with patient-level information, bar 
higher-level managers at the county and national-levels. graphs with cumulative incidents, and hot spot maps 
Sub-county disease surveillance coordinators are the first- indicating the health facilities that reported the cases. 
level responders to the reporting facilities. mSOS tried to The relevant authorities at the national and sub-national 
eliminate redundancies of data entry at multiple levels, and levels can also enter the time and details of actions taken 
to make information-sharing instant at all levels.4 The system on the notifications sent.
consists of two components: text messaging function, and 
web portal (see Figure 1, next page).
mHEALTH COMPENDIUM  SPECIAL EDITION 2016  n  55
Figure 1.  
Structure of the mSOS Integrated Disease Surveillance and Response Mobile System 
Twelve diseases and conditions were picked for the pilot infectious, zoonotic, foodborne, chemical, radio nuclear, or 
from the immediately notifiable diseases list in IDSR. The caused by an unknown condition). The pilot was implement-
list included adverse events following immunization (AEFI), ed in two counties: Busia and Kajiado. Busia County borders 
anthrax, cholera, dengue fever, Guinea worm, measles, neo- Uganda by the Victoria Lake basin with 7 sub-counties, and 
natal tetanus, plague, Rift Valley fever, viral hemorrhagic fe- Kajiado County borders Tanzania with 5 sub-counties.8-14
ver, yellow fever, and any public health event of concern (e.g, 
Program Design Process
The design process took 1 year: 6 months in conceptual- circulated to all members.
ization, 3 months in programming, and 3 months in beta 3. Contracting: Strathmore University Faculty of 
testing. The implementation period was 6 months. information technology (IT) was identified as the 
1. Conceptualization: mSOS was conceptualized in institution to perform programming for mSOS because 
mid- to late-2012. The JICA expert conducted informal of past experience working with the MOH. One of the 
interviews with MOH employees and workers in health servers at the MOH was identified to host mSOS. Due 
facilities to objectively understand the practice and to strict regulations by the Kenyan telecommunication 
implementation of IDSR guidelines and bottlenecks of authorities, a contract for a toll-free number was signed 
disease surveillance activities on the ground. with a premium rate service provider (PRSP) and not 
directly with a telecommunication company. 
2. Technical working group: A technical working group 
was formed at the MOH Disease Surveillance and 4. Programming: Several students at Strathmore 
Response Unit (DSRU), and mSOS was developed University Faculty of IT undertook mSOS 
in early 2013. The technical working group consisted programming as part of their internship. Students and 
of the head of DSRU, managers in charge of national their supervisor regularly attended the technical working 
disease surveillance and data management, the JICA group meetings to understand user requirements, and 
expert, and experts from the WHO and Kenya Medical presented progress in the technical working group 
Research Institute (KEMRI). Minutes were written and meetings. 
56  n  MSOS 
5. Stabilizing the system: After repeated prototyping of 6. Pilot implementation: mSOS pilot was implemented 
the system, mSOS was pretested in a few health facilities for 6 months, October 2013–April 2014. A 1-day 
in Nairobi in early 2013, and several bugs and issues training or refresher course for IDSR guidelines and a 
with power outages were identified. A tracking system 1-day training on mSOS was conducted in September 
was programmed in order to monitor downtime, and and October 2013 for 67 health facility in-charges in 
redundant backup was created. Busia and Kajiado counties. All 12 sub-county disease 
surveillance coordinators were also trained on how to 
troubleshoot and use the mSOS web portal. 
Growth in Scale 
After the implementation of the pilot, and before the results 3. mSOS Ebola (KEMRI Laboratory module): Results 
were analyzed, DSRU recommended mSOS to be modified on the laboratory confirmation of the patient serum 
as mSOS Ebola.15-17 samples were updated using the mSOS Ebola web 
portal, and text messages were automatically delivered to 
1. mSOS Ebola (text messaging): When a patient senior management at DSRU and a few policy decision-
suspected of having Ebola was identified by the Ebola makers at the MOH. 
Rapid Response Team, patient-level information was After mSOS Ebola was implemented, the mSOS 
sent through formatted text-messaging using mSOS stakeholders’ meeting was held to disseminate the 
Ebola. The messages with the detailed information on preliminary results of the pilot.
the time, place, and nature of the suspected patient 
case were delivered to senior management at DSRU 4. mSOS pilot dissemination: At the stakeholders’ 
and a few policy decision-makers at the MOH. An meeting, mSOS was very well received. Health workers 
alert message was also sent to the designated KEMRI appreciated the ease of use of the system and rapid 
laboratory workers. feedback from their managers through mSOS.
11-12 
Health managers especially appreciated the real-time 
2. mSOS Ebola (web portal): Patient-level information information sharing. The system was unanimously 
on the suspected cases, response action conducted, recommended for integration into the national health 
and laboratory confirmation were displayed on the information and management system, specifically to the 
password-protected web portal dashboard. open-source District Health Information Software 2 
(DHIS2) platform.18 
Sample mSOS alert messaging (left) and web portal dashboard (right)
mHEALTH COMPENDIUM  SPECIAL EDITION 2016  n  57
5. Buy-in from the MOH: Due to the overwhelming 7. Establishment of mSOS/IDSR Weekly Mobile 
recommendations at the stakeholders’ meeting on the Reporting System: A new enhanced version of the 
ability of mSOS to quickly adapt to the needs on the mSOS pilot, mSOS/IDSR Weekly Mobile Reporting 
ground (as seen by mSOS Ebola), the scale-up of mSOS System was developed through the technical working 
was included in the Cabinet Secretary’s Performance group in late 2015. This new system combines 
Contract 2015/16, a contract between the MOH event-based and indicator-based disease surveillance 
Cabinet Secretary and the President of Kenya.19 information. Once a suspected disease outbreak or 
6. Technical working group for scale-up efforts: A public health event is detected at the health facility 
technical working group coordinated by DSRU includes level, information is sent through the system to a central 
multiple units within the MOH, such as the Health server at the MOH. The central server then sends alert 
Information System; Information, Communication, messages to multiple officers responsible for outbreak 
Technology; eHealth; Zoonotic Disease; and Disaster and disaster response. The list of diseases and conditions 
Response units. It also includes multiple international is expanded to not only suspected disease outbreaks of 
partners, such as the WHO [SIKIWIS], Centers for immediate concern, such as cholera and measles, but 
Disease Control and Prevention (CDC) [mHealth also public health events (event-based) and routine 
Kenya, I-TECH], JICA [JICA-AMED SATREPS disease information (indicator-based), including diseases 
20
project], and United States Agency for International such as malaria.  
Development (USAID) [AfyaInfo project].13 
Evaluation and Results
As part of the cluster randomized controlled trial to test stratifying health facilities by sub-counties and randomly 
the effectiveness of the system, the research study included selecting intervention facilities from each stratum by a 1:1 
quantitative and qualitative assessments of the current IDSR ratio. Sixty-eight facilities were in the control group and 67 
guidelines implementation, and the impact of mSOS imple- were in the intervention group. A total of 65 health facilities 
mentation.21 in the control group and 66 health facilities in the interven-
A baseline assessment was conducted in June 2013, includ- tion group were assessed during the follow-up survey. 
ing retrospective data for the six-months before the interven- The quantitative analysis included examining the reporting 
tion (December 2012–May 2013), reviewing all information rates comparing paper-based and mSOS reports. A retro-
from outpatient, inpatient, and maternal and child health spective review at the baseline survey showed that 36 cases 
registers for the 12 diseases and conditions selected for the (17 cases in the control group and 19 cases in the inter-
study. In addition, in-depth interviews with health facility vention group) required immediate notification. Only one 
in-charges and sub-county disease surveillance coordinators paper-based report in the control group was completed. 
were completed. A post-intervention survey, including doc- During the post-intervention survey, we found that 130 cases 
uments review, and in-depth interviews with health facility in the intervention group and 39 cases in the control group 
in-charges and sub-county disease surveillance coordinators required immediate notification. One paper-based report in 
were completed in May 2014. In addition, a focus group the control group was completed, and 25 cases were report-
discussion was conducted at the national level. ed through mSOS in the intervention group. The results 
A total of 153 health facilities were assessed for eligibility, showed that the health facilities that used mSOS achieved 
and 142 completed the baseline survey in the selected 12 more timely notifications than those that did not (+16.7%). 
sub-counties in Busia and Kajiado counties. Health facilities The results of the evaluation were published in Emerging 
8
included public, private, faith-based, and non-governmen- Infectious Diseases in April 2016.  
tal organization-owned facilities at all levels of care. A total Analyses are currently ongoing for qualitative data collected 
of 135 health facilities attended the IDSR training and the during field interviews and focus group discussions.
randomization was conducted during the IDSR training by 
58  n  MSOS 
Lessons Learned in Program Implementation and Scaling 
Lessons learned from mSOS pilot implementation were that  only pilot the system, but also to tie into current disease 
timing, leadership, and feedback are important components surveillance efforts within Kenya’s MOH.
of the implementation success.
2. Leadership: Strong leadership by the DSRU, which 
1. Timing: mSOS was conceptualized, piloted, and promoted buy-in from the national government, 
disseminated during a time when the MOH was county governments, and international partners, 
exploring ways to move from paper-based reporting to lead to mSOS being recommended for scale-up and 
electronic reporting. It was also a time when various integration into the national health information and 
outbreaks occurred within Kenya and around the management system. DSRU included mSOS in its 
world, most notably Ebola in West Africa. At the same work plans, and staff members from the unit helped 
time, mobile phone penetration skyrocketed within support the system. DSRU also worked with the Health 
the country, even in hard-to-reach areas. Compliance Information Systems (HIS), ICT, and eHealth units and 
with IHR 2005 was also a task that the MOH needed their partners to assure that the maintenance could be 
to address. Overall, there was an increased awareness conducted within the ministry through DHIS2. This in 
and willingness of the ministry to look at a mobile turn would help mSOS be a sustainable system. 
phone solution that could enhance disease surveillance 3. Feedback: Inclusion of the opinions from all aspects, 
and compliance with IHR 2005. The scale-up was also such as the end-user, programmers, and health managers 
suggested at a time when the MOH is addressing a were an important component of the development and 
number of related efforts including: trying to integrate implementation of mSOS pilot. Repeated pretesting 
all information systems within DHIS2, preparing an and informal feedback from users helped mitigate 
electronic nationwide master facility list, conducting system abruption and solve bugs in a timely manner. 
a review of event-based surveillance, proposing In addition, engagements with various stakeholders 
mobile phone-based indicator surveillance, holding through the technical working group helped mSOS 
various taskforce meetings for national outbreaks, and be programmed and evolve as a flexible tool to offer 
construction of an Emergency Operation Centre at the local solutions to local problems. The large stakeholder 
MOH. mSOS was able to leverage these timings to not meeting and users’ feedback helped move mSOS into 
the next stage. 
mHEALTH COMPENDIUM  SPECIAL EDITION 2016  n  59
Future Plans 
The MOH envisions that real-time reporting and response to notifications that need further investigation. The 
through the mSOS/IDSR Weekly Mobile Reporting System system will serve as an early warning mechanism, whereby 
will reduce lag time for notification and response to out- analysis on trends could inform potential outbreaks and 
breaks and disasters, and minimize morbidity and mortal- mitigate morbidity and mortality in the nation.
ity in Kenya. The system will continue to improve as the 
5. Expansion of users: In the future, the system will be 
MOH rolls it out to all levels, including all 47 counties, 
all sub-counties, and the 7,500 health facilities across the expanded to the community level and to the public 
nation. where suspected cases can be reported and filtered automatically by the system. 
1. Stakeholders meeting: A stakeholders meeting was 6. Paperless reporting: Once the system is rolled out to 
held in December 2015 and pretesting was completed the whole nation, it may also replace the current paper-
with the relevant MOH units and international based reporting guidelines in the future.   n
partners. 
2. Training: In early 2016, national-level officers in the 
MOH attended a training of trainers (TOT) workshop. Snapshot: mSOS
Since February 2016, a series of TOT workshops Geographic Kenya
including county and sub-county disease surveillance Coverage Pilot: 67 health facilities
coordinators (DSCs) and health records information Scale-up: 7,500 health facilities
officers (HRIOs) have been ongoing by the MOH Implementation 2013 to present
with funding support from international partners. The Dates
training materials, including manuals and slides, were Implementation Ministry of Health (multiple units), Kenya
drafted and printed. As of April 2016, approximately Partners SATREPS ProjectJapan International Cooperation Agency (JICA)
350 national, county, and sub-county DSCs and Japan Agency for Medical Research and 
HRIOs were trained in half of the regions in Kenya.13  Development (AMED)
A launch ceremony is scheduled in 2016 after TOT is Strathmore University Faculty of Information 
Technology
completed at the national, county, and sub-county levels.
Donor(s) World Health Organization
3. Expansion of modes: The system would be modified to Centers for Disease Control 
smartphone- and feature phone-based applications so that USAID
health workers could use their personal phones to report. JICAAMED
4. Emergency Operation Centre: The system will be Contact Dr. Daniel Langat, Disease Surveillance and 
linked to the national Emergency Operation Centre for Information Response Unit, Ministry of Health, Kenya,  
24/7 analysis of information and prompt response action langat4@yahoo.com
60  n  MSOS 
References & Additional Resources
1. Gates, B., The next epidemic—lessons from Ebola. N Engl J Med, 2015. 372(15): p. 1381-4.
2. World Health Organization, International Health Regulations (2005), 2008.
3. Kasolo, F., et al., IDSR as a platform for implementing IHR in African countries. Biosecur Bioterror, 2013. 11(3): p. 163-9.
4. Ministry of Public Health and Sanitation. Integrated Disease Surveillance and Response in Kenya: Technical Guidelines 2012, 2012.
5. Ministry of Health Disease Surveillance and Response Unit. Mobile SMS Based Disease Outbreak Alert System. 2015  [cited 2015 December 
15]; Available from: http://ddsr.or.ke/mSOS/about.
6. Mendoza, G., et al., mSOS: Using mHealth to strengthen real-time disease surveillance and response in Kenya, in mHealth Compendium 
2014,  African Strategies for Health (ASH), Management Sciences for Health (MSH); USAID: Arlington, VA.
7. Osamu, S., Feature Story: Using Mobile Phones to Prevent an Epidemic of Infectious Diseases, 2016, Japan Journal.
8. Toda, M., et al., Effectiveness of a Mobile Short-Message-Service-Based Disease Outbreak Alert System in Kenya. Emerg Infect Dis, 2016. 
22(4): p. 711-5.
9. Njeru, I., et al., mSOS (mobile SMS-based disease outbreak alert system) Preliminary Report, 2015, Disease Surveillance and Response Unit 
(DSRU) at the Ministry of Health: Nairobi, Kenya.
10. Njeru, I., et al., Meeting Highlights: mSOS Stakeholders’ Meeting: Dissemination of findings, 2015, JICA-AMED SATREPS project.
11. Japan International Cooperation Agency. mSOS Stakeholders’ Meeting (05 June 2015). 2015 [cited 2015 June 5]; Available from: http://www.
jica.go.jp/project/english/kenya/006/news/general/150605.html
12. Japan International Cooperation Agency. mSOS: A Versatile Tool for Disease Outbreak Alert. 2015 June 5, 2015 [cited 2015 June 5]; Available from: 
http://www.jica.go.jp/kenya/english/office/topics/150605.html
13. Japan International Cooperation Agency. Activities towards nationwide scale-up of mSOS. 2016  [cited 2016 April 4]; Available from: http://www.
jica.go.jp/project/english/kenya/006/news/general/160404.html
14. Toda, M., et al., mSOS User Manual, 2013, Disease Surveillance and Response (DDSR), Ministry of Health (MOH); Japan International 
Cooperation Agency (JICA): Nairobi, Kenya.
15. Japan International Cooperation Agency. One year after the declaration of an Ebola state of emergency. 2015 [cited 2015 July 31]; Available 
from: http://www.jica.go.jp/english/news/focus_on/ebolaphotos.html
16. Japan International Cooperation Agency. mSOS Ebola handover ceremony was held at the Ministry of Health in December 9, 2014. 2014  
[cited 2014 December 9]; Available from: http://www.jica.go.jp/project/english/kenya/006/news/general/141209.html
17. Japan Science and Techology Agency. Using Mobile Phones to Contain Infectious Diseases. 2015 April 27, 2015 [cited 2015 March]; Available 
from: http://www.jst.go.jp/report/2014/150313-2_e.html
18. Ministry of Medical Services. Ministries of Health Launch District Health information System. 21 Feb 2012 5 July 2012 [cited 2012 5 
July]; Available from: http://www.medical.go.ke/index.php?option=com_content&view=article&id=136:ministry-of-health-launch-dhis-
software&catid=34:news-and-events&Itemid=62
19. Japan International Cooperation Agency. Meeting with Mr. James Macharia, Cabinet Secretary, Ministry of Health. 2015  [cited 2015 
December]; Available from: http://www.jica.go.jp/project/english/kenya/006/news/general/150708.html
20. Wanjiru, R., et al., mSOS/IDSR Weekly Mobile Reporting: Training Manual, 2016, Ministry of Health Kenya; World Health Organization (WHO); 
Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC); Japan International Cooperation Agency (JICA); United States Agency for International 
Development (USAID): Nairobi, Kenya.
21. ISRCTN Registry. ISRCTN79529838: Evaluating the response to suspected disease outbreaks using a short message service (SMS) model. 
Available from: http://www.isrctn.com/ISRCTN79529838, http://apps.who.int/trialsearch/Trial2.aspx?TrialID=ISRCTN79529838
mHEALTH COMPENDIUM  SPECIAL EDITION 2016  n  61
Tracking the first 1000 days of life, preventing 
unnecessary mother and newborn deaths
Photo by Todd Shapera
62  n  RAPID SMS RWANDA 
RapidSMS Rwanda
The overarching goal in instituting RapidSMS was to make each 
pregnancy “everyone’s business.” RapidSMS aims to ensure that 
no woman dies due to pregnancy or delivery and to have all 30 
districts record zero preventable maternal deaths. 
Between 2000 and 2015, Rwanda achieved some of the world’s highest average annual reductions in both the 
maternal mortality ratio and under-five mortality rate. Rwanda Demographic and Health Survey data show that the 
maternal mortality ratio fell from one of the world’s highest in 2005 at 750 deaths per 100,000 live births down to 
210 in 2014, and the under-five mortality rate declined by two-thirds during the same period. 1,2  
Rwanda’s 45,000 volunteer community health workers (CHWs) have been major contributors to this success. Each 
of the country’s 15,000 villages has three CHWs who provide a broad range of preventive, promotional, and curative 
services. Starting in 2009, the Rwanda Ministry of Health (MOH), together with UNICEF, Management Sciences for 
Health (MSH), and other partners, initiated an mHealth system with CHWs called RapidSMS, which has become a key 
intervention in promoting maternal and neonatal health.  
The overarching goal in instituting RapidSMS was to make each pregnancy “everyone’s business.” RapidSMS aims to 
ensure that no woman dies due to pregnancy or delivery and to have all 30 districts record zero preventable maternal 
deaths. This system has since been extended to enable CHWs to monitor and report on a wider array of health events 
involving pregnant women and children for the critical window of 1,000 days – from the first signs of pregnancy 
through the age of two years – when risk of death is highest.
About RapidSMS
R apidSMS is a mobile phone-based technology being used related to specific behavior change communications cam-throughout Rwanda to improve community maternal paigns or health threats that CHWs should be aware of in 
and child health. This tool helps CHWs track women’s ante- their community.
natal care visits, identify women at risk, refer them to health The RapidSMS system enables CHWs to rapidly communi-
facilities, and improve communication with the facilities in cate with other levels of the health system, promotes routine 
the event of an emergency. The system also requires CHWs contacts between CHWs and at-risk populations in their 
to regularly reach out to families at the household level and communities, and enables supervisors at the health center 
send simple text messages to the MOH reporting significant level and above to monitor CHWs’ performance. It has a 
events occurring during a woman’s pregnancy, delivery, and very simple message format and works with basic mobile 
the first year after the infant’s birth. Once received at the phones. Plasticized instruction cards serve as quick reference 
central level, these messages are stored in a web-enabled guides that make it very easy for CHWs to send messages for 
database and used to inform the ministry’s strategic plan- each type of alert.  Since their simple mobile phones lack the 
ning, technical supervision, monitoring and evaluation, and capacity to store all of the guidelines for health service deliv-
resource coordination.  For certain messages sent by CHWs, ery and use of the RapidSMS system, these A4 cards list the 
the system raises an alert and provides immediate feedback codes for each event and give examples of how to compose 
with guidance to the CHWs about specific actions to take.  the different type of SMSs CHWs may need to send.  Each 
It can also be used for widespread distribution of messages message contains the National ID number of the mother 
mHEALTH COMPENDIUM  SPECIAL EDITION 2016  n  63
Figure 1. 
RapidSMS Rwanda sample 
registration code format
so that they can be linked together and allow for tracking the 
history of individual pregnant women.
The slightest evidence of warning signs, as itemized in the 
list of codes, should prompt the CHWs to not only refer the 
woman for care but also accompany the mother to a facility, 
reducing a potentially life-threatening delay in receipt of care.
Program Design Process
With technical and financial support from UNICEF, Rap- budget, design a training curriculum, and train over 1,000 
idSMS was first piloted by the MOH in Musanze District community health supervisors who then trained over 45,000 
in 2009. The application follows national and international CHWs, many with no experience in the use of mobile 
guidelines for care and was intended to address three delays phones. Through IHSSP, USAID also procured and dis-
which can cause maternal death, namely in seeking care, tributed phones to 10,000 of the CHWs in 30 districts and 
reaching care, and in effective intervention. The logic of provided the first series of plasticized instruction cards for 
the program is to have 100% registration, following up on the CHWs to prepare and send messages through the system. 
identified risk cases, ensuring assisted deliveries, and using When the system was initially set up, it had a fairly basic in-
emergency alerts when appropriate. terface that enabled staff at the health center level and above 
After demonstrating positive results in the pilot district to monitor the logs of messages received, but only provided 
(highlighted below), the MOH began a national roll-out limited decision support. Significant effort went into design-
of the system in June 2010. The USAID-funded Integrated ing compelling graphic interfaces that calculated indicators 
Health Systems Strengthening Project (IHSSP), managed and helped these staff more easily navigate their way through 
by MSH, helped the ministry to develop a roll-out plan and the system.
Growth in Scale
The system was introduced in 2009 by the MOH’s Commu- information system (SISCom) nationwide, helped the MOH 
nity Health Desk with UNICEF support in Musanze, one of develop a roll-out plan, budget, curriculum, and schedule 
Rwanda’s 30 districts. By May 2010, one year after initiating of training of trainer sessions to be implemented across the 
the RapidSMS system, prenatal care visits in Musanze Dis- country.  The initiative also benefited from support from 
trict had increased by 25%, home deliveries had dropped by the highest levels of government, with Her Excellency Mrs. 
54%, health facility deliveries rose by 26%, and under-five Jeannette Kagame, First Lady of the Republic of Rwanda, 
mortality had declined by 48%.  participating in the ceremony to hand out the first 10,000 
Based on this success, the MOH, through its eHealth phones.  Other partners working at the district level, includ-
technical working group and the Community Health Desk, ing HealthBuilders, focused on reinforcing the use of the 
strongly urged other partners to participate in a national system through supervision and the creation of dashboards 
roll-out of RapidSMS.  USAID provided funding for 10,000 that enabled health center staff to monitor the coverage of 
phones, the Bill & Melinda Gates Foundation provided the different services provided by their CHWs.  
another 5,000 (through the Phones for Health project), In November 2012, the first RapidSMS retreat took place 
and the MOH purchased the remainder.  MSH, which had where the group expanded RapidSMS from one module that 
recently introduced a new computerized community health tracked the pregnancy cycle (version 1) to version 2 which 
64  n  RAPID SMS RWANDA 
consists of six modules: the pregnancy cycle, post-delivery SMS messages are sent to a toll-free number—using a short 
period, newborn care, deadly childhood diseases (pneumonia, code—so there is no cost to the CHWs to use the system.  
diarrhea, and malaria), nutrition, and children living with The MOH pays the SMS charges. Initially, this project was 
disabilities (cleft palate/cleft lip). The latter was later dropped linked with Phones for Health, which included a public-pri-
to avoid overloading CHWs with multiple program activities. vate partnership with MTN and Voxiva, so the SIM cards 
The system currently receives approximately 12,000 messages and server hosting were provided for free, and SMS messages 
a day (average since January 2016) from CHWs. The MOH were charged at a discounted rate.   When that initiative was 
is interested in using the system for other data-collection discontinued in 2014, the server was relocated to Rwanda’s 
needs, including immediate reporting of maternal deaths state-of-the-art National Data Center. 
from hospitals.
Evaluation and Results 
Rwanda has achieved impressive progress in reducing ma- RapidSMS provided a source of data on the activities of each 
ternal and child mortality between 2010 and 2015. While a CHW,  the Community Health Desk saw an opportunity to 
key intervention implemented by the MOH, RapidSMS was address this by using the RapidSMS data to calculate specific 
one of a number of initiatives in the health system over this indicators of individual performance and split the cooper-
period of time, making it challenging to attribute specific ative’s PBF funds to reward CHWs in the top performance 
improvements in maternal and child health to the mHealth quintiles with a greater share of the funds.  
program alone. This new approach, utilizing individual-level RapidSMS 
 An impact evaluation of a separate program, Rwanda’s data, is still in the process of nationwide implementation. 
CHW performance-based financing (PBF) program, imple- Now health centers are aware of the number of pregnant 
mented from 2012-2014 tested several different approaches women in their community, CHWs can easily communicate 
to incentivizing high-impact services at the community level. with health centers during emergencies, and patients needing 
The study looked at both the demand and supply sides of urgent care can receive ambulance transportation to health 
service delivery.  The study found relatively little impact from facilities. The system helps to ensure that CHWs in the com-
the CHW performance incentives for a variety of reasons: munity maintain regular face-to-face contact at the house-
performance was calculated at the CHW cooperative level hold level with all pregnant women and infants. This keeps 
(there is one cooperative per health center catchment area), the CHWs accountable to the people they serve, as the data 
and all CHWs received the same amount within a cooper- are triangulated with information on expected pregnancies 
ative, regardless of their individual efforts.  Realizing that and births that are collected at the health facilities. 
Sample regional dashboard
mHEALTH COMPENDIUM  SPECIAL EDITION 2016  n  65
Photo by Ivan Ngoboka
Figure 2.  
RapidSMS Rwanda Contiuum of Care Model 
Lessons Learned in Program Implementation and Scaling
The initial implementation plan for the RapidSMS program Other key challenges encountered included the following:
did not account for the challenges of charging phones in 
n Misunderstanding by CHWs of case definitions for 
a village setting without convenient access to electricity, RapidSMS indicators
nor the malfunctioning of nearly one-quarter of the phone 
chargers during the first year of national roll-out.  Some n Difficulties in using mobile phones due to English lan-
solar chargers were purchased but have not been available in guage barriers and lack of knowledge  of how to use the 
sufficient quantities.  In most cases, the CHW cooperatives text message capabilities of their phones
replaced chargers by using their own funds. n Limited use of RapidSMS data by local leaders and med-
A discounted SMS rate had been negotiated for the program, ical personnel (doctors and nurses) 
however, after several years; the negotiated cost per mes- n Lack of full coverage of all pregnant women reported by 
sage was actually higher than the market price, which had CHWs using RapidSMS, especially in urban areas
decreased over time.  Organizations need to ensure that the 
n Lack of printed registers for recording RapidSMS mes-
contract with their mobile network provider enables them to sages for better follow-up
index their discount on the actual rates.  
n Insufficient funding for supervisors to follow up with 
CHWs on RapidSMS activities
66  n  RAPID SMS RWANDA 
Future Plans 
RapidSMS Rwanda is currently operating at national scale. in pregnant women that need to be handled carefully 
The system is used by over 45,000 CHWs and their supervi- (e.g. HIV+) (MSH)
sors in 475 health centers, and provides information for deci-
n Connect the program  with a mobile money system to 
sion-making at the national level as well. Part of the platform pay CHW performance incentives directly through their 
is being upgraded to RapidPro, an open source platform phones based on metrics calculated using data reported 
released in 2014 which features easier-to-configure data visu- through RapidSMS (MSH)
alization. As part of Rwanda’s Health Enterprise Architecture 
initiative, the MOH worked with many partners (includ- n Continue to support the use of the RapidSMS data by 
ing Jembi Health Systems, Regenstrief, and InSTEDD) to health center and district-level staff through training and 
integrate RapidSMS data into a national shared health record supervision to monitor the performance of their CHWs 
repository and to generate alerts to CHWs immediately after and triangulate with the health center data on antenatal 
registering a pregnant women with known pregnancy-related care, deliveries, and treatment for malaria, pneumo-
risk factors.  While this has not been rolled out nationally, nia, and diarrhea (UNICEF). This will address many 
it was a proof of concept that sets the stage for a range of challenges such as clarifying case and indicator defini-
interoperability scenarios that can improve referral and conti- tions, learning how to use phones more effectively, and 
nuity of care at the community level. reinforcing the importance of routine use of the system.
Additional ongoing and future plans for the program, and n Strengthen the RapidSMS coordination mechanism 
the partner organization, include: through monthly and quarterly national-level meetings, 
including annual reviews of the system and tools and 
n Continue work to improve interoperability between technical validation meetings (UNICEF)
RapidSMS and other data management systems used 
within the country. In particular, interoperability with n Consolidate SMS, USSD, and other high-volume com-
the PBF system in District Health Information Soft- munications contracts within the MOH and Rwanda 
ware 2 (DHIS2) is planned to allow for payment of Biomedical Center to negotiate better terms for Rap-
performance incentives. Connection  with the electronic idSMS communications charges with the local mobile 
medical records system’s shared health record would phone companies (MOH)
allow for CHWs to be alerted to pre-existing conditions 
Snapshot: RapidSMS Rwanda
Geographic Rwanda
Coverage
Implementation 2009–2011 (pilot)
Dates 2012 to present (scale-up)
Implementation Ministry of Health (coordination, funding, and 
Partners project management)
UNICEF (funding, technical assistance)
MSH (technical assistance for systems, 
interoperability
Donor(s) USAID
UNICEF
Contact Randy Wilson, Team Lead: Research, M&E and KM, 
Information Rwanda Health Systems Strengthening Project, 
rwilson@msh.org
Additional Resources/ Information
References:
1. Rwanda Demographic and Health Survey 2005. Calverton, MD, National Institute of Statistics of Rwanda and ORC Macro, 2006. 
2. Rwanda Demographic and Health Survey 2014-5. Calverton, MD, National Institute of Statistics of Rwanda, Republic of Rwanda Ministry of 
Health and ICF International, 2015.
mHEALTH COMPENDIUM  SPECIAL EDITION 2016  n  67
Ending adolescent AIDS through mobile-based 
counselling and polling
Photo by UNICEF / Zambia / Maseka / 2016
68  n  U-REPORT 
U-Report
U-Report has been used as a focused mHealth application, 
specifically providing real-time mobile counselling and conducting 
coordinated polls on HIV/AIDS among adolescents and young 
people. 
Despite incredible progress over the last decade, adolescents aged 10–19 have been largely left behind in the global 
AIDS response. Adolescents are the only age group for which AIDS-related deaths have not decreased—in fact they 
have tripled since 2000.1 AIDS is the leading cause of death for adolescents in Africa, and the second globally.2 Every 
hour 26 new HIV infections occur among older adolescents (aged 15–19), 40% of which happen outside sub-Saharan 
Africa.3 Moreover, risk is high among this age group due to limited knowledge about HIV. In sub-Saharan Africa, 70% of 
boys and girls (15–19) have low comprehensive knowledge on how to protect themselves and access services.4  
To address this critical gap in the HIV/AIDS response, and with youth being the greatest users of mobile devices 
globally, UNICEF has to invest in innovative solutions that can achieve quick wins in service-delivery, while creating 
real, long-lasting change for adolescents. One such innovation is U-Report, a general mobile-enabled youth 
engagement platform. U-Report has been used as a focused mHealth application, specifically providing real-time 
mobile counselling and conducting coordinated polls on HIV/AIDS among adolescents and young people. Objectives 
of the program are to: improve access to sexual reproductive health (SRH) knowledge; increase utilization of HIV 
prevention services; and better understand perceptions on HIV-related issues in order to contribute to reducing new 
HIV infections among adolescents and youth.
About U-Report
Powered by RapidPro—UNICEF’s open-source software By sending the text message, “join,” to a toll-free number platform for international development—U-Report is and answering a few registration questions (e.g. age, gen-
a user-centered tool that empowers young people to speak der, region within a country in which they reside), any 
out on various issues that they care about in their commu- young person with a mobile phone can become a volunteer 
nity, encourages citizen-led response, and magnifies voices “U-Reporter” in their country. Young people join U-Report 
locally, nationally, and globally to create positive change. The through promotions from local nongovernmental organiza-
platform is interoperable with various technology platforms, tions (NGOs), youth groups, and faith-based organizations. 
allowing U-Reporters to communicate with other young Traditional media campaigns are also used to advertise the 
people and communities via SMS, Twitter, smartphone app, service and encourage young people to sign up. Weekly poll 
Facebook Messenger, and Telegram depending on country campaigns are conducted on a wide range of issues, includ-
context. First launched in Uganda in 2011, there are cur- ing poverty, bullying, Ebola, and gender equality.
rently more than 2 million U-Reporters, operating in 23 While U-Report is designed as a multithematic social 
countries: Brazil, Burkina Faso, Burundi, Cameroon, Central messaging tool, some countries, like Zambia, have chosen a 
African Republic, Chile, Democratic Republic of Congo, specific health issue to optimize on the tool’s large user base 
Guinea, Indonesia, Ireland, Liberia, Mali, Mexico, Mozam- and real-time analytics. The platform is utilized in a targeted 
bique, Nigeria, Pakistan, Senegal, Sierra Leone, Swaziland, approach to achieve HIV outcomes among adolescents and 
Uganda, Ukraine, Zambia, and Zimbabwe. young people, particularly to: increase knowledge on HIV 
mHEALTH COMPENDIUM  SPECIAL EDITION 2016  n  69
and SRH; generate demand for and increase uptake of HIV 2012 World AIDS Day. It currently has a national reach 
testing and counselling (HTC) and related health services, of over 98,000 subscribers, 65% of whom are adolescents 
and better understand barriers to HIV-prevention services. (10–19 years) and young adults (20–24 years). U-Report, as 
UNICEF, in partnership with Zambia’s National AIDS an SMS-based intervention, provides confidential, free-of-
Council (NAC), launched U-Report Zambia during the charge, and real-time counselling services on HIV and SRH 
to adolescents and youths. 
Program Design Process
U-Report Zambia is built on the foundation of its Uganda ings. The results inform policy dialogue and programmatic 
counterpart, where the platform was first implemented. It decisions, and establish a baseline on knowledge, access, and 
was further developed through a participatory, consultative utilization of high-impact HIV prevention services.
process including a design workshop that involved young UNICEF provides technical leadership and manages the 
people and program experts from NAC, the ministries of systems’ operations (e.g. Poll/Campaign module, and re-
health, education, youth and sports, local NGOs, represen- porting and analytics), and NAC acts as U-Report’s primary 
tatives from mobile companies, and information technology champion and country-wide coordinator of various partners, 
and software developers. Throughout design and implemen- ensuring that the program aligns with national HIV guide-
tation, the opinions of adolescents and young people from lines and plans. UNICEF negotiated discounted bulk SMS 
both urban and rural areas were continuously sought, either rates with all three mobile phone operators in Zambia—
in person or via U-Report to shape and improve the plat- namely Airtel, MTN, and Zamtel, offering SMS service to 
form’s programming and content, so that messages are locally U-Reporters at no cost. 
adapted to the language and tone of its young users. 
To implement the mHealth counselling component of U-Re-
The mHealth application of U-Report Zambia has two com- port, UNICEF entered into a partnership with CHAMP, a 
ponents: Knowledge Bank and Poll/Campaign. Knowledge local NGO, which already managed the national “990” voice 
Bank is a dynamic repository of up-to-date information on counselling service. CHAMP provides counsellors, manages 
HIV and SRH, which over time has expanded to other re- the Knowledge Bank module, and conducts the day-to-day 
lated issues, such as gender-based violence. SMS-counsellors operations of the “878” SMS-based U-Report counselling 
use this resource to provide correct and consistent informa- service. Integrating and ensuring interoperability of the 
tion to U-Reporters. The weekly Poll/Campaign module phone and SMS services, while challenging, is crucial to the 
obtains and gauges the opinions of adolescents and young program’s goals as it both streamlines operations, and gives 
adults on HIV issues, and promotes national events to create young people options to better access HIV counselling and 
awareness, promote positive behavior change and increase information. The two-way SMS communication between 
utilization of services (e.g. national HIV testing day). Survey young people allows for anonymity, while a voice conversa-
results are disaggregated, analyzed, and displayed on its web- tion allows for more in-depth conversation when necessary.
site in real-time, and integrated in key decision-maker meet-
Growth in Scale
In less than five years, U-Report’s membership has rapidly matic issue/s in their country to ensure local ownership and 
grown to over 2 million users worldwide, going live in 23 long-term investment, while achieving the three U-Report 
countries, with 11 in the pipeline. In addition to its coun- global strategic goals: “scale, engage, and change.” U-Re-
try roll-outs, U-Report has a global roll-out (U-Report port is based on the theory that the strength of its voice is 
Global), which enables adolescents and young people from in its numbers. Using transferable technology developed 
all over the world to voice issues that affect them through in the South, UNICEF is able to launch in a new country 
Facebook Messenger, Twitter, Telegram, and App, regardless within 8-12 weeks, working towards the objective to create 
if they have a national U-Report. U-Report’s digital reach an international community of young people. To ensure 
has expanded to over 40 countries in both developing and sustainability, UNICEF also works with telecommunication 
developed countries. providers to make U-Report a free platform within interop-
U-Report collaborates and builds relationships with multiple erable technologies.
stakeholders, who want to work on a common program-
70  n  U-REPORT 
U-Report’s advantage is that not only is it a multiplatform most pressing to young people. While HIV and health are 
technology, but it is also a multithematic platform that goes important issues, they may not be a primary concern among 
beyond mHealth per se. U-Report can focus on a specific young people, so it’s important to have a flexible platform. 
outcome area (e.g. HIV/AIDS) or population group (e.g. U-Report’s holistic approach constantly engages adolescents to 
adolescent girls and boys) like in the case of Zambia, but it discuss issues that affect them today, while giving them access 
can also concurrently tackle a broad range of issues that is to health information and HIV services. 
Evaluation and Results
Of the over 98,000 Zambian U-Reporters who have volun- Through a 10-day U-Report campaign on HTC, a package of 
tarily signed up, about 62% have asked questions—through SMS messages designed to trigger a two-way interactive SMS 
both poll-based solicited and unsolicited messages—with counselling session was delivered to all registered Zambian 
the counsellors.5 Most respondents are aged 10–24 years U-Reporters in Lusaka and Chongwe districts. SMS coun-
(65% of users), male (60%), and located around the urban sellors addressed questions and referred U-Reporters to the 
areas (55%). The average monthly traffic for 2016 ranges nearest HTC site in their location. The evaluation analyzed 
between 8,000 and 10,000 SMS messages, 90% of which, HTC uptake among U-Reporters at baseline, and measured 
if addressed to counsellors, are responded to within a two- the increase in uptake two weeks after the campaign.6  Out of 
hour window. By capitalizing on the growing use of mobile the 1,139 U-Reporters (10–24 years) who claimed that they 
phones and through reliable and correct information from have not tested for HIV in the past 12 months, 18% reported 
the counsellors, U-Report Zambia contributed to increasing going for HTC during the SMS campaign, most (62%) of 
access to and improving comprehensive HIV knowledge them adolescents (15–19 years). In a short period of time, the 
among adolescents and young people. While it’s crucial to U-Report SMS campaign was able to generate 1 additional 
promote and reinforce information through multiple chan- HIV test for every 5 young people who had not tested for 
nels, U-Report added value by disseminating information in HIV in the previous 12 months. While the results are prom-
real-time to a targeted and particularly vulnerable population ising, the methodology relies on self-reported data on HTC 
at a relatively low cost. uptake, and it would be important to conduct future studies 
that allow such claims to be verified by health facilities.
mHEALTH COMPENDIUM  SPECIAL EDITION 2016  n  71
Photo by Mark Naftalin
Zambian U-Reporter Beatrice Phiri (right) speaks to a fellow youth 
about HIV and AIDS information received on U-Report.
U-Report conducted a polling initiative focused on better cents prioritized the use of incentives and campaigns target-
understanding barriers to HIV prevention in Zambia among ing parents. While all age groups suggested to make condoms 
adolescents and on generating user feedback and solutions more widely available, older adolescents and youth preferred 
for more youth-friendly health services. The main barrier to confidential condom distribution centers managed by other 
HTC, according to analysis of a sample of 15,228 U-Re- young people. These findings were presented by adolescents 
porters aged 10–24 years, was fear of a positive test.7 Lack themselves at the Third National HIV&AIDS Prevention 
of awareness of the importance of HTC was highest among Convention—a national-level forum on HIV, which allowed 
younger adolescents. Older adolescents and youth proposed young people to meaningfully participate in policy and pro-
to increase tailored HTC campaigns, while younger adoles- gram design on HIV and health in their country.
Lessons Learned in Program Implementation and Scaling 
Voluntary medical male circumcision (VMMC) decreases promotion as part of a broader range of behavior change 
the chance of men acquiring HIV by 60%.8 Accordingly, interventions.
U-Report Zambia launched an SMS campaign on VMMC U-Report is committed to providing free access for the user 
as part of an impact evaluation, conducted by IDinsight and anywhere in the world, making negotiations with mobile 
funded by the International Initiative for Impact Evaluation.9 network operators (MNOs) crucial. Negotiations on pack-
The randomized controlled trial, with a sample of 2,312 ages with MNOs vary from country to country. One lesson 
male U-Report subscribers (aged 15–30) in urban Lusaka learned is to work closely with the operators at the onset, and 
and peri-urban Chongwe districts, examined the effects of bring them in as part of the U-Report program. In U-Report 
SMS-based interventions on circumcision uptake. In a span Zambia, the counselling component has an annual fixed 
of five months, participants received 21 SMSs, providing cost of over US$200,000 covered by the Global Fund to 
VMMC information, encouraging them to go for circumci- Fight AIDS, Tuberculosis, and Malaria over the next three 
sion, and engaging them in SMS counselling via U-Report. years. This price provides a dual SMS and voice service 24/7, 
The evaluation found that the SMS campaign did not have with counsellors working out of a call center. However, this 
evidence of impact on uptake of circumcision within six expense can be further reduced with more cost-effective solu-
months. However, the U-Report campaign showed signifi- tions, such as using a telecommuting model (i.e. counsellors 
cant information-seeking behavior on VMMC and spurred work remotely) and automated counselling systems. The low-
high levels of engagement with SMS counsellors. While SMS er the cost, the more scalable and sustainable an innovative 
interventions and counsellor access alone may not lead to solution is in the long-term.
increased circumcision uptake, policy-makers and program 
implementers should consider integrating low-cost SMS 
72  n  U-REPORT 
Photo by UNICEF / Zambia / Maseka / 2016
Future Plans 
During World AIDS Day 2015, more than nine countries and send standard responses, with the goal to provide faster 
engaged over 1.3 million U-Reporters to participate in a and more accurate counselling services.
multicountry dialogue on HIV/AIDS related issues. The Beyond mHealth, U-Report is looking to further diversify 
coordinated poll gauged young people’s perceptions on channels over which young people can communicate. Smart-
common themes, such as testing, treatment, knowledge on phone apps for iOS and Android are being released this year, 
prevention and transmission, and stigma around HIV/AIDS. with the ability to send and receive rich media. This feature will 
While its results should not be taken as statistically accurate, enable U-Reporters to share their experiences and stories in their 
as a crowdsourcing tool U-Report can complement ongoing own voices, and connect with others. U-Report is also launch-
processes and interventions. In 2016, U-Report will conduct ing a web-based registration, which could be applied during a 
a series of questionnaires on HIV throughout the year to humanitarian crisis and/or a health emergency response.  n
amplify the voices of adolescents and young people world-
wide, with quantitative and qualitative responses feeding Snapshot: U-Report
into UNICEF’s biennial “Stocktaking Report on Children 
and AIDS.” This initiative will give adolescents an oppor- Geographic U-Report is live in 23 countries: Brazil, Burkina Faso, Coverage Burundi, Cameroon, Central African Republic, Chile, 
tunity to recommend solutions, influence decision-makers Democratic Republic of Congo, Guinea, Indonesia, 
and government leaders during the 21st International AIDS Ireland, Liberia, Mali, Mexico, Mozambique, Nigeria, 
Conference (AIDS 2016) in Durban, South Africa, and ac- Pakistan, Senegal, Sierra Leone, Swaziland, Uganda, 
Ukraine, Zambia, and Zimbabwe.
tively participate in shaping the future of HIV programming U-Report Global (ureport.in/) has a digital reach in 
in UNICEF. an additional 28 countries.
In the pipeline, UNICEF’s priority is to expand mHealth Implementation 2011 to present
applications of U-Report linked to HIV services and pro- Dates
grammatic results. Several countries are working on linking Zambia  UNICEF
U-Report to help improve antiretroviral treatment adher- Partners National AIDS Council (leadership and coordination)Christian Health Association of Zambia (management 
ence, promote condom use, increase HIV testing, and sup- oversight of counseling service activity funds)
plement country assessments on adolescents and HIV data. CHAMP (management of the national “990” voice 
Nigeria and Zimbabwe have started adopting the Zambian counseling service and operations of the “878” SMS 
model of providing real-time counselling via U-Report. counseling service, promotion activities)
Zambia is looking into optimizing its SMS counselling Zambia Global Fund
Implementation Mobile phone operators (i.e., Airtel, MTN, Zamtel) 
through artificial intelligence. Currently in the testing phase, Donors provide SMS services at discounted rates
the automated version uses machine learning algorithms that Contact James Powell, U-Report Global Coordinator
pick out key words from messages, sort them into categories, Information UNICEF, jpowell@unicef.org
References & Additional Resources
References: 
1. UNAIDS 2014 HIV and AIDS estimates, July 2015.
2. WHO, Health for the World’s Adolescents: A second chance in the second decade, World Health Organization, Geneva, 2014.
3. UNAIDS 2014 HIV and AIDS estimates, July 2015.
4. UNICEF global HIV and AIDS databases (September 2015) based on MICS, DHS, AIS and other nationally representative household surveys, 
2010-2014.
5. As of end of April 2016, there are 98,277 members and 61,108 unique conversations in U-Report Zambia.
6. “Zambia U-Report: Innovative demand creation for HIV testing and counselling using mobile phones.” Abstract was written by authors from 
UNICEF Zambia, CHAMP, National AIDS Council (NAC), and UNICEF Eastern and Southern Africa Regional Office.
7. “Using real-time SMS to understand barriers to HIV prevention services among adolescents in Zambia: Lessons learned and implications 
for adolescent health programming.” Abstract was written by authors from UNICEF Zambia, University of Zambia, National AIDS Council 
(NAC), CHAMP, and UNICEF Eastern and Southern Africa Regional Office.
8. Bailey, RC, et al. Male circumcision for HIV prevention in young men in Kisumu, Kenya: a randomised controlled trial. Lancet, 2007, 369:643–656.
9. IDinsight, Measuring the Impact of SMS Campaigns on Uptake of VMMC in Urban Zambia, Lusaka, Zambia, June 2015.
mHEALTH COMPENDIUM  SPECIAL EDITION 2016  n  73
Ed Owles, Worldview
ANNEX
Case Studies from Previous Volumes
VOLUME 1.
BEHAVIOR CHANGE COMMUNICATION
Chakruok Interactive Radio Program
CycleTel™
iCycleBeads™ Smartphone Apps
La Ligne Verte Family Planning Hotline
Mobile 4 Reproductive Health (m4RH)
SMS and IVR to Improve Family Planning Services
Text Me! Flash Me! Call me!
Workplace-based SMS Awareness Campaign
DATA COLLECTION
Automating Data Collection for HIV Services
Child Status Index (CSI) Mobile App
EpiSurveyor/Magpi
Integrated Health Systems Strengthening Project – IHSSP: RapidSMS
JSI Early Warning System
www.africanstrategies4health.org/resources
FINANCE
Changamka Maternal Health Smartcard
Mobile Finance to Reimburse Sexual and Reproductive Vouchers
LOGISTICS
cStock
Delivery Team Topping Up System
Integrated Logistic System – ILSGateway
International Quality Short Message Services (IQSMS)
Mobile Product Authentication MPA
mTrac: Monitoring Essential Medicine Supply
Tupange SMS Community Tracking System
SERVICE DELIVERY
CommCare for Home-Based Care
Community IMCI (cIMCI)
eFamily Planning (e-FP)
eNutrition
Maternal Health (Antenatal and Postnatal Care)
mHealth for Safe Deliveries in Zanzibar
Mobiles for Quality Improvement (m4QI) – SHOPS Project
MOTECH Suite
Project Mwana – SMS for Early Infant Diagnosis of HIV
SIMpill® Medication Adherences Solution
Supportive Supervision (SS) for TB in Nigeria
The Malawi K4Health Mobile Learning Pilot
A:2  n  MAY 2016
VOLUME 2.
BEHAVIOR CHANGE COMMUNICATION
CommCare for Antenatal Care Services in Nigeria
JustTested: SMS-Based Support and Information for HIV Testing and  
Counseling Clients
MAMA Bangladesh
MAMA South Africa
Tobacco Kills: Say No & Save Lives
Wazazi Nipendeni (Parents, Love Me): mHealth Initiative to Support 
Maternal Care in Tanzania
DATA COLLECTION
Community-based Health Promotion for Safe Motherhood using 
mHealth
DataWinners Platform
iHRIS and Mobile Reference Dictionary
iPhones for Malaria Indicator Survey www.africanstrategies4health.org/resources
The Last 10 Kilometers: What it Takes to Improve Health  
  Outcomes in Rural Ethiopia
Mobile Phone Microscopy for the diagnosis of Parasitic Worm Infections
OpenHDS
FINANCE
Heartfile Health Financing - an mHealth enabled innovation in health social protection
Jamii Smart | KimMNCHip—referrals, mSavings and eVouchers
Tanzania National eVoucher Scheme
transportMYpatient: Facilitating access to treatment for obstetric fistulae
LOGISTICS
Enat Messenger for Maternal Health in Ethiopia
Mobile Phone Survey Software for End-Use
mPedigree
mTRAC Stop Malaria Program (SMP)
SERVICE DELIVERY
AliveCor Heart Monitor - Mobile ECG
FioNet: Mobile Diagnostics Integrated with Cloud Information Services
GxAlert
MarieTXT: A Mobile Powered Management Information System
mCARE: Enhancing Neonatal Survival in Rural South Asia
txtAlert for Patient Reminders
mHEALTH COMPENDIUM  SPECIAL EDITION 2016  n  A:3
VOLUME 3.
BEHAVIOR CHANGE COMMUNICATION
Heart Health Mobile
Mobile Integrated Resources for Aurat-Women (MIRA) Channel
NightWatch: Mobile
Wired Mothers
DATA COLLECTION
Child Profiling Survey
Global Trachoma Mapping Project
Malaria Control Program (MACEPA)
Real-Time Biosurveillance Program
ZiDi
FINANCE
Interactive Alerts
mHealth for Safe Delivered: Ezy Pesa mobile banking services www.africanstrategies4health.org/resources
Pona na Tigo Bima
LOGISTICS
Fone Astra
Project Optimize: Albania
SMS for Life
SERVICE DELIVERY
ACT of Birth, Uganda
Baby Monitor
eNUT
Mobile Media Rich Interactive Guidelines
MobiUS Ultrasound
mSakhi
Pre-eclampsia Integrated Estimate of Risk (PIERS) on the Move
Sky Social Franchise Network
SMART
A:4  n  MAY 2016
VOLUME 4.
BEHAVIOR CHANGE COMMUNICATION (BCC) 
Ananya
Empowering and Mobilizing People Living with HIV/AIDS
mCenas!
Mobile Information for Maternal Health
No-Yawa
DATA COLLECTION
Community Led Total Sanitation Mobile Surveillance 
GIS Mapping of Health Facilities
Ma Sante
Mobile HIV & Malaria Diagnosis and Reporting System
mSOS
mSpray
mWater
Participatory Monitoring and Evaluation (PartMe) www.africanstrategies4health.org/resources
Reduction of Maternal Mortality Through ICT
FINANCE
The Mobile Health Research Lab: Mobile Wallet
LOGISTICS
The Liberian Agriculture Upgrading, Nutrition, and Child Health
(LAUNCH) Project
SERVICE DELIVERY
Better Health for Afghan Mothers and Children 
Chipatala cha pa Foni (Health Center by Phone)
eCompliance 
Emergency Triage Assessment and Treatment (ETAT)
Engage TB
Grand Challenge Exploration Phase 1 Project
inSCALE
IVR mLearning Platform in Senegal 
Malaria Community Surveillance for Elimination
Mobile-based Early Detection and Prevention of Oral Cancer (mEPOC)
Mobile Phones for Improved Access to Safe Water (M4W)
Mobilise! 
Peek Vision
The Referral Exchange System (SIJARIEMAS) 
The Safe Delivery App 
mHEALTH COMPENDIUM  SPECIAL EDITION 2016  n  A:5
VOLUME 5.
BEHAVIOR CHANGE COMMUNICATION (BCC) 
Hesperian HealthWiki
EbolaTxt
Project Khuluma
U-Report: Fighting Diseases Across Borders
Alive & Thrive
Projecting Health
iDEA: Interactive Distance Education Application
MomConnect
DATA COLLECTION
MP3Youth 
PMI Africa Indoor Residual Spraying (AIRS)
Hang-Up and Track
CRS Senegal mHealth Pilot
SEDA Automated Health Data Exchange System www.africanstrategies4health.org/resources
OpenSRP: Open Smart Register Platform 
SMS for Life: Sightsavers
mHBB
FINANCE
Accredited Drug Dispensing Outlet
mHealth for Safer Deliveries
Heartfile Health Financing
M4Change + mCCT
Airtel Insurance with MicroEnsure
LOGISTICS
Informed Push Model
mHealth for iCCM
IQSMS International Quality SMS
eLMIS Bangladesh
DrugStoc
cStock Supply Chains for Community Case Management
SERVICE DELIVERY
OppiaMobile
mCare Enhancing Neonatal Survival in Rural South Asia
mTIKKA
HELP: Health Enablement and Learning Platform
ETAT 
mHealth for Community-Based Family Planning Services 
ePartogram
mHero
Mobile App for Management of HIV in Pregnancy 
Maternal and Child Health Integrated Program, Kenya 
ASHA-LINKS 
CommCare Mobile Job Aid for Sahiyas 
MobyApp 
CycleTel Family Advice & CycleTel Humsafar
A:6  n  MAY 2016

African Strategies for Health
Management Sciences for Health
4301 N Fairfax Drive, Suite 400,  Arlington, VA 22203
Telephone: +1-703-524-6575
as4h-info@as4h.org
www.africanstrategies4health.org
Photo by David Dorey/MicroEnsure
