  
Download	Our	Videos
 
What	People
Say
Thanks	a	lot	for	sharing	your	videos.	
They	are	fabulous!!		You	did	a
tremendous	work.	…	I	think	the
videos	are	extremely	valuable	and
well	done.
–	Goldy	Mazia,	MD,	MPH,	Technical	Advisor,
Newborn	Health,	Maternal	and	Child	Health
Integrated	Program	(MCHIP)
Read	More
Watch	Our	Videos
Nutrition	Series	in	7	Languages!
Feeding	young	children	with	care	using	a	warm	and	interactive	approach	is	key	to	developing	close	emotional	connections	and
healthy	lifelong	eating	habits.
Latest	News
Key	steps	in	cleaning	resuscitation	equipment
During	a	newborn	resuscitation,	the	equipment	becomes	contaminated	with	body	fluids	from	the	mother	and	baby.	The
equipment	must	be	properly	cleaned	and	disinfected	before	it	can	be	used	again.	We	have	developed	a	set	of	...	
Read	More
“Empower	parents,	enable	breastfeeding”
This	is	the	theme	of	World	Breastfeeding	Week	(August	1–7),	which	focuses	on	creating	an	enabling	environment	for
breastfeeding	in	communities	and	in	the	workplace.	Global	Health	Media	Project	supports	breastfeeding	worldwide	with
teaching	videos	for	...	
Read	More
Learning	the	basic	steps	of	newborn	resuscitation	with	a	training	doll
Learning	the	basic	steps	of	newborn	resuscitation	with	a	training	doll
We	created	two	films	to	teach	the	basic	steps	of	newborn	resuscitation	using	the	Helping	Babies	Breathe	guidelines:	one	with
live	footage	and	one	using	a	training	doll.	Our	newest	release—Helping	Babies	Breathe	with	a	Training	...	
Read	More
Organizations	that	spread	our	films	around	the	world
and	train	the	health	workers	who	save	lives	…
Global	Health	Media	Project
30	Common	Road
Waitsfield,	VT	05673,	USA
+1	802.496.7556
globalhealthmediaproject@gmail.com
Latest	Tweets
Global	Health	Media 19	Aug
Our	newest	videos	demonstrate	key	steps	for	cleaning	resuscitation	equipment	to	make	it	safe	for	the	next	baby.	https://t.co/jLYZsyWWQD

Global	Health	Media 5	Aug
Celebrate	#WorldBreastfeedingWeek2019	by	empowering	parents	w/	Global	Health	Media	Project	teaching	videos	available	in	40	languages
worldwide.	#WBW2019	https://t.co/zqwPGpeqvO 
Connect	with	us
 	  	 
DONATE
X 	

D O N A T E 	 N o w 	 
©	2014-2019	Global	Health	Media	Project	|	a	501(c)3	not-for-profit Terms	of	Use			Privacy	Policy
