TC309:	mHealth	-	Mobile	Phones	for	Public
Health
JSahnaurea:ry	16,	2017	-	1F7ebruary	10,	20017	|	Facilitated	by	Nick	Martin
APPLY	NOW
Course	Description
In	2016,	the	number	of	global	mobile	subscriptions	will	reach	8.5	billion	—	more	than	the	number	of	people
on	this	earth,	and	it	took	a	little	more	than	20	years	for	that	to	happen.	Yet	at	the	same	time,	health
systems	around	the	world	are	struggling	to:
Provide	access	to	affordable	healthcare	for	all
Treat	infectious	diseases	such	as	Ebola,	HIV/AIDS,	Malaria,	and	Tuberculosis
Address	crippling	maternal	and	child	mortality	rates	in	low-income	countries
Manage	non-communicable	diseases	like	heart	disease,	cancer,	and	Diabetes
Tackle	infrastructure	and	supply	chain	challenges	in	remote	settings
Train	frontline	health	workers	to	provide	care	to	vulnerable	populations
Increasingly,	Ministries	of	Health,	companies,	NGOs,	and	various	bilateral	and	multilateral	donors	are
looking	to	mobile	phones	as	part	of	a	solution	for	responding	to	these	challenges.
This	four-week,	online	certificate	course	will	focus	on	building	mHealth	skills	that	revolutionize	approaches
to	patient	care	and	management,	point-of-care	support,	health	education,	remote	monitoring,	diagnostics,
supply	chain	management	&	logistics	and	more.
A	growing	number	of	mHealth	projects	have	been	implemented	across	the	world	from	Guatemala	to
Uganda,	from	India	to	Argentina	–	we	will	explore	what	has	worked	and	what	could	be	improved	with	each
example,	and	invite	participants	to	share	their	own	experiences	in	managing	ongoing	projects.
Course	Topics	and	Featured	Tech
Week	1:	Introduction	to	Mobile	Phones	for	Public	Health
Week	2:	Strengthening	Health	Systems
Week	3:	Citizen-Centered	Health
Week	4:	The	Future	of	mHealth
Course	Objectives
At	the	conclusion	of	the	course,	participants	will	be	able	to:
critically	analyze	both	the	opportunities	and	the	pitfalls	that	emerge	when	working	with	mobile
technology	to	improve	public	health	outcomes
connect	relevant	development	theories	to	the	technological	strategies	and	tools	discussed	in	the
course
manage	specific	mHealth	software	platforms	and	tools
design	dynamic	and	effective	strategies	for	using	tools	and	platforms	to	improve	mHealth	efforts
become	more	confident	using	mobile	technology	to	address	public	health	challenges
Course	Methodology
This	course	is	delivered	entirely	online	over	a	period	of	four	weeks.
This	course	features	several	live	interactive	guest	expert	sessions	each	week	with	leading
practitioners,	software	developers,	academics,	and	donors.
Every	live	event	is	recorded	and	archived	for	you	to	watch	later.
This	course	also	features	a	unique	hands-on	learning	environment	with	animated	videos,	technology
demos,	practical	activities,	networking	events,	office	hours,	participant	presentations,	immersive
simulations,	and	more.
TechChange	recommends	budgeting	a	minimum	commitment	of	5-7	hours	per	week	and	scheduling
time	for	the	course	around	your	existing	obligations.
Participants	will	have	access	to	all	course	content	for	at	least	4	months	after	course	completion	so	the
material	can	be	completed	and	revisited	later.
Course	Price
$395	if	application	and	payment	is	submitted	by	October	14th,	2016
$445	if	application	and	payment	is	submitted	by	January	10th,	2017
$495	if	application	and	payment	is	submitted	by	course	start	date
Group	discount	rates	available.	For	more	details,	please	contact	us	at	social@techchange.org.
If	you	are	not	happy	with	your	course	experience	for	any	reason,	TechChange	is	happy	to	discuss
refunds.
APPLY	NOW
Still	have	questions?	Learn	more	about	 Our	Model	|	Browse	other	 Courses
Facilitators
Nick	Martin
Nick	Martin
Nick	Martin	is	an	educator,	technologist,	and	social	entrepreneur	with	over	ten	years	of	expertise	in	international	development	and	social	innovation.	He
is	the	founder	and	CEO	of	TechChange	and	an	adjunct	faculty	member	at	Georgetown	and	George	Washington	Universities.	He	has	won	numerous
awards	for	his	teaching	and	leadership	and	has	been	featured	in	the	New	York	Times,	Fast	Company,	The	Economist	and	Forbes.
Guest	Experts
Sophie	Wertheimer
Interagency	Coalition	on	AIDS	&	Development
Read	Bio	
Steve	Ollis
D-Tree	International
Read	Bio	
Cara	Silva
Youth	+	Tech	+	Health	(YTH)
Read	Bio	
Ray	Brunsting
Tula	Foundation
Read	Bio	
Carolyn	Moore
mPowering
Read	Bio	
Ryan	Littman-Quinn
Penn	Center	for	Global	Health
Read	Bio	
Aimee	Leidich
mSurvey
Read	Bio	
Ernest	Ostro
International	Rescue	Committee
Nicolas	Pottier
Nyaruka
Marion	McNabb
Pathfinder	International
Platform	Screenshots
Visualize	your	progress	as	you	learn
Network	with	professionals	from	dozens	of	countries
Exchange	with	leading	experts	in	real	time
Enjoy	custom	animations	and	tech	demos
Technical	Requirements
Flash:	Flash	Player	10	or	later,	and	one	of	the	following	browsers:
Windows:	Internet	Explorer	6	and	later,	Firefox	1.x	and	later,	Safari	3	and	later,	Google	Chrome,	Opera	9.5	and	later
Mac:	Safari	3	and	later,	Firefox	1.x	and	later,	Google	Chrome
Linux:	Firefox	1.x	and	later
HTML5:
Windows:	Internet	Explorer	6	and	later,	Firefox	1.x	and	later,	Safari	3	and	later,	Google	Chrome,	Opera	9.5	and	later
Mac:	Safari	3	and	later,	Firefox	1.x	and	later,	Google	Chrome
Linux:	Firefox	1.x	and	later
Apple	iOS:	Articulate	Mobile	Player;	Apple	iOS	5.0	or	later	on	iPad
Testimonials
I	would	highly	recommend	TechChange’s	Mobile	Phones	for	Public	Health.	The	course	brings	together	an	impressive	array	of	researchers	and
practitioners	who	are	passionate	about	MobileHealth.	The	course	utilizes	impressive	learning	platform	that	is	highly	interactive	and	attracts	a	diverse
cohort	of	participants	from	around	the	world.	I	absolutely	love	the	learning	platform.
-	Dr.	Kerry-Ann	Hamilton,	Howard	University
Enter	your	email	here... SUBSCRIBE
Contact	Us
©	2012-2019	TechChange,	Inc.
2001	13th	St.,	NW,	3rd	Floor,	Washington,	DC	20009
