Connecting ministries of health with frontline 
health workers via SMS
Photo by Emily Nicholson for IntraHealth International
42  n  MHERO 
mHERO
MHero is a two-way, mobile phone-based communication 
platform that uses basic text messaging, or SMS, to connect 
ministries of health and health workers. mHero operates  
on simple talk-and-text mobile devices—no smartphone or 
tablet required. 
MHero is not a new technology. It’s a way to connect data from existing health information systems (HIS) to allow 
targeted, real-time communication. mHero brings together components of a country’s HIS using open international 
interoperability standards for health information exchange.  Health officials can use mHero to:
n communicate critical messages to health workers and informal indicators, one-time assessments, and 
during a crisis; validation of health worker and facility data; and 
n target messages to health workers based on cadre, n support surveillance systems for real-time report-
location, or skill set; ing on active cases and potential outbreaks and to 
 collect critical information that supports resilient reinforce health workers’ skills—part of a country’s n
health systems, including stock levels, routine formal solution for Integrated Disease Surveillance and 
Response (IDSR).
Harnessing the principles for digital development—guidelines that can help development practitioners integrate 
established best practices into technology-enabled programs—IntraHealth International and UNICEF created mHero in 
August 2014 to support health sector communication during the Ebola outbreak in Liberia.1 mHero is currently being 
scaled up in Liberia, piloted in Guinea and Sierra Leone, and deployed in Mali and Senegal as part of the Global Health 
Security Agenda to support IDSR use cases. 
About mHero
MHero combines iHRIS, an open source human resourc- What makes mHero work at national scale is rigorous es information system (HRIS) developed by Intra- adoption of open international standards for health in-
Health, and RapidPro, UNICEF’s SMS platform that allows formation data exchange. These include the Care Services 
users to create SMS messages in a “workflow” through a Discovery (CSD), Mobile Alert Communication Manage-
website. mHero supports one-time messages to health work- ment (mACM), and HL7 Fast Healthcare Interoperability 
ers or two-way communication between health workers and Resources (FHIR) standards for sharing health worker and 
the ministry of health. Health workers can initiate messages health facility data and to provide standards-based commu-
themselves by sending a standardized SMS to the mHero nication protocols for health workers. The open source and 
phone number. open standards approach means that the mHero platform is 
The technology behind mHero includes interoperability with not tied to any specific piece of software and allows minis-
other systems, such as DHIS2, through OpenHIE, an archi- tries of health to readily integrate mHero into their HIS.   
tecture that supports mHero as HIS expands and evolves. A variety of tools support the mHero platform.2 These 
Using these open source systems, ministries of health are able include video tutorials on operating the platform; operations 
to efficiently leverage health information technologies, many and management tools to support implementation; and a 
of which they have already invested in scaling to improve wiki to guide developers and program implementers setting 
their own HIS. up their own instances of the platform.3,4
mHEALTH COMPENDIUM  SPECIAL EDITION 2016  n  43
Program Design Process
The mHero platform is designed by facilitating interoper- rica, Johns Hopkins Center for Communication Programs, 
ability of existing HIS.   Linking iHRIS and RapidPro via International Medical Corps, Dimagi, the Clinton Health 
an interlinked health worker registry, information on health Access Initiative and many others.
workers (including cadre, facility, location), as well as their The most important stakeholder, however, is the ministry 
mobile numbers, are pulled from iHRIS and attached to the of health in the country in which mHero is implemented. 
workflow developed in RapidPro. mHero was also created to mHero is fully integrated into and operated directly by the 
be interoperable with District Health Information Soft- ministry. The ministry decides which use cases to prioritize 
ware 2  (DHIS2) and interlinked facility registries to ensure and which health workers to target with messages, and de-
standardized facility data are part of the mHero platform. velops and sends the workflows. IntraHealth works with the 
Security, access control, and data synchronization services are ministries and partners in the respective countries to align 
provided through the OpenHIM software. mHero with national policies and strategies so the platform 
mHero’s initial development was supported by UNICEF, can be utilized to support the existing (or future) HIS and to 
the US Agency for International Development (USAID) respond to priority health needs.
through the K4Health Project, and Johnson & Johnson. IntraHealth and UNICEF are building the capacity of 
The design process engaged a number of partners, including mHero implementers at ministries of health in Liberia, 
Jembi Health Systems, Thoughtworks, USAID, and others. Sierra Leone, and Guinea. This includes collaboration to 
An intentional multistakeholder approach was undertaken in strategically integrate mHero into existing data collection 
the development and implementation of mHero to include and reporting structures, training in RapidPro to create 
as much collaboration as possible to ensure the platform workflows and in operation of the platform through iHRIS, 
aligned with other digital efforts to reach health workers, establishing interoperability between RapidPro and iHRIS, 
especially during the Ebola response. These stakeholders and developing standard operating procedures and other 
have expanded to include the World Health Organization, critical management processes to integrate mHero into the 
MEASURE Evaluation, Jhpiego, Management Sciences for existing HIS framework.5 
Health, mPowering Frontline Health Workers, eHealth Af-
Growth in Scale 
The first mHero use cases were developed to help Libe- The success of mHero in Liberia can be attributed to the 
ria’s Ministry of Health and Social Welfare determine the ministry mHero team’s ownership of the platform and 
location of health workers during the Ebola response and commitment to ensuring mHero is aligned with Liberia’s 
which facilities were open. After a successful pilot in four HIS and that the platform is successful in responding to the 
facilities in four counties, the mHero team at the ministry ministry’s information and communication needs.As mHero 
began raising awareness of the platform among county-level scaled in Liberia, ministries in Guinea and Sierra Leone 
stakeholders.  began planning implementations. Officials from the three 
Interest in the system grew as officials realized the platform’s countries met through iHRIS and mHero trainings to share 
accessibility and flexibility, allowing for new use cases to experiences developing and deploying the platform, includ-
be developed. These included collecting information about ing integration into ministry and HIS structures and best 
mental health services, conducting an assessment of anthro- practices for strategic development of meaningful use cases. 
pometric nutrition tools, alerting new staff to their payroll As of March 2016, the ministry in Sierra Leone had planned 
IDs, and collecting information from health workers on their its use cases and was close to piloting the platform. Efforts 
level of family planning training, commodities supply, and to build a sustainable base for mHero in Guinea are gaining 
service provision.6 To date, 22 distinct use cases have reached momentum as the ministry develops its HIS strategic plan. 
over 5,000 health workers throughout the country. The min- USAID has supported scale-up of mHero in the three coun-
istry is now engaging external partners in the development tries through the Ebola Grand Challenge Innovation Grant 
and sending of use cases, demonstrating its role in leading through the Global Health Bureau.
health worker communications in Liberia. 
44  n  MHERO 
In Mali, IntraHealth is working with the Ministry of Health reinforcement of health workers’ skill sets during the surveil-
to develop and deploy mHero in both SMS and interactive lance process. In Senegal, the Ministry of Health is deploying 
voice response (IVR) formats to support the surveillance a version of mHero across its health regions. 
system, including enhancements in real-time reporting and 
Evaluation and Results
In November 2015, one year after the initial pilot, a baseline associated with Liberia’s Ministry of Health and Social Wel-
assessment was conducted in Liberia to measure frontline fare. The largest factor contributing to awareness of mHero 
health workers’ awareness of, use of, and attitudes toward was exposure, as 81% of those who knew of the platform 
mHero. Ten-question phone surveys were administered to had received an SMS sent via mHero. Health workers iden-
266 randomly selected recipients who fit the definition of tified various factors motivating them to respond to these 
a frontline health worker. A randomly selected subsample messages, with the most frequent reason being that they had 
of 20 health workers responded to an extended survey. This been told about mHero prior to receiving the text. Responses 
survey featured additional queries that elicited more detailed to the extended survey indicate that health workers almost 
information about respondents’ phone use, including mobile universally bring their phones to work each day, and more 
technologies such game playing, accessing social media, use their phones for connecting to social media than they do 
and taking online courses. The extended survey also probed for playing games or taking courses. Health workers report 
participants’ phone use patterns, such as preferred times for receiving a wide variety of health-related texts each month of 
receiving and responding to text messages. varying origin.
Overall, survey findings at baseline proved very preliminary An endline assessment using the same questions will be con-
due to a lack of awareness of mHero among respondents. ducted in Liberia in July 2016 toward the end of the USAID 
Out of the 266 respondents, only 7.9% of the health workers Ebola Grand Challenge Project.
had heard of mHero, and even fewer knew that mHero was 
mHEALTH COMPENDIUM  SPECIAL EDITION 2016  n  45
Photos by Emily Nicholson for IntraHealth International
 
Lessons Learned in Program Implementation and Scaling
A number of key insights and lessons learned have emerged working with other implementing partners to improve 
since mHero’s initial pilot in late 2014. These include: infrastructure in Liberia, Guinea, and Sierra Leone. 
 Ministry of health leadership and ownership: mHe- The needed infrastructural investments are not extreme n
ro’s success depends on the ministry stakeholders who and can support other subsystems of an HIS and basic 
utilize and implement the platform. It can take time operations of the ministry. This includes basic Internet 
to build a sense of ownership, to identify the strategic connection, procuring laptops for ministry staff, and 
“home” for mHero within the ministry, and to integrate provision of servers and backup servers for data and en-
mHero into the HIS architecture. suring security of mHero and iHRIS data. Working with 
other partners and donors to ensure a strategic approach 
n Awareness-raising with health workers: To encour- to infrastructure improvement is important, especially 
age their active engagement, health workers need to during an emergency response when coordination of 
know that mHero messages are legitimately from the investments is challenging.
ministry and that their responses are important for 
decision-making. Flyers, brochures, and other commu- n Implementation capacity: Though mHero harnesses 
nication tools can help spread the word. existing technology, the processes for implementing 
mHero are new. Ensuring ongoing capacity-building 
n Infrastructure: mHero’s functionality depends on a for mHero team members to not only facilitate the 
number of infrastructure components, including ade- interoperability of the systems but also establish proce-
quate software and hardware to operate the platform and dures that fit within their local context is important, as 
mobile network service throughout the country. Inade- is building capacity to manage and use data. Through 
quate infrastructure has delayed mHero implementation, ongoing training and mentorship, both from a distance 
in some cases more so than expected, but IntraHealth is and through short-term technical assistance, IntraHealth 
46  n  MHERO 
Photo by Emily Nicholson for IntraHealth International
continues to work with mHero teams in the respective n Engaging other external partners: Many other donors 
ministries to foster skills-building in systems operations and implementing partners have been operating in 
and data use. Staff turnover and non-mHero work Liberia, Guinea, and Sierra Leone to support the Ebola 
demands have posed challenges, thus an organizational response and rebuilding efforts, creating an additional 
development approach must be taken in capacity-build- but important layer of collaboration and commitment 
ing efforts. for mHero implementation to be successful.
Future Plans 
The future of mHero focuses on thoughtful steps toward the n Streamlined integration for communication with a 
full integration of the platform into ministry of health HIS health facility’s point of contact
plans and procedures, ensuring strategic use of the platform 
n Integration with other communication platforms as 
to support the needs of health workers and ministries, and alternatives to RapidPro (e.g., CommCare) for countries 
raising awareness to encourage message response. Future that are comfortable with their existing platform
trainings on both iHRIS and mHero have been planned, as 
well as workshops on the strategic use of data to inform pro- n Expanded analytics capabilities  n
grammatic and policy decisions. Discussions about interop-
erability are underway to ensure mHero can directly support 
other HIS subsystems. Pilot messages will be initiated in 
Sierra Leone, Guinea, and Liberia in the coming months, Snapshot: mHero
demonstrating full regional scale of the platform. In addi-
Geographic Guinea, Liberia, Mali, Senegal, Sierra Leone, Tanzania
tion, the Liberia ministry is interested in decentralizing use Coverage
of mHero so that county human resource officers can use it Implementation November 2014 to present
to communicate with health workers in facilities.  Dates
Other future plans to expand the capability of the mHero Implementation IntraHealth (co-founder of platform);
platform include the following: Partners UNICEF (co-founder of platform)
mHero is implemented by Ministries of Health
n Providing mHero functionality at the level of the Inter- Donor(s) USAI
linked Health Worker Registry, rather than iHRIS, for Johnson & Johnson
countries or programs that do not use iHRIS UNICEF Global Innovation Centre
UNICEF Liberia
n Tighter integration with DHIS2 for routine data col-
lection as well as alerts and reminders to support the Contact Amanda Puckett BenDor, Technical Advisor, Information IntraHealth, apuckett@intrahealth.org
routine data-collection process
References & Additional Resources 
1. “The Principles.” Principles for Digital Development, accessed March 15, 2016. http://digitalprinciples.org/
2. “Toolbox & Resources.” mHero.org, last modified April 19, 2016, http://www.mhero.org/toolbox-resources
3. Leitner, Carl. “mHero Videos by Carl.” YouTube.com, last modified September 1, 2015, https://www.youtube.com/playlist?list=PLVS-
gzqqaj15C4JEF-_GD5n8553ZgO_Nc
4. “MHero Installation and Configuration.” ihris.org, last modified March 1, 2016. https://wiki.ihris.org/wiki/MHero_Installation_and_
Configuration
5. “RapidPro Table of Contents.” RapidPro.io, accessed March 21, 2016. http://docs.rapidpro.io/
6. Puckett BenDor, Amanda; Nicholson, Emily. “Spotlight: mHero Connects Frontline Health Workers with Mental Health Services in Liberia. “ 
IntraHealth.org. December, 2015. http://www.intrahealth.org/page/mheromentalhealth
 
mHEALTH COMPENDIUM  SPECIAL EDITION 2016  n  47
