 
INTERACTIVE ALERTS  
Improving vaccine coverage through small incentives 
An estimated 17% of the 8.8 million deaths worldwide receive higher cash amounts for vaccinations that are 
each year in children under five are attributed to administered at the recommended age. After winning 
vaccine-preventable illnesses. Despite major the lottery, the caregiver is sent a winning lottery code 
immunization coverage efforts through Pakistan’s via SMS. The lottery winnings can be used at the 
Expanded Program on Immunization (EPI), low rates participating stores offering groceries and medicines 
of uptake and delayed immunization leave children located in close vicinity to each EPI center, and codes 
vulnerable to diseases that are vaccine-preventable. cannot be exchanged for cash. Each time a lottery prize 
Provinces report full immunization coverage rates is won, the health worker who administered the 
from 40% to 80%. Additionally, there are limited data vaccination also receives a mobile money transfer 
identifying whether vaccines were administered at age payment through Easypaisa, equivalent to 40% of the 
-appropriate times during infancy.  lottery prize. Easypaisa is a mobile banking service 
offered through Telenor Pakistan cellular 
Through education and small incentives, Interactive communications, in partnership with Tameer Bank 
Research & Development (IRD) hopes to decrease the MicroFinance.  
burden of vaccine-preventable diseases by increasing the 
immunization coverage and timeliness among Pakistani 
children. IRD, in collaboration with the Government of Evaluation and Results 
Pakistan and the Department of Health in Sindh 
The pilot phase started in June 2012 and has enrolled 
Province, implemented Interactive Alerts, a mobile 
more than 14,000 infants from 12 public and private 
phone-based vaccine registry system that uses SMS 
sector EPI centers in Karachi. 
reminders to caregivers and conditional cash transfers 
to care givers and health workers to improve Interim data analysis suggests improved immunization 
immunization coverage among children in and around coverage and timeliness. Currently, an impact evaluation 
Karachi, Pakistan.  study is underway to determine the effectiveness of 
Interactive Alerts in improving immunization coverage 
Implementation date: June 2012 
and timeliness in children, performance of vaccinators, 
and the accessibility and quality of program data. 
About Interactive Alerts Scale-up of the project will begin in January 2014 with a 
Interactive Alerts offers child tracking and referral via target of reaching another 100,000 children from 
general packet radio service (GPRS) using near field Karachi over the period of one year.  
communication (NFC) mobile phones and radio 
frequency identification (RFID) tags. It provides a J2ME 
mobile client application for data collection and a web Lessons Learned 
based server side application for data monitoring and  Vaccinators are enthusiastic about using a cell phone 
storage. Plans are to release the android version of the data entry system for recording immunization 
application in November 2013. events. mHealth Innovation leverages existing 
resources and personnel and increases their 
A child’s caregiver first enrolls in a lottery system during 
efficiency compared to the existing paper-based 
an EPI center visit and then receives SMS reminders 
record keeping system. 
about vaccination appointments. To assure each child 
completes the scheduled vaccines on time, health  Lottery-based conditional cash transfers incur low 
workers also individually track enrolled children using costs and have the potential to induce positive 
the mobile phone-based RFID system. The amount of behavior change in caregivers for improving 
cash the caregiver is eligible to win increases with each immunization and improve performance of 
subsequent vaccine their child completes. Caregivers vaccinators  
34 mHEALTH COMPENDIUM   |   VOLUME 3 
 
INTERACTIVE ALERTS  
Improving vaccine coverage through small incentives  FINANCE 
Figure 1. Participant flow 
Conclusion Contact Information:  
IRD Pakistan: Subhash Chandir, Director of Vaccines 
Small incentives can prove beneficial in public health 
Program (subhash.chandir@irdresearch.org) | Asad Zaidi, 
programs. Through SMS reminders and a lottery system, 
Medical Epidemiologist (asad.zaidi@irdresearch.org) | Saira 
caregivers are encouraged to bring in their children for 
Khowaja, Director of Program Development 
timely vaccinations and health workers are incentivized 
(saira.khowaja@irdresearch.org) 
to provide efficient vaccination services. Together, these 
mHealth Alliance: Francis Gonzales, Program Associate 
innovative strategies help prevent needless childhood 
(Fgonzales@mHealthAlliance.org) 
deaths and illnesses associated with vaccine-preventable 
diseases.   References: 
1. eHealth. Interactive Research & Development. No date. Web. 
-------------------------------------------------------- 
2. Global immunization data. WHO and UNICEF, October 2012. 
Geographic Coverage: Pakistan Web. 
3. Hasan Q, Bosan AH, Bile KM. A review of EPI progress in 
Implementation Partners: Interactive Research & Pakistan towards achieving coverage targets: present situation 
Development (IRD) | Expanded Program on Immunization and the way forward. East Mediterranean Health Journal, 2010, 
(EPI), Sindh Province, Government of Pakistan | 16 Supplement:S31–S38. Web. 
openXdata.org; Indus Hospital | Johns Hopkins Bloomberg 4. Pakistan Demographic and Health Survey 2006–2007. Islamabad, 
School of Public Health Pakistan, National Institute of Population Studies and Macro 
International Inc., 2008. 
Funder: mHealth Alliance, Community Health Solutions 
5. World Health Organization. IRD – Interactive Alerts for Vaccine 
Coverage (Pakistan). Project Profile. 2013. 
  mHEALTH COMPENDIUM   |   VOLUME 3 35 
