 
iPHONES FOR MALARIA INDICATOR 
SURVEY 
January 31 to March 8 of 2013, covering 6,720 
households throughout the country.  Despite the great 
surge of mobile technologies to accelerate data 
collection, all surveys prior to this were using paper-
based systems in Sierra Leone. The 2013 MIS used 
Apple 3GS iPhones to collect data via the iFormBuilder 
platform, a software as services application with a 
companion app for mobile devices allowing for timely 
data collection, monitoring, and analysis. 
ABOUT iFORMBUILDER FOR 
SURVEYS 
Network coverage in Sierra Leone has greatly improved 
over the past decade, and although coverage can be 
intermittent in many rural areas, network connection 
can generally be found in at least a few areas in each 
village. This was an important consideration prior to 
deciding to use iPhones for data collection through the 
iFormBuilder platform. 
In designing the data collection program, CRS and 
partners developed three main forms: 1) a household 
BRIEF OVERVIEW questionnaire; 2) a women’s questionnaire; and 3) a 
Malaria is endemic in Sierra Leone, with stable and biomarker testing form for eligible children via their 
perennial transmission in all parts of the country. As consenting mothers. Within each of these forms, other 
such, the entire population is at risk of developing the sub-forms were created.  Skip logic and validation were 
disease. Malaria accounts for about 50% of outpatient programmed in order to facilitate consistent and 
morbidity and is presently the leading cause of morbidity complete data entry. 
and mortality among children under five years of age, 
with a mortality attributed to malaria estimated to be For the purposes of the household schedule and to 
38% among this age group and 25% for all ages facilitate data entry at the time of the interview, all 
(Outpatient morbidity statistics, MoHS, 2009, MIS 2010).  household names, village, district, and GPS location were 
recorded into the iPhones. Each individual was also 
Catholic Relief Services (CRS) and the Ministry of assigned a unique identification code at the time of 
Health and Sanitation (MoHS) of Sierra Leone are co- questionnaire administration to ensure confidentiality 
implementing a Global Fund to Fight AIDS, Tuberculosis, during subsequent data analysis.  
and Malaria (Global Fund) Round 10 grant for Malaria. 
The overall goal of the Global Fund Round 10 Malaria On completing all three forms (and their respective sub-
program is to achieve the malaria-related Millennium forms), data collection team supervisors were trained to 
Development Goals (MDGs) by 2015, not only check for accuracy, electronically sign their name, and 
nationally, but also among the poorest groups across ensure that a unique identifier was present for the 
Sierra Leone.   household, before synching completed questionnaires to 
a cloud-based database via the local network. Since this 
In order to track progress and impact, CRS led the unique identifier was included in all three main 
implementation of a Malaria Indicator Survey (MIS) from 
30 mHEALTH COMPENDIUM   │    VOLUME 2 
 
 DATA COLLECTION 
questionnaires it allowed for the CRS Freetown-based collection, a CRS Freetown-based team was 
support center staff to immediately extract, view, and available 16 hours a day to respond to phone calls 
make a quick analysis of data on the iFormBuilder from the field teams, especially during the first 10 
platform to make sure that all information was correctly days of fieldwork. 
recorded.  If CRS staff noticed any irregularities, such as 
missing forms for household members who were eligible 
for women’s interviews or blood testing, a call could be CONCLUSION 
made and problems rectified immediately.  The iPhone/iFormBuilder technology eliminated the 
need for paper transcribing, allowing for quicker data 
tabulation, and facilitated faster interviewing through 
EVALUATION AND RESULTS skip patterns.  Also, the fact that survey teams and 
Under a similar Global Fund Malaria program in The central data managers were able to view completed 
Gambia, CRS had experience supporting the Ministry of questionnaires in real time allowed for instantaneous 
Health in conducting a paper-based MIS. It took over mistake identification, and consequently data cleaning, in 
two years for results to be compiled, cleaned, and addition to ameliorating the data accuracy and 
analyzed. With the iPhone technology, CRS in Sierra completeness of each field team from one enumeration 
Leone was able to have a clean dataset close to the end area to the next. 
of data collection, allowing preliminary results to be 
available within two months of the end of the survey. 
GEOGRAPHIC COVERAGE 
Sierra Leone (nationwide coverage; 14 districts)  
LESSONS LEARNED 
 Planning sufficient time to transform the paper-
based questionnaire into an electronic format: It IMPLEMENTATION PARTNERS 
took three rounds of approximately three weeks Catholic Relief Services is leading a team of partners 
each of intense programming and testing, over the which include Sierra Leone Ministry of Health and Sani-
course of a 10-month period, to program the MIS tation, University of Sierra Leone College of Medicine 
questionnaire into the iFormBuilder platform. and Applied Health Sciences, Statistics Sierra Leone, ICF 
International, and World Health Organization  
 Giving the program enough time for pre-testing the 
tool: The tool was pre-tested in 100 households in FUNDER 
both rural and urban areas of Bo District three Global Fund to Fight AIDS, Tuberculosis, and Malaria  
months prior to the MIS data collection. 
 Spending enough time on training data collectors CONTACT INFORMATION 
and biomarkers prior to data collection:  Data Global Fund 
collection training for the 28 teams lasted for three  Camille Collin, Program Officer  
weeks, which was necessary to ensure that all Email: camille.collin@theglobalfund.org  
individuals undertaking the MIS data collection fully Catholic Relief Services  
understood the questions, the functioning of the  Emily Bostick, Program Director Global 
iPhones, and the sequencing of the questionnaires, Fund Round 10 for CRS/Sierra Leone  
especially with respect to the anemia and malaria Email: emily.bostick@crs.org  
testing. 
 Having a technical support center throughout the 
survey data collection:  Throughout the survey data 
  MHEALTH COMPENDIUM  |  VOLUME 2 31 
