Requests from pre-
registered hospitals arrive 
as SMSs, which trigger 
the system.  Automated 
alerts go to patients and 
doctors to gauge a patient’s 
eligibility for assistance. 
Once a procedure is done 
or services are delivered, a 
monitoring officer confirms 
completion.
Heartfile Health Financing
IMPLEMENTATION DATE:  2010 to Present
Financial risk protection for people with non-communicable diseases in Pakistan
There are two health systems models operating in the world: the Beveridge system, in which revenues 
fund public facilities and services, and the Bismark system, where pooled funds and intermediary agencies 
procure services from the private sector for those employed in the formal sector. These models are 
limited in their ability to offer financial risk protection to the poor working in the informal sector, especially 
in countries with mixed health systems where public and private service providers coexist but out-of-
pocket payments remain the major means of health financing. 
In such settings, public sector facilities do not offer free onsite services for the entire spectrum of needs. 
Therefore, individuals seeking care for major illnesses, especially non-communicable diseases, end up 
spending catastrophically on healthcare and are either pushed into poverty or forgo healthcare altogether. 
These problems exist in Pakistan as well as in most developing countries with mixed health systems. 
Access to financial services has been termed as one of the three impediments to seeking healthcare in 
WHO’s World Health Report on Health Financing, 2010. Heartfile has developed a health system model 
to overcome this gap.
About Heartfile Health Financing
Heartfile Financing is an mHealth-enabled fund-based philanthropy, bilateral and multilateral agencies, and institu-purchasing system. The fund currently has a full grant tional donors. Two other windows are planned for introduc-
and a partial grants window in operation. Because of the tion in an effort to move towards sustainability. A mobile sav-
unique donor empowerment features (real time micro-trans- ing program backed by telco-microinsurance linkages helps to 
action alerts, full web viewing of grant allocation to individu- underwrite partial health costs and a health loans program. 
al patients, etc.), these windows have expanded overtime and The Heartfile Financing system runs on mobile phones. The 
are now being  supported by a range of donors—individual SMS function is being used as the backbone of communi-
54  n  FINANCE
Heartfile
Lessons Learned 
n Innovations have to be developed at multiple levels 
and in a holistic way in order to build an innovative 
system to overcome a specific challenge. Innovations in 
partnerships, technology, systems, and procedures have 
to be integral to this process.
n Building a system is an iterative process—initial 
development, deployment, operationalization, learning 
from implementation experiences, and evidence-based 
modifications have to be part of the process.
cation rather than smartphone features in order to make 
the program widely available in developing countries where n The use of cell phones has made this new model 
smartphone penetration is still low. Requests from pre- widely acceptable to all stakeholders, especially users, 
registered hospitals arrive as SMSs, which trigger the system. as they do not have to make an investment in hardware 
Automated alerts go to patients and doctors in local vernac- and do not have to spend much time learning new skills.
ular to gauge a patient’s eligibility for assistance. Automated n The transparency of the program has been valued by 
SMS-based decisions are conveyed to patients and doctors, all stakeholders.
followed by SMS-based purchase orders to suppliers and 
pre-registered hospitals ordering supplies and/or procedures Conclusion 
for a particular patient.
Once a procedure is done or services are delivered, a moni- Heartfile Financing is a health systems model which aligns 
toring officer confirms completion with a cell phone message with mixed health systems to achieve financial risk protection 
and the doctor acknowledges the same. This segregation for the poor in the informal sector. The model is scalable 
of responsibilities helps to protect against abuse and the and replicable in settings other than Pakistan, where it was 
possible introduction of a ‘ghost patient’ in the system. A developed and is being tested. The key variables for scale-up 
donor is then matched with a patient according to donor and replication are a reliable cell phone network and internet 
preferences and an SMS alert is sent to convey case closure. connectivity for the clearing house. The features and controls 
The cell phone messaging is part of a workflow algorithm. built into the system help protect against abuse, improve 
For each patient, this workflow is performed on tablets in efficiency, and achieve value for money.  n   
the field and on a technology platform at the clearing house 
at Heartfile. Unique transparency features enable tracking 
of individual patients on a web platform, linking doctors, 
patients, and service providers.
Geographic Coverage:  Pakistan 
Evaluation and Results Implementation Partner: Heartfile 
Donors: Dr Sania Nishtar, Founder; Royalty of the book, Choked 
Both impact and process evaluations are currently in the final Pipes, published by the Oxford University Press; Rockefeller Foundation; Individual donors and private foundations in Paki-
phase of analysis. A series of ethnographies of beneficiaries of stan; Pakistan Poverty Alleviation Fund; Canada’s International 
the program from across Pakistan were conducted. This study Development Research Center (IDRC); USAID; John Snow 
has completed the data collection and analysis phases. A pro- International; KFW Bankengruppe; partnerships with the 
cess evaluation is also underway. Expressions of interest for Clinton Global Initiative (a joint commitment) and the World 
third party evaluations and case studies have been solicited. Economic Forum’s International Partnership for Innovative 
Healthcare Delivery (IPIHD) 
Contact Information: Dr. Sania Nishtar, Founder, Heartfile, 
sania@heartfile.org 
mHEALTH COMPENDIUM  VOLUME 5  n  55
