REDUCTION OF MATERNAL MORTALITY 
THROUGH ICT 
Combating maternal and child mortality with text messages in Uganda 
DATA COLLECTION 
Implementation date: October 2011 to December 2014  
Though maternal mortality in Uganda has decreased in the last 15 years – from 527 women per 100,000 live births (1995) to 
310 per 100,000 live births (2010) – the rate remains unacceptably high. The greatest risk of maternal death occurs during 
child birth and in the following first few hours and days of the child’s life. A baseline survey carried out by Voices for Health Rights 
in 2011, found there was a lack of knowledge among pregnant women on what healthcare they are entitled during pregnancy, 
and services they should seek to minimize complications during pregnancy and birth (e.g.  the recommended four antenatal care 
visits before delivery). 
The survey found that only 49.5 percent of pregnant women were aware of danger signs during pregnancy and child birth and 
only and 26.2 percent were aware of their right to receive healthcare because of their “maternal functions of women including 
reproduction” (article 33(3) of the 1995 Constitution of Uganda). To better address this gap in knowledge, the International 
Institute for Communication and Development (IICD) and its Connect4Change (C4C) Consortium partners began supporting the 
Uganda National Health Consumers’ Organization (UNHCO) to implement a program to provide better access to maternal and 
child health (MCH) information.  
About Reduction of Maternal Mortality through ICT 
IICD and C4C-partners are supporting UNHCO for three persons) using the same platform to collect feedback on 
year period with ICT capacity-building enabling them to how health service delivery can be improved 
m ake MCH information more accessible to all registered  In addition to the text messages, call centers are being 
beneficiaries within the project areas of Lyantonde, Luweero used to assess client satisfaction of the participants on 
and Kamuli, and improve client feedback of available health the SMS platform with the services they receive 
 
services. During the program (2011-2014) various ICT-based  Reminders are being sent through SMS to pregnant 
solutions are being used targeting men and women of mothers about their antenatal care appointments at 
r eproductive age, pregnant mothers, health workers, and health facilities 
community resource persons. These include:  Incentives of airtime credit are given out to participants, 
to encourage more participation 
 SMS-campaigns sensitizing communities about maternal 
  Training takes place in the use of digital tools to develop 
and child health issues. Text and voice messages are user-friendly information / education / communication 
being sent twice a month materials based on experiences/testimonies captured in 
  Text messages from UNHCO are being sent to the communities for showing at health facilities 
registered numbers (community members and resource 
 
42  |  mHealth Compendium Volume 4 
E valuation and Results 
Thus far, the project has reached 3,170 people, including 
800 pregnant mothers. Sixty health workers have been 
trained in use of ICT to reach out to people in the 
community. To be able to monitor progress, a baseline 
study was carried out in November 2012 and follow-up 
studies in 2013 and 2014.  In 2013, the results showed 
that the number of people being reached by means of 
ICT quadrupled to 1,845. As a result of this, 19,995 
people went to a health facility.  Over 60 percent of the 
patients providing feedback in 2012 had a satisfaction 
score of >75 percent, however in 2013 this had 
decreased to 51 percent. 
 Other findings from the annual learning workshops 
and semi-annual progress include: 
 ICT solutions have made awareness-creation easier 
through mechanisms such as video and audio messages 
that are shared at health facilities and through phone calls 
 The use of ICT has reduced delays in collection and analysis of data and, increased efficiency in reporting 
 Feedback messages provide UNHCO with better insight on issues affecting healthcare delivery e.g. client feedback 
highlighted that the number of midwives available in the facilities was low compared to the needs in the districts of 
Lyantonde, Luweero and Kamuli 
 The feedback data has contributed to UNHCO’s advocacy for various health related issues such as underfunding of 
Primary Health Care funds. Now UNHCO has the lead of several Civil Society Organizations who jointly advocate for 
an increase of the PHC budget to promote preventive measures of diseases with in communities. 
Lessons Learned 
 The voice messaging component was easily adopted by the community and is also the preferred mode for information 
dissemination. Future projects targeting similar user groups 
should take into account that voice might help get a better 
outreach than text 
Geographic Coverage: Kamuli, Luweero and 
 Women do have access to mobile phones, but often do not Lyantonde Districts in Uganda  
possess the phone which might hinder regular and timely access 
when needed. For example, data gathered on patient satisfaction Implementation Partners: Uganda National 
by UNHCO, was biased to some extent as the majority of Health Consumers’ Organization (UNHCO)  
respondents were men  
Funder: Connect4Change Alliance (IICD, 
Cordaid, Text to Change)  
Conclusion 
Contact Information: 
The use of ICT has made it easier for UNHCO to disseminate 
information and collect and analyze feedback data. Sensitization UNHCO | Esther Nalugya, Program Officer 
through SMS, VHTs and regular monthly talk shows has increased the (+256774854502, enalugya@unhco.or.ug) 
number of people visiting a health facility.  
IICD | Hilde Eugelink, SDU Health Coordinator 
The use of ICT more easily and quickly collect patient satisfaction (+31-70-311-73-11, Heugelink@iicd.org) 
data has helped to improve the quality improvement mechanisms. It 
See References on page 89. 
has also increased the cohesion for dialogue, planning and delivery of 
services. 
 
mHealth Compendium Volume 4  |  43 
