SPOTLIGHT
OCTOBER 2013
MAMI
COLOMBIA
BACKGROUND
MAMI, Mothers More Involved (Mamás Más Involucradas) made its debut on May 
4th, 2013, at the “Co-Crea Colombia” Hackathon organized by the World Bank under 
the Smart Cities Program and the Colombian Ministry of Information, Communica-
tion and Technology. The event featured innovative solutions to challenges related to 
citizen security, transportation, education and health and was attended by local and 
international experts in ICT. MAMI was chosen as one of three prestigious winners.
MAMI is based in Manizales, a city in central Colombia. It is the capital of the De-
partment of Caldas in the Paisa region. According to the Center of Information and 
MAMI Statistics of Manizales, in 2011 the maternal mortality rate was 109 per 100,000 live 
Safe, informed, births, under-fi ve child mortality was 13.4 per 1,000 live births and infant mortal-
shared pregnancy. ity was 10.7 per 1,000 live births. Manizales is fairly representative of the national indicators for maternal, child and newborn health- the maternal mortality rate for 
Colombia is 92, the infant mortality rate is 15 and under-fi ve child mortality is 18.1
While MAMI is based in Manizales, and has immediate plans to scale up within Cal-
das, it has long term plans to achieve a much greater, national reach. Despite improve-
ments in overall poverty rates, Colombia remains one of the most unequal countries 
in one of the most unequal regions in the world. Large disparities in income, wealth, 
and living standards persist between different regions and socioeconomic groups. 
For example infant mortality rates in Chocó, the Colombian department with the 
worst social indicators, are similar to the national average 20 years ago.2
1. World Bank Data 2013 MAMI points out that in addition to national disparities, disparities amongst coun-
2. World Bank, “Colombia: Poverty Assessment tries in the region of Latin America are striking. For example, in 2012, 510 pregnant 
Report” 2011 women died in Colombia, a rate ten times higher than in Chile; and 9,580 infants 
MAMA: MOBILE ALLIANCE FOR MATERNAL ACTION | SPOTLIGHT OCTOBER 2013 1
under one year died, a rate 14 higher than in Cuba. These inequalities motivate the 
MAMI team to continue to come up with innovative solutions and localized content 
to improve maternal and newborn health in the Colombia.
USE OF MAMA MESSAGES
MAMI is an educational, empowering and shared pregnancy platform for mothers 
from low to middle income settings in Colombia. Women from in these groups have 
difficulty gaining access to health care, and face obstacles such as distance and lack 
of resources. MAMI is a tool that works to promote healthy pregnancy, encourages 
preventative care seeking behaviors and enables women to make informed decisions 
throughout pregnancy. MAMI’s health and education strategy is aimed directly at 
reducing maternal mortality (MDG 5) as well as under-five child mortality (MDG 4) 
and to improve the lives and over-all well-being of those involved in the program.
MAMI’s messages are personalized and use the “ages and stages model” to send wom-
en messages in accordance with their gestational stage. MAMI sends pregnant wom-
en three messages per week, and their supporting companion (these may be husbands, 
mothers, or whoever the pregnant woman trusts, relies on and spends most time with) 
one message per week. The messages fall into three categories: early identification of 
warning signs and risk factors, growth and development of the baby, and messages 
that foster empowerment and a healthy environment.
PROGRAM SPECIFICS
EARLY PROGRESS
From June to July of 2013 MAMI completed its first pilot with 50 mothers and 50 
supporting companions in Manizales, Villamaría, Medellín, and Bogotá. The pilot 
was launched with assistance from the Health Secretary of Manizales to identify 
pregnant women in these locations. During the pilot, 1,600 messages were sent. 
Survey results were collected during the pilot to assess user friendliness, relevance 
of content, and user perceptions of the messages. Of the 50 expectant mothers 
surveyed, 94% reported that the program was “Very good” and 75% reported that the 
program made them feel “Very motivated/ supported” upon receiving the messages. 
In addition, 85% of supporting companions reported the program to be useful and 
helpful in becoming more involved in care-giving through-out pregnancy.
TESTIMONIALS
Mother
“The messages are important in keeping attentive and informed. Sometimes [in 
my pregnancy] I that overlook things, but the messages constantly remind me to be 
careful and pay attention. I feel important because its feels like someone is interested 
in me and my child, and wants everything to be okay.”
Supporting companion, Husband
“The messages have been very special to me. Because of work I had not been able 
to actively participate in assisting my wife’s health. Right at the moment where I 
received the MAMI message, I had just decided to take time off to accompany my 
wife to her medical exam. It made us both smile because it was such a coincidence.”
MAMA: MOBILE ALLIANCE FOR MATERNAL ACTION | SPOTLIGHT OCTOBER 2013 2
Supporting companion, Mother in Law
“The messages made me feel more engaged in my daughter’s pregnancy. They also 
helped a lot, because for example she didn’t believe me when I told her about the im-
portance of certain things during pregnancy such as vitamins. The messages told her 
that she had to take the vitamins, supporting what I had told her was important.”
In addition to the survey, MAMI carried out field work in Manizales and the sur-
rounding areas. During these site visits, the MAMI team analyzed the ways in which 
poverty, inadequate education, and lack of reproductive knowledge among youth pose 
significant barriers to planned and healthy pregnancy. During MAMI’s field work, the 
team offered pregnant women courses aimed at improving their mental, physical and 
emotional health.
MESSAGE ADAPTATION, LOCALIZATION AND TRANSLATION
MAMI began by undertaking the principal translation of the MAMA messages 
from English to Spanish. Throughout the translation process, the MAMI team 
took care to ensure that the content in each message remained intact and clear. The 
MAMI team overcame challenges related to evaluating the context, using language 
that was formal enough but not too technical, and getting messages across in less 
than 160 characters.
An important part of the message adaptation process occurred with the assistance 
of a medical team. This collaborative work provided the MAMI team with a firm 
understanding of the medical terminology at the core of the messages. In addition, the 
medical team helped motivate women to participate in the project, and to adapt the 
messages to the local context.
Some of MAMA’s messages were determined to be contextually irrelevant in Colom-
bia. For example, the vast majority of births in urban Colombia (98%) are attended 
by skilled medical personnel.3 Therefore, in Manizales, MAMA’s messages about 
delivery at home (such as those about cord cutting) were deemed irrelevant. Addi-
tionally, in Colombia 93% of the population uses improved drinking water sources.4 
As such, MAMA messages on clean water are not as necessary or relevant in many 
cases in the country. In other settings in Colombia, such as in more rural and isolated 
communities, the MAMI team plans to reevaluate the use of this content.
In addition, the MAMI team determined through interviews and surveys of women in 
the pilot program that the language in the messages was at times too direct and explic-
it for the Colombia context. The MAMI team is therefore working to create messages 
that are more subtle (while still straight-forward) to prevent the women from feeling 
uncomfortable. This work will prove very valuable as more MAMA Community Mem-
bers in Latin America and the Caribbean adapt the messages for their own cultural 
contexts, as many of these countries share conservative Catholic cultures.
FUTURE PLANS
The next step for MAMI is a second phase with 80 new mothers and their supporting 
partners in Manizales. It will also involve signing up 1,035 mothers and their supporting 
3. W orld Bank “Saber: Country Report 2013, partners from different municipalities in Caldas and other zones. These new subscribers 
Colombia — Early Childhood Development” 
2013 will allow MAMI to substantially expand their work and impact the region. In addition, 
4. W orld Health Organization Data Repository the MAMI team is working to develop a sustainable business model to achieve greater 
“MDG 7: Water and Sanitation” impact and scale at the national level.
MAMA: MOBILE ALLIANCE FOR MATERNAL ACTION | SPOTLIGHT OCTOBER 2013 3
The MAMA Community Spotlight series 
shines a light on some of the great work 
being done by organizations using MAMA’s 
adaptable mobile messages. Each month 
we feature a new organization that has 
downloaded our messages and is using mobile 
technology to improve maternal, newborn and 
child health. 
Inspired by these innovative programs? 
Download the MAMA messages for yourself by 
visiting www.mobilemamaalliance.org 
and completing our short questionnaire.
For inquires about working with our 
partnership, contact: 
MAMA Global
 tel: 202.887.9040 
email: info@mobilemamaalliance.org
Media Inquiries, contact: 
Mabinty Koroma 
tel: 202.862.6315 
email: mkoroma@mobilemamaalliance.org
