Cambridge | New Delhi | Cape Town | Maputo | Dakar
www.dimagi.com
information@dimagi.com
Dimagi is an award-winning social enterprise 
that delivers open & innovative technology to help 
underserved communities around the world
Founded in 2002, Dimagi, Inc. is a fast-growing leader in mobile technology for frontline 
workers in low-resource settings. We are a social enterprise with a diverse blend of 
expertise, bringing deep experience in ICT for data collection and analytics, systems 
design, capacity strengthening, and open source software development. Our technologies 
have been used to support over 300 projects in more than 40 countries around the world. 
Dimagi rapidly iterates and adapts its technologies to local environments, creating appropriate, 
scalable, and sustainable solutions at a low-cost. We have a strong history of successful project 
execution acting as a technical lead partnered with in-country implementation leads. This model 
has been successfully implemented as pilot-phase projects through large-scale, enterprise-
wide deployments with over 75 partners, including the World Health Organization, World 
Bank, USAID, CDC, World Vision, UNICEF, PATH, and the Rockefeller Foundation. In addition 
to our strong project implementation experience, Dimagi has over 10 years of experience 
participating in and leading research for healthcare delivery for underserved populations.
Our worldwide team of 100+ engineers, physicians, public health professionals, data analysts, project 
managers, and field staff are based around the world, many in the communities they serve. We 
have offices in Cambridge, MA (headquarters), New Delhi, India, and three offices in Africa (Dakar, 
Cape Town, and Maputo), in addition to full time staff in Guatemala, Nepal, Myanmar, and Zambia. 
Dimagi’s core product, CommCare, is the most widely used, evidence-based platform for frontline 
workers & has been evaluated by numerous top-tier research firms, NGOs, & academic institutions.
Dimagi has three open source, mobile solutions that support frontline workers 
in low-resource settings: CommCare, CommConnect, & CommTrack
CommCare  (www.commcarehq.org) is an easily customizable, open 
source mobile platform that supports frontline workers in low-resource 
communities. Frontline workers use CommCare to track and support their 
clients with registration forms, checklists, SMS reminders, and multimedia. 
CommCare is the most widely adopted, technically advanced, and evidence-based mobile 
platforms for frontline workers. It is the only platform for frontline workers that is open source, 
supports longitudinal client tracking, is specialized for low-literate users, runs on Java and Android 
phones, runs offline, integrates SMS for performance improvement, and has an application 
builder designed for non-programmers. A collection of over 35 research publications about 
CommCare demonstrate that, when used correctly, CommCare improves clients’ access to, quality, 
experience, and accountability of services, in addition to clients’ knowledge attitudes, and practices.
CommTrack (www.commtrack.org) is an open source, mobile tool that strengthens supply 
chain and logistics management for low-resource settings. CommTrack streamlines data 
into actionable information to improve the performance of new and existing supply chains. 
Organizations can ensure that deliveries are made, track consumption, and project stock demand, 
leading to fewer stock-outs and less accumulation in places where consumption is lagging.
 
CommTrack is currently proven at scale in Ghana, Malawi, Tanzania, 
and Uganda, where more than 9,000 frontline workers are using it. 
CommTrack mitigates stock accumulation and stock outs, monitors 
supply chain and stock-on-hand, coordinates remote distributions, 
and facilitates direct communication to and feedback from recipients.
CommConnect is an open source, robust, user-friendly “short message service” (SMS) and 
Interactive Voice Recording (IVR) messaging platform. CommConnect allows users to quickly 
build SMS/IVR campaigns that can scale cross-country and for projects requiring both incoming 
and outgoing SMS. Data submitted via CommConnect automatically syncs with CommCare and/
or CommTrack, bringing data collection capabilities to end users in the most austere contexts.
 
For most communities, SMS remains the most reliable and familiar source of 
communication. Organizations can use CommConnect to collect clients’ mobile 
numbers while conducting field visits, facilitating SMS-based follow-up messages to 
determine the impact of the services and obtain feedback to improve their efforts.
For more information, please visit www.dimagi.com or email information@dimagi.com
