 
JUSTTESTED: SMS-BASED SUPPORT AND 
INFORMATION FOR HIV TESTING AND 
COUNSELING CLIENTS 
BRIEF OVERVIEW automate the signing in and opting out of subscribers 
HIV testing and counseling is an important step for into the program as well as the sending of SMSs. 
people to protect themselves and to prevent infecting Individuals learn of the program through posters and 
others. Knowledge of one’s HIV status is also a critical pamphlets placed in participating healthcare facilities. 
factor in the decision to seek treatment. In 2011, only Additionally, during counseling sessions, HCT 
24.7% of adults in South Africa aged 15 to 49 had tested counselors explain the program. Subscribers can sign up 
for HIV, while approximately 5.6 million, or 17.3%, of and opt out by sending a please-call-me (PCM) to mobile 
South Africans currently live with HIV. phone numbers given to them.  
The JustTested program aims to 
supplement HIV testing and EVALUATION AND 
counseling (HCT) services by RESULTS 
giving support and information to 
An evaluation of the pilot phase 
people who would have just 
w a s  c o n d u c t e d .  A n 
tested, regardless of whether they 
approximate ten-fold increase 
test HIV positive or negative. 
was observed when counselors 
Subscribers choose between the 
were actively recruiting 
JustTested negative or positive 
subscribers, suggesting that 
free short message service (SMS), 
counselors are key to the 
both available in Afrikaans, English 
recruitment process (as 
and isiXhosa. The service sends 39 
opposed to relying on sign-ups 
messages over the course of three 
t h r o u g h  p o s t e r s  a n d 
months on the topics of healthy 
pamphlets). Twenty percent of 
living and addressing HIV and AIDS 
the subscribers sent an opt-out 
related issues. 
PCM. Based on interviews with 
JustTested began in May 2012. It is 17 subscribers that sent an opt-
currently active in parts of the out PCM, 88% sent the PCM by 
Overberg district of the Western mistake. Almost all the 
Cape and the Nelson Mandela interviewed exiting subscribers 
Metro District in the Eastern reported that they found the 
Cape. SMSs acceptable and easy to 
understand. Most subscribers 
also reported that they learnt 
ABOUT JUSTTESTED new information from the SMSs 
SMSs were developed in line with and that the SMSs improved 
the Health Belief Model, which their outlook on life. Most 
states that a person's belief in a subscribers suggested that the 
personal threat of an illness or SMSs should last for at least 6 
disease together with a person's months.  
belief in the effectiveness of the 
recommended health behavior or 
action will predict the likelihood LESSONS LEARNED 
he or she will adopt the behavior.  Translators that utilize 
Communicate, Cell-Life’s web- simple language are preferred 
based software, is used to 
 SMSs should have a clearly 
12 mHEALTH COMPENDIUM   │    VOLUME 2 
 
 BEHAVIOR CHANGE COMMUNICATION 
 
identifiable brand name so users know who is 
 
sending them GEOGRAPHIC COVERAGE 
South Africa 
 Subscribers who mistakenly opt out of the program 
should be allowed to automatically resume IMPLEMENTATION PARTNERS 
messaging 
Cell-Life, Eastern Cape Department of Health, Right to 
 Getting permission from provincial departments of Care Overberg branch  
health can be time consuming 
FUNDER 
 Users need reassurance that the SMSs are free and 
VodaCom Foundation  
that their mobile phone numbers will be kept 
private 
CONTACT INFORMATION 
 Lay-counselors could also benefit from an Cell-Life  
educational and support SMS program  Victoria Nembaware, mHealth Projects 
Coordinator, M&E Specialist  
 Recruitment rates could be improved by having the 
Tel: +27-21-469-1111, Email: victoria@cell-
option of SMS messaging to clients be part of the 
life.org 
standard of care, and advertising the program 
VodaCom 
outside of healthcare facilities 
 Mthobeli Tengimfene, Executive Head of 
 Periodic reviewing and editing of SMSs is required CSI Projects 
based on feedback from subscribers and lay- Tel: +27-11-653-5223,       
counselors to keep the SMS content relevant Email: Mthobeli.Tengimfene@vodacom.co.za 
CONCLUSION 
This JustTested program has the potential to enhance 
HCT services in South Africa. The evaluation of the pilot 
phase shows it is feasible and acceptable to both 
counselors and subscribers while also being cost-
effective and easy to implement.  
Future work includes exploring additional forms of 
marketing to increase recruitment rate, as well as finding 
ways to optimize implementation and investigate 
effectiveness of the program in changing and improving 
health behaviors. Upcoming iterations will examine 
tailoring content to gender-specific messaging and 
making the program more interactive by including two-
way communication. 
Information was excerpted from:  
“Behavioral Change Models: The Health Belief Model.” Boston University School of Public Health. 2013. Web.  
“Just Tested: Mobile Health Solutions.” Cell Life. 2012. Web. 
Country Progress Report: South Africa: Sexual Transmission of HIV. UNAIDS. 2010. Web. 
  MHEALTH COMPENDIUM  |  VOLUME 2 13 
