  
M  obile Finance to Reimburse Sexual and 
 
Reproductive Vouchers  
 
 
B rief Overview 
 
Maternal health in Madagascar has improved across 
the country since the 1990s. Between 1990 and 2008 
for example, the number of maternal deaths per 
100,000 live births went down by 38 percent; from 
710 to 440 maternal deaths per 100,000 live births. 
The improvement in maternal health is, in part, the 
result of increased contraceptive use. For example, 
the rate of modern contraceptive use among married 
women in Madagascar increased from five percent in 
1992 to 29 percent in 2008-2009. However, 18.9 
percent of married or cohabiting women in 
Madagascar still have an unmet need for 
voluntary family planning. Many women also lack 
access to other sexual and reproductive health 
services, including prenatal care or the services of a 
health professional during childbirth. 
 
Under the SHOP’s project, Marie Stopes Madagascar (MSM) established a subsidized voucher program to 
increase poor people’s access to voluntary family planning services. Clients could give the voucher to one of 
MSM’s 42 social franchisees in Itasy or Bongolava, two rural regions in Madagascar, in exchange for family 
planning services that would normally cost between 4,000 and 10,000 Ariary (between US$2 and US$5).  
MSM used mobile phone-based short message service (SMS) money transfer systems instead of traditional 
payment methods to reimburse service providers.   In  doing  so,  MSM’s  voucher   program demonstrated 
that SMS money transfer systems can successfully reimburse health service providers in remote, rural and 
urban settings. 
The program began in October 2010. Data collection occurred between February and July 2011. 
 
 Geographic Coverage: 
Madagascar 
 
 Implementation Partners: 
Abt Associates, through the SHOPS Project, leads a team which includes Marie Stopes 
International 
 
 Funder: 
USAID 
 
 For More Information Contact: 
USAID  
 Margaret Farrell  
                                       Tel: +1-202-1712-0458; email:mfarrell@usaid.gov 
MSI Madagascar 
 Boni Ramanantsoa, Information Systems Manager; 
Lot IIP bis, Avaradoha, Antananarivo 101, Madagascar;  
    Tel: +261-(0)-20-22-40304; email: iangotina.ramanantsoa@mariestopes.mg 37 
 
 
Finance 
 Mobile Finance to Reimburse Sexual and Reproductive 
Vouchers  
 
About Mobile Finance to Reimburse codes on the parts of vouchers retained by social 
Sexual and Reproductive Vouchers franchisees and cross-checked monthly by MSM 
Health Network International (HNI) developed an  
online database that uses MySQL and the operating Lessons Learned 
system Linux, which collects and analyzes data sent via • Important to conduct an analysis of mobile 
SMS, send automated text messages via SMS, and phone use and SMS money transfer systems 
manage the claims process required for the voucher available to ensure access to this 
program. reimbursement method. 
 • Program managers should undertake a 
Prior to the voucher program’s launch, MSM comprehensive cost/benefit analysis of the SMS 
supplemented the core training provided to all social money transfer system. 
franchisees with additional training focused upon the • Program managers should design and map the 
services available to voucher holders, client referrals, reimbursement process to identify the team 
the reimbursement process and the SMS money transfer members and tasks. 
system.  • Program managers should ensure that this 
 method of reimbursement is supported by a 
Each social franchisee receives 7,500 Ariary (US$3.70) password-protected database capable of 
for any contraceptive method and counseling or referral collecting and analyzing data sent via SMS. 
they provide to clients in possession of a subsidized • Voucher codes should not be lengthy to reduce 
voucher. This payment includes the standard rate for error and to simplify the process. 
sending the SMS to MSM as well as the cost to social 
• Toll-free number should be obtained so that 
franchisees of withdrawing money from an account. 
end-users can submit reimbursement claims 
This payment excludes the cost to MSM for transferring 
without incurring extra costs. 
funds by SMS to social franchisees. This latter cost varies 
• Program managers should ensure that all final 
from 5-18 percent, depending upon the SMS money 
payments are made using a computer to limit 
transfer system used. To receive this payment, social 
data entry mistakes and so that payments can 
franchisees are required to send the unique code on a 
be easily tracked and audited. 
client’s voucher by SMS to a phone number linked 
 
directly to MSM’s online database.  
 Conclusion 
Evaluation and Results SMS money transfer systems can significantly strengthen 
Between February 2011 and the end of July 2011, MSM the reach, efficiency and sustainability of health services. 
distributed 5,950 vouchers. By the end of July 2011, the The method of reimbursement used by MSM can be 
unique code of 1,737 (29%) of the vouchers distributed replicated in other countries. SMS money transfer 
by MSM had been submitted using SMS by social systems have been introduced in more than 60 
franchisees for reimbursement. The SMS money transfer countries worldwide and more are planned. One in 10 
systems incorporated by MSM into its voucher program of these SMS money transfer systems has one million or 
are successfully reimbursing social franchisees for more users. 
services they deliver to clients in possession of a  
voucher. All of the unique codes submitted by social 
franchisees have been reimbursed by MSM. In total, 599 
(35%) of the 1,737 claims for reimbursement sent by 
MSM’s social franchisees were reimbursed within 48 
hours. Furthermore, no discrepancies have been 
identified between the codes submitted by SMS and the 
Information was excerpted from: 
http://www.mariestopes.org/sites/default/files/12pp_Marie%20Stopes_Mobile_Money%20FINAL.pdf 
 
38  
