57388_UNF_S2:Layout 1 5/6/08 9:23 AM Page 1
Access to
Communication Publication Series
Volume 2
Wireless Technology for Social Change:
Trends in Mobile Use by NGOs
www.unfoundation.org/vodafone
57388_UNF_S2:Layout 1 5/6/08 9:23 AM Page 59
Recommended Readings
Banks, Ken, and Richard Burge. Mobile Phones: An Appropriate Tool for Conservation and Devel-
opment? (Cambridge, UK: Fauna and Flora International, 2004).
Chetley, Andrew (ed.). Improving health, connecting people: The role of ICTs in the health
sector of developing countries (Washington, DC: InfoDev, 2006).
Coyle, Diane/Enlightenment Economics. The Role of Mobiles in Disasters and Emergencies
(London, UK:GSM Association, 2005).
Crawford, Diane. Role of IT in emergency response and crisis management. Communica-
tions of the Association of Computer Machinery 50 (2007).
Currion, Paul. Information and Technology Requirements Initiative: Assessment Report - Global
Response (Emergency Capacity Building Project, 2006).
Kaplan, Warren. Can the ubiquitous power of mobile phones be used to improve health out-
comes in developing countries? Globalization and Health 2 (2006): 9. www.globalizationand-
health.com/content/2/1/9.
Authors:
Löffler, Jobst, and Markus Klann (eds.). Mobile Response: First International Workshop on
Sheila Kinkade Mobile Information Technology for Emergency Response. Mobile Response 2007, Sankt
Katrin Verclas, MobileActive.org Augustin, Germany, 22-23 February 2007, Revised Selected Papers. Lecture Notes in Computer
Science 4458 (Springer, 2008).
About The Vodafone Group Foundation and the UN Foundation Partnership
MTC Group. Mobility: A Nation Under Siege. An insight into mobile communications during the
The UN Foundation–Vodafone Group Foundation Partnership is the leading public–private 2006 Lebanon conflict (MTC Group, 2007).
alliance using strategic technology programs to strengthen the United Nation’s humanitarian
efforts worldwide. The Partnership has three core commitments: (1) to develop rapid Shackleton, Sally Jean. Rapid Assessment of Cell Phones for Development (UNICEF, 2007).
response telecommunications teams to aid disaster relief; (2) to develop health data systems Wattegama, Chanuka. ICT for Disaster Management (Bangkok, Thailand: United Nations
that improve access to health data thereby helping to combat disease; and (3) to promote Development Programme – Asia-Pacific Development Information Programme and
research and innovative initiatives using technology as an agent and tool for international Asian and Pacific Training Centre for Information and Communication Technology for
development. Further information can be found at www.unfoundation.org/vodafone. Development, 2007).
Contact:
United Nations Foundation The Vodafone Group Foundation
1800 Massachusetts Ave., NW Vodafone House
Suite 400 The Connection
Washington, DC 20036 Newbury, Berkshire, RG14 2FN
U.S.A. UK
Recommended Citation: Sheila Kinkade and Katrin Verclas. Wireless Technology for
Social Change. Washington, DC and Berkshire, UK: UN Foundation–Vodafone Group
Foundation Partnership, 2008.
Cover Photo Credits:
Clockwise left to right: World Food Programme/ICT; DataDyne; Cell-Life; Télécoms Sans
Frontières (TSF); FishMS; TSF.
Wireless Technology for Social Change: Trends in Mobile Use by NGOs 59
57388_UNF_S1_R1:UNFoundation.qxd  5/6/08  9:20 AM  Page 1
Access to Communications Publications Series
Table of Contents
Foreword 4
Acknowledgements 5
Survey of NGO Use 6
Introduction 8
GLOBAL HEALTH 11
1. Delivering Patient HIV/AIDS Care (South Africa) 13
2. Connecting Health Clinics and Remote Health Workers (Uganda) 16
3. Lowering the Barriers for Access to Public Health Data (Kenya, Zambia) 19
4. Connecting Youth to Sexual Health Information (United States) 23
Credit: DataDyne
HUMANITARIAN ASSISTANCE 29
5. Delivering Food Aid to Iraqi Refugees (Syria) 31
6. Facilitating Communication in Emergency Situations (Peru, Indonesia) 34
7. Text Messaging as a Violence-Prevention Tool (Kenya) 38
ENVIRONMENTAL CONSERVATION 43
8. Text Messaging to Save Trees (Argentina) 45
9. A Survey of Text Message ‘Infolines’ (South Africa, United Kingdom) 48
10. Environmental Monitoring with Mobile Phones (Ghana) 52
11. Protecting Wildlife and Human Wellbeing (Kenya) 55
Recommended Reading 59
Credit: TSF
57388_UNF_S1_R1:UNFoundation.qxd  5/6/08  9:20 AM  Page 4
Foreword
Mobilizing for Change
our years ago, we stood together at the United Nations to announce a global part-
Fnership that would help bring innovative technology to bear on some of the world’smost intractable problems. Since that time, through the United Nations Founda-tion–Vodafone Group Foundation Technology Partnership, we’ve brought the best
of the business world together with dynamic UN agencies and other organizations to help
collect and track health data in Africa, respond to humanitarian disasters across the globe,
and drive forward policy changes related to technology and development.
This partnership is helping the United Nations achieve the Millennium Development Goals
and tackle key health, social, environmental, and development challenges. Technology—es-
pecially wireless communication—is crucial to finding solutions to these problems. It can
connect families separated by disaster, help emergency relief workers respond more quickly,
empower farmers to ask for better prices in markets, help track the impacts of climate
change, and so much more.
Our partnership is also constantly exploring new ways of applying technology to benefit de-
veloping countries, where mobile technology adoption rates are highest. To this end, we
support original research to expand the discussion about how technology can help trans-
form lives.
In this second publication in our Access to Communications Publication Series, the authors
examine real-life examples of and trends in wireless technology solutions being used to
drive change in the areas of health, humanitarian assistance, and environmental conserva-
tion. The compelling stories portrayed in this report demonstrate that telecommunications
can be a powerful tool for positive change in our world.
We hope you’ll join our efforts to harness technology and innovate on behalf of humanitar-
ian causes and a better world.
Arun Sarin, CEO Ted Turner, Chairman
Vodafone United Nations Foundation
4 Wireless Technology for Social Change: Trends in Mobile Use by NGOs
57388_UNF_S1_R1:UNFoundation.qxd  5/6/08  9:20 AM  Page 5
Acknowledgements
he United Nations Foundation and The Vodafone Group Founda-
Ttion are indebted to the many individuals who made the researchand stories in this publication come to life. In particular, we wouldlike to thank report co-authors Katrin Verclas of MobileActive.org
and Sheila Kinkade.
We are also grateful for the participation of survey group Greenberg Quinlan
Rosner Research and the many non-governmental organization (NGO) rep-
resentatives who responded to the survey about how they are using mobile
technology. We appreciate the partnership approach of the eight NGO net-
works who welcomed us to use their websites and email lists to reach a di-
verse set of NGOs with the survey—Idealist.org, InterAction, International
Youth Foundation, MobileActive.org, New Tactics in Human Rights,
OneWorld, SANGONeT, and ShareIdeas.
This report would not have been possible without the help of the NGOs and
intergovernmental organizations profiled in this publication. We would like to
thank all of the representatives from these organizations for the time spent
sharing the results of their projects.
Finally, we would like to acknowledge the team that worked to produce the
document you now hold in your hands. This includes copyeditor Lelani
Arris, and Hal Kowenski and Karen Finkel at Linemark Printing.
Wireless Technology for Social Change: Trends in Mobile Use by NGOs 5
57388_UNF_S1_R1:UNFoundation.qxd  5/6/08  9:20 AM  Page 6
A Survey of NGO Use of Mobile
Technology for Social Change
Between December 10, 2007 and January 13, 2008, 560 non-governmentalorganization (NGO) workers participated in a survey designed to demonstratehow NGOs are using wireless technology to help reach various social, civil,economic, and political goals.
The survey was developed by Greenberg Quinlan Rosner Research, and distributed via the
email networks of eight partner groups reaching a geographically and thematically diverse
group of NGOs: Idealist.org, InterAction, International Youth Foundation, MobileActive.org,
New Tactics in Human Rights, OneWorld, SANGONeT, and ShareIdeas. The survey was
also shared with the contacts of the two sponsoring organizations: The Vodafone Group
Foundation and the United Nations Foundation. Responses were collected from NGO
representatives in all parts of the world.
NGOs’ Use of Mobile Technology Very Widespread and
Indispensable
Eight-six percent of NGO employees are using mobile technology in their work. NGO
representatives working on projects in Africa or Asia are more likely to be mobile
technology users than their colleagues in areas with more ‘wired’ infrastructures. Ninety-nine
percent of technology users characterize the impact of mobile technology as positive.
Moreover, nearly a quarter describe this technology as “revolutionary” and another 31
percent say it would be difficult to do their jobs without it.
Total (%)
It has completely revolutionized the way my organization or
project does its work 25
It would have been very difficult to do the work without it 31
It is/was very helpful for my organization or project 36
It is/was only somewhat helpful 8
Ultimately, it is/was more of a burden than a help 0
It was a waste of time and money 0
6 Wireless Technology for Social Change: Trends in Mobile Use by NGOs
57388_UNF_S1_R1:UNFoundation.qxd  5/6/08  9:20 AM  Page 7
Applications of NGO Mobile Use Are Diverse
While voice and text messaging are still the most common applications of mobile
technology among NGO workers, respondents report using wireless technology in a
number of other ways, including photo and video (39 percent); data collection or transfer
(28 percent); and multi-media messaging (27 percent). The survey also finds some NGO
workers using mobile technology for more sophisticated purposes such as data analysis (8
percent), inventory management (8 percent), and mapping (10 percent). Importantly, the
amount of money invested in mobile technology correlates to a higher diversity of
application; those NGOs that spend more use this technology for higher-end functions.
Users of mobile technology on projects with a health focus are also more likely to use
mobile technology for data purposes.
Perceived Benefits of NGO Mobile Use are Enormous
The survey reveals that the key benefits of mobile technology for all NGOs include time
savings (95 percent); the ability to quickly mobilize or organize individuals (91 percent);
reaching audiences that were previously difficult or impossible to reach (74 percent); the
ability to transmit data more quickly and accurately (67 percent); and the ability to gather
data more quickly and accurately (59 percent).
Not surprisingly, then, 76 percent of NGO users said they would likely increase their use of
mobile technology in the future. Many of these survey results are reflected in the case
studies featured in this report.
Wireless Technology for Social Change: Trends in Mobile Use by NGOs 7
57388_UNF_S1_R1:UNFoundation.qxd  5/6/08  9:20 AM  Page 8
Introduction
n estimated 3.5 billion mobile
A Innovative Uses of Technologyphones are now in use around Driving Changethe world—more people nowhave one than don’t.1 This Looking at the work of NGOs in three
remarkable revolution—widespread access specific issue areas—health, the
to the most ubiquitous communication environment, and humanitarian relief—we
device in human history—has changed the found a number of creative and innovative
way societies and communities organize uses of mobile technology for change. In
themselves and do business. exploring the various applications in these
areas, we observed the following:
We, the authors, set out in this report to
explore the ways in which non-
governmental organizations (NGOs) and Innovation and Scaling
other groups deploy and use mobile  Organizations are thinking in creative,
technology in their work to help solve some innovative, and often very
of the world’s greatest problems. This study entrepreneurial ways about how mobile
is not meant to be exhaustive or definitive, technology can advance their social
but rather to provide a view into how a impact.
number of organizations are using mobile  The potential to scale and replicate
technology to achieve social impact. We projects is significant. Although the vast
selected case studies that enabled an majority of projects are ground-
exploration of significant innovations, breaking, often they are pilot projects
opportunities, and emerging trends, as well that are small in scale. Many of the
as the obstacles, in the use of mobile organizations we talked to recognize
technology to advance social goals. that scaling their projects beyond a
relatively small pilot and replicating
1UNCTAD (United Nations Conference on Trade and them elsewhere will be vital to realizing
Development). Information Economy Report 2007-2008 the potential of mobile technology in
(UN Publications, 2008). the areas studied.
 Creative partnerships are key to
bringing promising mobile initiatives to
scale. For example, SexInfo, a text
message-based health information
service for youth, was made possible
through collaboration between the San
Francisco Department of Public Health
and a local nonprofit. Now it is being
scaled up in a similar way in two new
locations. Similarly, both Satellife’s
project in Uganda and the EpiSurveyor
project piloted in Kenya and Zambia
are being replicated and scaled to use
mobile devices for health data
collection and analysis in several
additional countries.
Credit: TSF
8 Wireless Technology for Social Change: Trends in Mobile Use by NGOs
57388_UNF_S1_R1:UNFoundation.qxd  5/6/08  9:20 AM  Page 9
 Sharing information and technical access is increasingly assured. Likewise,
exchanges could reduce the amount of mobile initiatives can be more
time it takes to launch a solution and affordable but the skills and training
reduce the associated costs. Smaller necessary to implement them less so.
organizations, in particular, continue to
 Mobile technology initiatives in this
exercise a great deal of trial and error
field are still emerging, with most of the
when it comes to utilizing mobile
projects we investigated at the ‘proof of
technology in their work. ISIS-Inc., the
concept’ stage. A report by the World
parent organization of the SexInfo
Bank’s InfoDev program states, “It is
project (Case Study 4) spent nearly six
harder to find examples of analysis that
months researching cost effective ways
moves beyond the project purpose to
of implementing its text messaging-
[…] look at the conditions that might
based health information service before
need to be in place to scale up
a technology firm in Australia offered to
interventions and what might be the
provide a short code at no cost.
impact of such activity.”2
 More needs to be done to overcome
 While we can point to solid outcomes
the ‘innovation silos’ some
for the programs, for example, the
organizations operate in, where
number of clients served or number
advances and knowledge gained in the
of text messages sent, strong evidence-
use of mobile technology do not
based information about the widespread
necessarily transfer across
impact of mobile initiatives on
organizational boundaries.
international development goals is
 We have seen in the health field that elusive. In our review of organizations’
mobile technology is facilitating data work and relevant literature, only rarely
collection; yet health providers and did we find solid impact assessments
local and national governments are that evaluate whether an empirical link
now facing the need to create back-end exists between a technology solution
systems capable of aggregating and and the achievement of a social or
analyzing a wealth of new data. Systems international development goal.
are complex and multi-faceted and
 Investment in knowledge-sharing and
interventions in one area may require
impact assessments are vital to realize
investments in others. In some cases,
what we believe is the enormous
advances made possible through
potential of mobile technologies to
mobile technology demand more
further development goals such as those
sophisticated back-end systems.
outlined in the United Nations’
Millennium Development Goals.
Social Impact Several donors, such as Canada’s
 Mobile initiatives provide greater International Development Research
opportunities for social impact that Centre, are now investing considerable
other information and communications resources to assess over several years
technology (ICT) projects do not the impact of mobile technologies in
necessarily share. For example, physical improving health, for example, to build
access to mobile phones is obviously a more solid body of evidence about
much greater compared to computers social impacts.
and other less readily available
technologies. With rapid mobile phone 2Chetley, Andrew, ed. Improving Health, Connecting
penetration in many areas of the globe People: The Role of ICTs in the Health Sector of Developing
and growing mobile network coverage, Countries (Washington, DC: InfoDev, 2006).
www.infodev.org/en/Publication.84.html.
Wireless Technology for Social Change: Trends in Mobile Use by NGOs 9
57388_UNF_S1_R1:UNFoundation.qxd  5/6/08  9:20 AM  Page 10
Challenges • Mobile solutions, as with any other
 The costs of developing and deploying ICT project, need to be appropriate
mobile technologies are often onerous to their environment to have impact,
for organizations, explaining, in part, and be responsive to local needs and
why projects are small in scale. We conditions.
found that many projects rely on
• Users need to be involved in the
heavily subsidized technology or
planning and design of mobile
transmissions or even direct donations
systems and they need incentives
by technology companies and mobile
(such as increased efficiency or time
operators. While some players are
savings) to use the technology.
willing to donate their services for
smaller projects, there are questions as • Training for users needs to be a
to whether scaled initiatives would focus of mobile projects within an
receive the same level of support. organization.
 The potential for scaling up ‘mobile for • There needs to be a focus on the
good’ initiatives may come with benefits of a given system rather
identifying commercial incentives, as is then the technology per se.
the case with GSMA/Safaricom
initiative that we describe in this report, • Governmental ICT policies and
designed to protect human populations regulatory frameworks should be
and elephants in Kenya. Identifying consistent and predictable and foster
potential win-win solutions for an environment for innovation.
businesses and nonprofit organizations There are still significant barriers in
holds promise for expanding and this arena, despite efforts by trade
sustaining the impact of such initiatives associations such as the GSMA to
in the future. increase awareness of these issues
for development.
Lessons Learned We are hopeful that increased attention and
 Many of the same lessons learned in investment into the real and concrete
information and communication potential and actual use of mobile
technologies (ICT) development and technologies will help improve lives around
deployment apply to mobile initiatives. the world.
Our research has uncovered a set of
potential best practices for technology
deployment:
• There need to be clear and realistic
program goals and solid knowledge
about the needs on the ground and
of the intended beneficiaries.
10 Wireless Technology for Social Change: Trends in Mobile Use by NGOs
57388_UNF_S1_R1:UNFoundation.qxd  5/6/08  9:20 AM  Page 11
I. Global Health
Mobile Technology in Health
he Millennium Development Goals (MDGs) acknowledge
Tthe centrality of health in reducing poverty and increasinghuman development. The role of mobile phones, as withother information and communication technologies (ICT), is
under increasing scrutiny in the health arena, precisely because the
stakes are so high and the potential gains from technology development
so significant.
Take HIV/AIDS, for example. A 2007 report on the MDGs states:
“The number of people dying from AIDS worldwide increased to 2.9
million in 2006, and prevention measures are failing to keep pace with
the growth of the epidemic. In 2005, more than 15 million children had
lost one or both parents to AIDS.”3
Furthermore, of the one billion people living in extreme poverty, 75
percent live in rural areas. A report by InfoDev notes: “Health
Credit: Cell-Life conditions in rural areas are generally poorer, and access to
information, services, and supplies is most limited.”4
Delivering Patient HIV/AIDS Care
(South Africa) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .13 Informa Telecoms & Media estimates that in mid-2007, mobile
networks covered 90 percent of the global population, and that in 2008
Connecting Health Clinics and Remote worldwide mobile phone penetration will hit 50 percent, with well over
Health Workers (Uganda) . . . . . . . . .16 3 billion subscriptions.
5 With rapidly increasing mobile coverage
around the world and expansion to rural areas where Internet access is
Lowering the Barriers for Access to Public still years away, mobile technology holds great promise for making
Health Data (Kenya, Zambia) . . . . . . . .19 health prevention and medical care more effective for the world’s
poorest people.
Connecting Youth to Sexual Health Mobile technology has been piloted in a range of health-related areas,
Information (United States) . . . . . . . .23 including improving dissemination of public health information (e.g.,
disease outbreak and prevention messages); facilitating remote
consultation, diagnosis, and treatment; disseminating health
information to doctors and nurses; managing patients; monitoring
public health; and increasing the efficiency of administrative systems.
In all these areas, evidence exists that mobile phones can play a
significant role. Further work is underway to look at the actual impact
of mobile phones on improving health outcomes. The PanAsian
Collaboration for Evidence-based e-health Adoption and Application
(PANACeA), a project underway at the International Development
Research Centre, is assessing the effect of mobile phones on improved
health.
3United Nations. Millennium Development Goals Report, 2007 (United Nations, 2007).
4Chetley, Andrew, ed. Improving Health, Connecting People: The Role of ICTs in the Health
Sector of Developing Countries (Washington, DC: InfoDev, 2006.
www.infodev.org/en/Publication.84.html).
5Informa Telecoms. Mobile Industry Outlook 2008, 6th Edition (London: Informa Telecoms,
2007).
Wireless Technology for Social Change: Trends in Mobile Use by NGOs 11
Health
57388_UNF_S1_R1:UNFoundation.qxd  5/6/08  9:20 AM  Page 12
While impact assessments and outcome measurements are
hard to come by, there is evidence that text message
reminders increase patient compliance in taking medication
for such diseases as tuberculosis and HIV.6 Yet much of the
published evidence about the use of mobiles in health
remains in the proof of concept stage.
The case studies featured here explore areas where mobile
phones show great potential: health workers making better
treatment decisions because of information delivered via the
mobile network (e.g., Academy for Educational
Development (AED)-Satellife), people making informed
choices about their health with better access to information
delivered via mobile phones (e.g., SexInfo), and the
collection of medical data on mobile devices for better
patient and public health management (e.g., DataDyne and
Cell-Life).
Credit: DataDyne In order to justify investing in the use of mobile
technologies in the health sector in poor countries, much
more attention needs to be paid to how such technologies
effectively integrate and improve basic service delivery on
the ground. Furthermore, the potential benefits in improved
access, quality of care, and better clinical results need to be
clearly demonstrated.
The challenge is how to move from proof of concept to
larger scale implementations of promising projects. We are
optimistic that with increased investments in evaluating the
health impact of using mobile technologies and, more
importantly, in the scaling of projects that are shown to
work, we will see significant progress in some of the areas
discussed. Lastly, we hope that there will be continued
investment in new and innovative uses of mobile
technology in exploring, for example, how mobile phones
can play a role in maternal health.
6Vodafone Group. The Role of Mobile Phones in Increasing Accessibility and
Efficiency in Health Care. Vodafone Group Policy Paper Series (Newbury, UK:
Vodafone Group, 2006).
12 Wireless Technology for Social Change: Trends in Mobile Use by NGOs
Health
57388_UNF_S1_R1:UNFoundation.qxd  5/6/08  9:20 AM  Page 13
C A S E S T U D Y 1
Delivering Patient HIV/AIDS Care (South Africa)
Issue: Confronting South adherence to medication is not kept above
Africa’s HIV/AIDS Epidemic 90 percent, HIV can develop mutations
that lead to drug resistance, making first-line
edical workers and doctors ART ineffective and worsening the
Min South Africa are epidemic.confronted daily with nearlyimpossible odds: over one-
tenth of the South African population has
HIV/AIDS, with younger age groups
showing infection rates as high as 30
percent. With more than 5.6 million
afflicted with HIV or AIDS, South Africa
has the worst AIDS epidemic in the world.7
The South African government began
supplying anti-retroviral drugs in 2004. By
2006, 33 percent of people living with
HIV/AIDS were receiving anti-retroviral
treatment.8
A weak state health infrastructure and
disparate system of rural clinics make
consistent anti-retroviral treatment (ART) Credit: Cell-Life
and patient monitoring extremely difficult. Response: Improving
Eighty percent of the HIV/AIDS patients Treatment through Mobile
that do receive medical care rely on the Applications
government health care system. HIV/AIDS
patients living in rural areas must travel long Cell-Life, a non-governmental organization
distances to reach a hospital. Frequently, based in Cape Town, South Africa, created
they encounter a day-long wait as its “Aftercare” program to work with the
understaffed and under-resourced clinics public health system and its health workers
attempt to cope with the high demand. to provide home-based care for HIV/AIDS
Sometimes hospitals run out of the necessary patients receiving ART treatments. The
drugs, and patients return home without mobile technology-based Aftercare
medications. Secondary infections such as program supports the effective treatment of
tuberculosis or pneumonia are common. HIV/AIDS patients, and covers other
aspects such as voluntary counseling.
For those patients fortunate enough to be
receiving ART, effective patient care Each Aftercare worker is assigned to
monitoring is essential to reducing the risk monitor 15 to 20 patients. The worker visits
of high toxicity levels from treatment, and the patient in his or her home, and in a one-
to ensure a regular treatment regime. If on-one session discusses the patient’s
current treatment. Using their mobile
7See www.avert.org/aidssouthafrica.htm. phones for data capture, Aftercare workers
8WHO. Towards Universal Access: Scaling Up Priority record information about patient medical
HIV/AIDS Interventions in the Health Sector (Geneva,
Switzerland: World Health Organization, 2007, status, drug adherence, and other factors
www.who.int/mediacentre/news/releases/2007/pr16/en/index that may affect a patient’s ART therapy.
.html).
Wireless Technology for Social Change: Trends in Mobile Use by NGOs 13
Health
57388_UNF_S1_R1:UNFoundation.qxd  5/6/08  9:20 AM  Page 14
C A S E S T U D Y 1 C O N T I N U E D
Aftercare workers then relay this designed with end users in mind. It
information via text message to a central functions in a participatory fashion, is
Cell-Life database. simple and works consistently, and provides
feedback to the counselors via text message
The data sent via text message reaches the when reports from the home health aides
Cell-Life server, where a care manager uses are received. The program has been able to
a web-based system to access and monitor keep costs relatively low by using data
the incoming patient information. The collection software that functions even on
manager can also respond to Aftercare low-cost phones.
workers’ questions and provide
supplemental information to improve
patient care. Challenges: Sustainability and
Scalability
The information collected not only
facilitates individual patient care, but is also Two major challenges for Aftercare’s future
used to build a database of information on identified in several evaluations are long-
the severity and prevalence of the South term financial sustainability and the
African AIDS epidemic in these regions. difficulty of implementation on a larger
The goals of the program include reduction scale. Scaling the project to more areas is
of treatment errors, increased volume of expensive and difficult because the system
patient data, and increased comfort for the can only be used on one network using
patients as they receive HIV/AIDS care. prepaid accounts. And because the software
is written only in English, it would have to
Outcome: Delivering Health be translated into South Africa’s eleven
national languages in order to be
Care for HIV/AIDS Patients successfully scaled.
The Cell-Life Aftercare project was Ulrike Rivett, founder and director of Cell-
conceived as a joint project with the Life, says: “The single greatest risk [to
University of Cape Town and the Cape effective patient monitoring] is the lack of
Peninsula University of Technology. The resources to roll out ART effectively. The
partners built a monitoring and evaluation areas with the highest prevalence of HIV
system into the Aftercare program, and have a shortage of skilled medical
initial results indicated that the quality of personnel, lack of good nursing and
care for patients has improved. A Women’s management staff and have limited financial
Net and United Nations Children’s Fund resources,” making mobile health solutions
(UNICEF) report billed Aftercare as “one all the more valuable.
of the most experienced initiatives
combining mobile phone technologies
and AIDS management.”9
In part, the efficacy of Cell-Life’s work in
South Africa can be attributed to the high
prevalence of mobile phones. South Africa’s
mobile penetration rate is 41 percent, and
mobile phone networks cover more than 90
percent of the country’s territory.10 The
Aftercare program and technology were
9Shackleton, Sally Jean. Rapid Assessment of Cell Phones
for Development (Women’s Net and UNICEF, 2007,
10
http://www.unicef.org/southafrica/SAF_resources_cellphones4 The Economist Intelligence Unit, data accessed
dev.pdf). February 2008.
14 Wireless Technology for Social Change: Trends in Mobile Use by NGOs
Health
57388_UNF_S1_R1:UNFoundation.qxd  5/6/08  9:20 AM  Page 15
C A S E S T U D Y 1 C O N T I N U E D
Cell-Life is also considering a migration to
Java and GPRS (General Packet Radio
Service) platforms to lower data
transmission costs. They are also looking to
enhance security measures and translate the
program to other languages spoken in
South Africa.
In a country challenged by a high rate of
HIV/AIDS, a weak state health
infrastructure, and a disparate system of
rural health clinics, the Cell-Life Aftercare
program is demonstrating how an
innovative mobile application can improve
patient treatment. If the program can
overcome the significant barriers to
expanding nationwide, it may provide a
Credit: Cell-Life
necessary tool for South Africa’s ability to
Next Steps: Expanding the confront its HIV/AIDS epidemic through
Cell-Life Model the delivery of effective treatment. 
Beyond securing the necessary funding,
Cell-Life has identified a number of criteria
that would influence the future of Aftercare.
These include:
 further development of its data
management software;
 expansion of its partnerships with other
actors in the public health sector and
commercial operators in South Africa;
 better interoperability between its
systems;
 greater standardization for medical
record collection forms; and
 the adaptation of the system to other
chronic and acute diseases.
Wireless Technology for Social Change: Trends in Mobile Use by NGOs 15
Health
57388_UNF_S1_R1:UNFoundation.qxd  5/6/08  9:20 AM  Page 16
C A S E S T U D Y 2
Connecting Health Clinics and Remote Health
Workers (Uganda)
Issue: Relaying Medical Care How It Works
Information in Rural Areas AED-Satellife has used handheld computers
for the last six years to deliver medical
n developing countries, health care is
I information at the point of care. It deliversoften delivered by a lone nurse medical information including diseasepractitioner in a one-room clinic. As treatment guidelines, continuing educationthey battle AIDS, tuberculosis, materials, newsletters, and essential drug
malnutrition, malaria, and other diseases, the lists and databases. Nurses also receive
practitioners frequently lack access to national and international news articles on
electricity or running water, let alone medical their devices.
information, a telephone, or the Internet.
AED-Satellife also has customized software
Often the quality of care a patient receives for data collection on handhelds so medical
is limited to whatever knowledge the nurse workers are able to track patients and keep
retained from basic training. In Uganda, per records electronically. Clinics are required
capita spending on health is US $57 per to regularly send data on public health
year. In Rakai, a rural district about 200 programs and routine epidemiological data
miles southwest of the capital city of back to the regional health centers.
Kampala, there is one doctor for every
22,400 people; in the Mbale district, a rural
agricultural district where coffee and Personal Digital Assistants
bananas are grown, there is one doctor for
every 15,000 people. With medical staff PDA, or personal digital assistant,
stretched so thin and working under is a small, handheld computer that
challenging circumstances, access to Amakes it possible to store, access,
wireless-enabled health care information and organize large volumes of information.
becomes a critical lifeline just when it is Personal digital assistants can exchange data
needed—at the point of care. electronically with other devices. They are
sometimes also referred to as ‘smart phones’
Response: Using Wireless when telephone capabilities are included.
Personal Digital Assistants to
Bridge the Gap Holly Ladd, Director of AED-Satellife,
describes how handheld devices deliver
To address this urgent need for point-of-care vital information: “We have seen changes in
medical information, Academy for practice, particularly around treatment for
Educational Development (AED)-Satellife, diarrhea. We emphasize in the medical
a U.S.-based nonprofit organization, has treatment alerts that we send to the
implemented projects in more than a dozen handheld devices in the clinics that re-
countries where health professionals hydration therapy is strongly recommended
working in resource-poor areas use as a first course of action, particularly with
handheld personal digital assistants (PDAs) kids. We have evidence that this is now
to transmit and receive vital data via a used much more often as a first course of
wireless or mobile network. action in those clinics.”
16 Wireless Technology for Social Change: Trends in Mobile Use by NGOs
Health
57388_UNF_S1_R1:UNFoundation.qxd  5/6/08  9:20 AM  Page 17
computers result in “more rapid, accurate,
and cost-effective data collection and
reporting.”11 It found that a handheld
computer network spanning two districts in
Uganda indicated a 24 percent savings over
traditional paper-and-pencil methods, and
that further savings are expected as
additional surveys are converted to the
Credit: AED-Satellife handheld format.
Likewise, PDAs can streamline health data AED-Satellife has carefully documented its
collection from remote areas. Ladd lessons learned from years of using PDAs
describes a recent typhoid outbreak that in delivering and collecting health
was detected early because clinics regularly information in developing countries. The
reported cases with PDAs. “The outbreak organization has produced a ‘PDA Toolkit’
was contained because we could see that complete with a step-by-step guide on how
something was amiss. This would not have to deploy PDAs, including information on
been possible with paper and pencil the opportunities available and how to
reporting, which is much more time- assess an organization’s readiness for using
consuming,” she says. handhelds.
AED-Satellife has pioneered the use of Ladd notes that AED-Satellife now knows
handheld devices that can perform the “what users like and do not like, what
same tasks as a desktop or laptop computer incentives they need to use the PDAs,
in health-care settings in developing where we need to cheerlead, support, and
countries. The Uganda Health Information evangelize. It turns out that delivering news
Network is an AED-Satellife Project and popular content—including gossip
operated in collaboration with Uganda columns—onto the nurses PDAs is a great
Chartered HealthNet and the Faculty of way to get users used to using them.”
Medicine of Makerere University. It is the
largest of AED-Satellife’s current projects
using PDAs in health clinics. Next Steps: Coordinating with
Key Partners to Bring
Outcome: More Effective Data Programs to Scale
Collection, Better Health Care In order to expand projects like AED-
Services Satellife, the Uganda Health Information
Network needs institutional support from
Four years into the project in Uganda, 175 the national healthcare system. In Uganda,
remote health facilities serving more than the AED-Satellife project was initiated by
1.5 million people are able to send and two non-governmental organizations
receive data and medical updates. AED- (NGOs) in conjunction with the Faculty of
Satellife is replicating the project in Medicine of Makerere University.
Mozambique, having translated the
software and materials into Portuguese, Although the District Health Services—
where 110 health centers are receiving Uganda’s regional health system—was
medical updates and are collecting health actively supportive, the Ugandan Ministry
information. It also launched in South of Health initially wanted to wait until the
Africa in spring 2008. viability of the solution was proven before
An evaluation of AED-Satellife’s project in 11AED Satellife internal evaluation
Uganda determined that handheld
Wireless Technology for Social Change: Trends in Mobile Use by NGOs 17
Health
57388_UNF_S1_R1:UNFoundation.qxd  5/6/08  9:20 AM  Page 18
C A S E S T U D Y 2 C O N T I N U E D
making a decision about whether to become with health workers. Particularly for remote,
a direct implementing partner. AED- under-resourced areas, access to wireless-
Satellife continuously updated the Health enabled health care information can serve
Ministry on the project, and in 2007 the as a critical lifeline for informed health
Ministry indicated its intent to roll out the care. 
network to additional 20 districts.
Ladd says: “We have proof of concept now, Developing Open Source
and are working with the Health Ministry to Standards
scale the network from 174 health centers
here are now several consortia
operating at the district level to an Tthat aim to collaborativelyadditional 20 health districts with standardize software for medical
approximately 3,000 additional health
records collection. The Open Medical
centers.”
Records System (OpenMRS) is a free
In Mozambique, AED-Satellife took a and open source electronic medical
slightly different approach. That project, record application for developing
which began with the launch of PDA countries (www.openmrs.org). The
programs in 110 health centers, was application has been used to manage
initiated by the Maputo Ministry of Health patient and treatment information
and supported at that level. Engaging the associated with HIV/AIDS and
Ministry of Health from the very beginning tuberculosis care in several countries in
proved to be instrumental in ensuring sub-Saharan Africa. Open Rosa, another
project sustainability, and facilitating rapid consortium just now forming, aims to
skills transference to Ministry technical develop a mobile medical record
personnel. system. Both consortia have received
funding and are aimed at reducing
As the program is brought to scale, the
redundancy amongst NGOs developing
wireless connections established through
medical record systems, and
the AED-Satellife programs are increasing
standardizing the way medical data is
health officers’ knowledge of health care
collected and managed, both on
needs—even in the most remote areas—while
computers and on handheld and mobile
sharing critical medical and health updates
devices.
Credit: AED-Satellife
18 Wireless Technology for Social Change: Trends in Mobile Use by NGOs
Health
57388_UNF_S1_R1:UNFoundation.qxd  5/6/08  9:20 AM  Page 19
C A S E S T U D Y 3
Lowering the Barriers for Access to Public Health Data
(Kenya, Zambia)
Issue: Monitoring Disease in Response: Collecting Health
Developing Countries Data through an Open-Source
t was the late 1990s and I was Mobile Software Tool
“Iamazed by the lack of adoption of In 2002, Selanikio teamed up withmodern IT [information technology] computer scientist Rose Donna to form thein collecting health data, whether you DataDyne Group, a non-profit dedicated to
were in Haiti or parts of the U.S.,” increasing access to public health data
recalls Joel Selanikio, a pediatrician, through mobile software solutions. Inspired
technologist, epidemiologist, and co- by an earlier CDC product called Epi Info,
founder of the non-profit DataDyne.org. Selanikio created EpiSurveyor, a free, open-
“Government agencies tend to lag far
behind the private sector in pursuing new
technologies.”
Dr. Selanikio began his public health career
working at the Centers for Disease Control
and Prevention (CDC), a U.S. government
agency. He traveled the globe investigating
disease outbreaks. Searching for clues, he
collected and analyzed health data,
evaluated programs, interviewed patients,
and was sometimes able to discern patterns
others had overlooked. Yet, as is often the
case in addressing public health concerns,
his efforts were hindered by a lack of
reliable, systematically recorded data. In a
number of countries, critical health data was
being collected through agonizingly slow
paper-based systems—if it was collected at Credit: DataDyne
all. These gaps in access to up-to-date source, mobile data collection software tool.
public health data made informed public EpiSurveyor offers health data collection
health decision-making extremely difficult. forms that can be downloaded at no cost
and modified by anyone with basic
Having worked earlier in his career as an IT computer skills. Selanikio and Donna
consultant on Wall Street, Selanikio began believed that this technological innovation
exploring the use of handheld computers to could empower developing country health
record field data. He discovered that while officials with the tools needed to gather
the hardware needed to collect data was time-sensitive health data quickly, and
readily available, the software required was without outside assistance.
often too complex and costly for use by
those in developing countries.
Wireless Technology for Social Change: Trends in Mobile Use by NGOs 19
Health
57388_UNF_S1_R1:UNFoundation.qxd  5/6/08  9:20 AM  Page 20
C A S E S T U D Y 3 C O N T I N U E D
In many cases when developing countries creating mobile data products to address
track public health data, they do so by public health needs in developing countries.
hiring programming consultants to
customize the required IT solutions. This In 2006, DataDyne entered into a
arrangement can strain limited resources, partnership with the United Nations
and in some cases also raise questions about Foundation, The Vodafone Group
health data ownership. Selanikio designed Foundation, the World Health Organization
EpiSurveyor to lower the barriers of access (WHO), and the Ministries of Health of
to public health data through a user-friendly Kenya and Zambia to launch a pilot
and easily adaptable health data collection program that scaled the beta-tested software
tool. “We wanted to create a tool that the at the provincial level. Through the pilot,
average person who knows how to word public health officials in Kenya and Zambia
process could handle,” Selanikio says. received training and mobile computing
devices to support the fight against measles.
“For some time, we had been exploring
How It Works how to use mobile technology to collect
piSurveyor incorporates a Win- data on the ground that could be used byE health officials in making life-savingdows-based “Designer” forms- decisions,” says Mitul Shah, senior directorcreation application, and a
of technology partnerships at the United
Java-based engine that can run on per-
Nations Foundation. “In Zambia and
sonal digital assistants (PDAs), smart Kenya, for example, health officers
phones, and soon, common mobile traditionally traveled to remote facilities and
phones. Users start by downloading the recorded information, like stock levels, on
software from the DataDyne.org website paper. This information was then
(www.datadyne.org). Then, using a desk- transferred manually to an electronic
top or laptop computer, they enter the database, which took time. We wanted to
health survey questions into the De- systematize how health data was collected.”
signer program. The resulting form can
The pilot sought to contribute to the goals
then be published to a mobile device. of the Measles Initiative, a partnership
For data that is collected via PDA or aimed at reducing measles deaths
smart phone, once data is collected from worldwide, that counts as its founding
the field the mobile device is synchro- partners the American Red Cross, U.S.
nized with the computer. Data from Centers for Disease Control and
multiple handsets can then be combined Prevention, the United Nations Children’s
into a single data table for analysis. Fund (UNICEF), the WHO, and the
United Nations Foundation. From 2000 to
2006, the Initiative succeeded in reducing
Piloting the Approach measles deaths in Africa by more than 90
percent. Still, monitoring measles
Shortly after developing EpiSurveyor, and
vaccination rates and disease outbreaks in
working with Dr. Mark Grabowsky, then of
hard-to-reach areas was a complex and
the American Red Cross, Selanikio entered
time-consuming task. While the Measles
and won a grant from the World Bank’s
Initiative had worked with DataDyne in
Development Marketplace Competition.
using PDAs for this purpose in the past,
They used the award to develop and test a
Selanikio realized that switching from a
beta version of the software in Kenya. At
consultant-based solution to a country-
the same time, Selanikio and Donna were
owned process using EpiSurveyor would
launching DataDyne, with the goal of
provide a more sustainable solution.
20 Wireless Technology for Social Change: Trends in Mobile Use by NGOs
Health
57388_UNF_S1_R1:UNFoundation.qxd  5/6/08  9:20 AM  Page 21
“The long-term goal [of the pilot] was to occurred in Kenya, when political unrest
strengthen systems—to make clinics more and fighting in neighboring Somalia brought
responsive and train health surveillance in waves of unvaccinated refugees—some of
officers to be able to report more accurately whom carried the polio virus. Despite the
and on a more timely basis about measles fact that the last native case of polio in
and other priority diseases,” says Andrea Kenya had been seen more than two
Gay, executive director of Children’s decades ago, the human migration
Health for the United Nations Foundation introduced a new threat of disease outbreak.
and senior advisor to the Measles Initiative.
Titus Kolongie, who works with the Kenya
Expanded Programme on Immunizations
(KEPI), was part of a cadre of health workers
trained on EpiSurveyor who responded to
the crisis. Using a PDA loaded with
EpiSurveyor, he evaluated an emergency
polio vaccination campaign that targeted
individuals who may have come into contact
with the virus as it entered Kenya. In total,
KEPI was targeting almost two million
children for vaccination, giving the polio
virus fewer places to hide, and preventing
life-long infections from a debilitating
Credit: DataDyne disease. Says Kolongie, “EpiSurveyor made
things work efficiently, allowing us to collect
Outcome: Improved Public information and conduct analyses quickly.”
Health Response to Disease Even more remarkably, the pilot officers in
Outbreaks Zambia learned of the outbreak investigation
form created by the Kenyan team,
Through the pilot, thirty provincial health downloaded it from the project website, and
supervisors in each country were trained in put it into use in Zambia with minor
how to use EpiSurveyor on Palm Zire™ modifications. This adaptation of the
handheld computers. The health officers software and forms came as great news to
then used EpiSurveyor to collect Selanikio.
management data about public health
clinics—such as medical supply quantities “First, you had health professionals using
and levels of staff training. In both countries, the software—on their own initiative—to
officers went beyond the purpose of the meet a pressing need,” he explains. “Next,
pilot to gather additional health data as new
needs arose. In Zambia, for example, the
supplied PDAs and EpiSurveyor software
were used by health officers to conduct a
post-measles vaccination campaign
coverage survey—the very first time that
such a survey had been independently
conducted by in-country staff using PDAs.
Another instance in which local health
officials modified the open source software
to meet new health needs as they arose
Credit: DataDyne
Wireless Technology for Social Change: Trends in Mobile Use by NGOs 21
Health
57388_UNF_S1_R1:UNFoundation.qxd  5/6/08  9:20 AM  Page 22
C A S E S T U D Y 3 C O N T I N U E D
you had health professionals in a different Tools like EpiSurveyor offer great potential
country sharing forms leading to the for helping to monitor these needs.”
standardization of data. This is a potentially
revolutionary change in the way we collect Based on the results of the pilot program,
data.” If comparable health data were WHO is considering plans to implement
available across countries, it would be easier EpiSurveyor in all sub-Saharan African
to share best practices and implement more countries. Starting in 2008, health
widespread interventions, he adds. professionals in ten countries will be trained
to use the software in their work,
particularly in the area of disease
Challenges: Overcoming In- surveillance.
Country Logistical Constraints
DataDyne is also working with Cell-Life
Selanikio points out the challenge of (see Case Study 1), a non-profit developer
measuring the effectiveness of a tool like in South Africa, to adapt EpiSurveyor to
EpiSurveyor in the face of independent run on Java-enabled mobile phones. This
variables that users have no control over. In will allow users of the software to transmit
some communities in Kenya, for example, data wirelessly, thereby saving time and
lack of fuel and bad weather made it improving efficiency.
difficult for those trained to use
Because the software is open source and can
EpiSurveyor to travel to clinics.
be easily downloaded for free, hundreds of
An abundance of new data is also people and organizations have accessed
generating a demand in government EpiSurveyor and are using it—formally and
ministries of health for back-end data informally—in their work. Among these are
aggregation and analysis tools. This means the Harvard and Johns Hopkins schools of
that in some cases, until aggregation and public health. Those who seek to modify the
analysis are embedded in the system, this EpiSurveyor code to create new
new data may not be acted upon as quickly functionality, rather than simply using it as
as one might hope. Still, this offers a real provided, are required by the licensing
opportunity for further research and agreement to make their source code open to
development to bring to fruition complete others, thereby stimulating new innovations
front- and back-end solutions. and the sharing of valuable tools.
For its part, DataDyne is focused on
Next Steps: Adapting the refining and adapting the software to
Application, and Bringing It address a wide variety of needs. “By adding
to Scale functionality, we can use the platform to
provide clinical updates, patient tracking
Despite these challenges, the results of the and management, reference materials, and
pilot have paved the way for wider other tools,” says Selanikio.
applications of EpiSurveyor. “The results
are very encouraging in that they By the year 2010, DataDyne estimates that
demonstrate the potential for using mobile more than 1,000 public health professionals
devices for widespread data collection,” will be using EpiSurveyor for data
says Shah. “The Millennium Development collection and analysis. “We’ve just put our
Goals have underscored the need for better toe into the pool,” says Selanikio. “Imagine
data—data that can help prevent the spread where this could be ten years from now.” 
of disease, monitor child nutrition, and
determine people’s access to clean water.
22 Wireless Technology for Social Change: Trends in Mobile Use by NGOs
Health
57388_UNF_S1_R1:UNFoundation.qxd  5/6/08  9:20 AM  Page 23
C A S E S T U D Y 4
Connecting Youth to Sexual Health Information
(United States)
Issue: Improving Sex Response: Reaching teens
Education for the Teen through text messaging
Population “The thing about mobile phones is that
t was while standing in front of the they’re small and can be used privately to
IMission High School near her home in access information anonymously,” saysSan Francisco, California that Levine. With 85 percent of the city’s youthDeborah Levine, executive director of owning a mobile phone, a text-based
Internet Sexuality Information Services approach simply made sense.
(ISIS-Inc.), a nonprofit she founded that ISIS-Inc. and SFDPH had a history of
develops “high-tech solutions for sexual collaborating in using information and
health education,” conceived of a potential communication technologies to address
solution to a pressing public health problem. public health challenges. Now, they were
Levine had recently been approached by poised to enter new territory in using
the San Francisco Department of Public mobile technology to promote teen sexual
Health (SFDPH) to develop a website to health.
address rising rates of sexually transmitted “ISIS brought its experience in technology,
diseases among at-risk youth. In 2005, rates innovation, and working at the community
of gonorrhea among African-American level,” says Jeff Klausner, MD, SFDPH
youth, ages 18 to 25, had gone up over 100 Deputy Health Officer. “We brought a long
percent, with African-American women history of working in sexual health
being infected by the disease at 12 times the education and disease prevention, financial
rate of American women of Caucasian resources, and expertise in marketing,
descent. monitoring, and evaluation.”
As she watched a flood of teenagers emerge As Levine began researching her idea, she
from the school’s entrance, Levine was learned of a similar initiative in London. In
struck by how many were calling and 2002, The Brook Advisory Centre, a
texting their friends. So began her inquiry national charitable organization, launched
into how to use mobile phones as a health a text messaging service that United
awareness and disease prevention tool. Kingdom (UK) youth could use to access
sexual health information and referral
services (see sidebar). Levine received
helpful ideas from Brook staff and set out to
design a solution to address the needs of at-
risk youth in San Francisco. The service
would soon become known as “SexInfo.”
A critical first step was informing and
engaging local community members. ISIS-
Inc. and SFDPH identified representatives
of community organizations (e.g., high
school health programs, public clinic staff
serving African-American youth, juvenile
Credit: ISIS-Inc.
Wireless Technology for Social Change: Trends in Mobile Use by NGOs 23
Health
57388_UNF_S1_R1:UNFoundation.qxd  5/6/08  9:20 AM  Page 24
C A S E S T U D Y 4 C O N T I N U E D
probation officers, and local clergy) to serve answers to when it came to their
on an Advisory Board. The group provided reproductive health.
valuable feedback during the planning
stage, and was consulted regularly SexInfo was also designed to provide youth
thereafter. with information on where they could
access free, confidential sexual health
Focus groups were also held with young services. To address this need, ISIS-Inc.
African-American men and women to staff mapped youth-oriented clinical and
determine their needs and how they social services in communities in or near
preferred to access sexual health where those young people they sought to
information. Questions focused on young reach lived. Staff then visited the clinics to
people’s existing knowledge of sexually gauge their relevance to youth.
transmitted diseases (STDs), their sources of
information, and their use of technology,
including cell phones. “One hundred
percent said this would be a great way to
reach them and their peers,” says Levine.
Focus group discussions also emphasized
the need for an ‘opt-in’ service, whereby
users would control the type of information
they received and when. “They didn’t want
anyone pinging them with messages or
asking them to get tested for an STD,” says
Levine.
Based on this research, ISIS health
educators initiated the content development
phase of the project. They began by
identifying key questions that sexually
active youth, ages 12 to 24, most needed
Credit: ISIS-Inc.
“Ask Brook”: Providing Young People in the United Kingdom with
Sexual Health Information
In 2002, The Brook Advisory Centre, a UK char- According to Lisa Bartlett, Ask Brook Programmeity, launched an enhanced “Ask Brook” infor- Manager, a major benefit of text-based services ismation service providing young people with that they are confidential and appeal to young peo-
sexual health knowledge and support via tele- ple who are intimidated at the thought of talking
phone, the Internet, and text message. about sensitive issues. “Once up and running, such
services don’t require a lot of resources beyond pro-
To access the service via mobile phone, young peo-
motion,” she says. Brook benefits from its name
ple text BRK, followed by their postcode, to 81222.
recognition and 40-year history. Given its relation-
Subsequently, they receive information regarding
ship with local government and national health
sexual health services in their area. They can also
services, Brook is able to promote the service with-
select standardized responses to questions relating
out investing significant ongoing resources.
to contraception, pregnancy, sexually transmitted
disease, and other sexual health issues. In 2006 and For more information, visit: www.brook.org.uk
2007, the service received an average of 100 text
message queries per month.
24 Wireless Technology for Social Change: Trends in Mobile Use by NGOs
Health
57388_UNF_S1_R1:UNFoundation.qxd  5/6/08  9:20 AM  Page 25
Developing the Technology and Outcome: Texting the Relevant
Launching the Service Information to Teens—
ISIS hired HipCricket, Inc., a mobile Anywhere, Anytime
marketing firm in Australia, to program the
service and ensure the confidentiality of During the first 25 weeks of the project
users. Next came the task of working with (April–October 2006), 4,500 individuals
mobile operators to provide mobile phone accessed the service, with 2,500 taking the
subscribers with access to the service. steps to retrieve content and referrals. The
HipCricket offered to let ISIS-Inc. use its top three messages accessed were: “What 2
five-digit ‘short code’ during the project’s do if ur condom broke,” “2 find out about
start-up phase. Levine was then able to STDs” and “if u think ur pregnant.” Table 1
work through an aggregator in the United demonstrates the number of inquiries per
States to obtain the short code (61827) now message.12
being used to access SexInfo. Short codes
are generally used to market or promote a
product or service to mobile users. Table 1. Most Popular Messages
Prior to launching SexInfo, ISIS-Inc. Most
worked with Youth United Through Health Popular Message Inquiries
Education (YUTHE), a program of
#1 A1 (if ur condom broke) 523
SFDPH, to develop marketing materials
and test their appeal among local youth. #2 C3 (to find out about STDs) 486
Outreach materials included posters, palm- #3 B2 (if u think ur pregnant) 372
sized cards, and bus shelter ads. To engage
parents and community members, ISIS-Inc. #4 D4 (to find out about HIV) 277
created a companion website #5 E9 (if ur sexually active) 199
(www.sextextsf.org) where the public could
learn about the service and view the content #6 F6 (if they’re cheating on u) 181
of the text messages online. ISIS-Inc. has #7 F8 (if ur not sure u want to have sex) 158
also created a mobile WAP (wireless
#8 E7 (if u think u might be gay) 110
application protocol) site that can be viewed
on mobile phones (m.sextext.org). #9 E5 (Need to speak to some one now!) 78
SexInfo launched formally on 24 April #10 G11 (if u need a place to stay) 59
2006. Following the initial media campaign, #11 F10 (if someone’s hurting u) 44
ISIS-Inc. and SFDPH explored creative
means of reminding youth about the
service. One of these involved producing a
“Working with the government—and in our
public service announcement for television
case, the public health department—has
featuring a popular rap musician, Mistah
helped enormously with evaluation efforts,”
F.A.B. The announcement was broadcast
says Andrew Woodruff, ISIS-Inc. Program
locally on Black Entertainment Television
Director. “We’ve found that a text-based
and MTV and is now available on
approach can get the information into
YouTube.
people’s hands. They can be anywhere and
access the information they need.”
12Levine, Deborah, et al., “SEXINFO: A Sexual
Health Text Messaging Service for San Francisco
Youth,” American Journal of Public Health, 98 (2008):
393–395.
Wireless Technology for Social Change: Trends in Mobile Use by NGOs 25
Health
57388_UNF_S1_R1:UNFoundation.qxd  5/6/08  9:20 AM  Page 26
C A S E S T U D Y 4 C O N T I N U E D
Challenges: Meeting Teen ISIS-Inc. is now looking to expand the
Needs with a Relevant, Usable online component of SexInfo based on
evidence that its target group uses mobile
Service technology to surf the web. By adding
In 2007, ISIS-Inc. made a number of wallpapers, ringtones, and other items of
changes to the service based on initial interest to youth, ISIS-Inc. seeks to
results and a usability test. The test was reinforce the service’s overall appeal and
carried out by Youth United Through impact.
Health Education (YUTHE) team While getting the technology right is
members—college students—who went out critical, SFDPH’s Klausner emphasizes the
on the street with a video camera and a importance of finding the right partner(s) to
professional market researcher to document develop an effective solution. “Frustrations
how young people used the service. can emerge between governmental and
Roughly half of the young people surveyed non-governmental organizations because
reported difficulty in navigating the SexInfo they have different styles,” he says. To
menu of options. To simplify the user’s address these differences, Klausner stresses
experience, ISIS-Inc. has shortened the the importance of mutually establishing
number of questions from eleven to four. timelines and facilitating regular and open
Now, rather than entering two digits (e.g., communication.
A1) to obtain an answer to a question, users
need enter only one. These changes have
increased the percentage of young people
who get to the resources provided by over
100 percent.
Health Info-Lines: A Promising Tool in the Fight Against HIV/AIDS
Health information lines, accessible via a A related monthly competition, ‘MyAnswer,’ invitesmobile phone texting service, are young people to text in their answer to a question—increasingly being looked to as a tool in for example, what is the difference between HIV
the fight against HIV/AIDS. A new service, and AIDS? Every month, ten of those who answer
‘MyQuestion,’ launched in Nigeria in November correctly win a prize. The contest encourages young
2007, is directed at increasing HIV/AIDS awareness people to research and reflect on issues that affect
and promoting healthy behaviors among 10- to 25- their health.
year-olds. Through the service, young people can
Both services are part of the wider eLearning pilot
obtain answers to reproductive health-related
program, Learning About Living, in Nigeria.
questions by sending text messages, emailing, or
Learning about Living is funded by Oxfam Novib
calling a telephone hotline. Through providing
and the MacArthur Foundation and is being
varied options for accessing the service, it is hoped
managed by One World UK, in collaboration with
that even the most reluctant youth will find their
Action Health Incorporated, Butterfly Works,
comfort zone when it comes to asking sensitive
Nigerian Education Research & Development
questions.
Centre, Federal Ministry of Education, Federal
During the first three months of the service, the Ministry of Health, Education as a Vaccine Against
mobile phone component has proven to be the Aids, and Girls’ Power Initiative. To learn more,
most popular medium by far, with 14,000 text visit: www.learningaboutliving.com.
message responses sent to teenagers accessing the
service.
26 Wireless Technology for Social Change: Trends in Mobile Use by NGOs
Health
57388_UNF_S1_R1:UNFoundation.qxd  5/6/08  9:20 AM  Page 27
C A S E S T U D Y 4 C O N T I N U E D
Looking ahead, Levine is encouraged about
the prospects for more nonprofits to
incorporate text-messaging services into
their health education and disease
prevention efforts. “The more mobile
technology work that’s being done, the
more costs will start to come down,” she
says. “We’re still in the pioneering years of
this in the U.S.”
To an ever-growing worldwide population
conversant in text messaging, anonymous,
mobile-enabled services that provide real-
time sexual health information are proving
an easy way to communicate sensitive
information, anytime, anywhere.
Expanding these services to new geographic
areas, and across other health issues, is a
natural next step in the process of
improving public access to health
information through mobile phones. 
Credit: ISIS-Inc.
Next Steps: Expanding Text
Services—To Other Cities and
Other Public Health Issues
Steps are underway to adapt SexInfo’s
approach to Washington, DC and Toronto,
Canada. In Washington, ISIS-Inc. is
working with the local government and
Metro TeenAIDS, a community health
organization, to adapt the SexInfo
approach. Rather than have youth call into
the service, messages will be “pushed out”
to young people who have signed up to
receive information. In Toronto, ISIS-Inc. is
collaborating with the Toronto Department
of Public Health and hopes to launch
SexInfo there by summer 2008.
Wireless Technology for Social Change: Trends in Mobile Use by NGOs 27
Health
57388_UNF_S1_R1:UNFoundation.qxd  5/6/08  9:20 AM  Page 28
28 Wireless Technology for Social Change: Trends in Mobile Use by NGOs
57388_UNF_S1_R1:UNFoundation.qxd  5/6/08  9:21 AM  Page 29
II. Humanitarian Assistance
Mobile Phones in Disasters and Humanitarian
Relief
obile technology plays an important role in communica-
Mtions efforts during the various phases of a humanitariancatastrophe—from the early warning phase through theimmediate disaster response and longer-term recon-
struction efforts. Stories abound about how mobile technology has
been used in recent disasters, from reestablishing communications net-
works vital to the work of first responders to providing a first line of
communications for refugees trying to reconnect with a loved one.
Communication needs differ in each unique situation, ranging from
mass broadcasting of text messages in the early warning phase, for ex-
ample, to decentralized two-way communication among relief workers
and affected populations in the aftermath of a disaster.
Early warning systems involving mobile phones—both cell broadcast
and text messaging alerts—are being considered or implemented in var-
Credit: TSF ious countries. Because it can quickly and informally disseminate infor-
mation from person to person, mobile communication is a good
medium for information sharing both during and in the aftermath of a
disaster. The case study on the World Food Programme’s use of text
messaging to inform Iraqi refugees of food shipments illustrates both
Delivering Food Aid to Iraqi the challenges and opportunities of text alerts.
Refugees (Syria) .........................31 There is evidence that neither the public nor emergency workers uti-
lize mobile technology to its fullest potential. For emergency workers,
Facilitating Communication in key barriers include organizational and communication inefficiencies
Emergency Situations and breakdowns, as well as technical barriers such as overburdened
(Peru, Indonesia) .............................34 systems unable to handle post-disaster traffic.13 For the affected popu-
lations, emergency communication needs to take a priority and may
Text Messaging as a Violence- necessitate prioritizing that particular traffic over person-to-person
Prevention Tool (Kenya) ............38 communication.
A 2005 GSMA study14 found that in the immediate aftermath of a dis-
aster the speed with which cellular networks can recover from dam-
age—often within hours—plays a critical role in relief supply
management and economic recovery. As the case study on Télécoms
Sans Frontières illustrates, rapid restoration of networks is essential in
the critical period right after a disaster.
Our research underscores the importance of operators, governments,
13Currion, Paul. Emergency Capacity Building Report: Information and Technology Requirements
Initiative. Assessment Report (Emergency Capacity Building Project, 2006).
14Coyle, Diana. The Role of Mobiles in Disasters and Emergencies (London: GSM
Association, 2005).
Wireless Technology for Social Change: Trends in Mobile Use by NGOs 29
Humanitarian
Assistance
57388_UNF_S1_R1:UNFoundation.qxd  5/6/08  9:21 AM  Page 30
Credit: TSF and relief organizations working closely to- have grown increasingly popular in recent
gether to ensure that mobile networks are years, with private donations in many cases
available for critical communication, and exceeding government expenditures in the
that information is able to flow freely. The wake of a disaster. This was especially true
GSMA study states that: “in the case of de- after the 2004 Indian Ocean tsunami, when
veloping countries in particular, mobiles are millions of dollars were raised via text mes-
likely to be the dominant means of commu- saging—particularly in Europe. Even though
nication for affected members of the public. donations are relatively small, their cumula-
This flow of information—not mediated by tive impact can be substantial.
broadcasting agencies or public authorities—
ensures that people elsewhere quickly come Looking ahead, there are a number of op-
to know what is happening and what help is portunities for improving the effectiveness
needed. In the chaotic aftermath of a disas- of mobile technology in disaster relief. As
ter, when people are displaced, buildings mobile infrastructure grows worldwide,
and infrastructure destroyed, no central au- early warning and last minute information
thority can possibly hold all the necessary dissemination become more viable, espe-
information and allocate resources in the cially if there are strategic investments and
place of greatest need.”15 agreement on standards. Similarly, efforts
are needed to coordinate relief organiza-
Hence, there is a need for government coor- tions more effectively and increase their in-
dination with telecommunication carriers to ternal capacity to take strategic advantage of
ensure that there is rapid rebuilding after a mobile technology.
disaster, and ‘light touch’ regulation to sup-
port this.
Text messaging-based fundraising appeals
15Ibid, p. 33.
30 Wireless Technology for Social Change: Trends in Mobile Use by NGOs
Humanitarian
Assistance
57388_UNF_S1_R1:UNFoundation.qxd  5/6/08  9:21 AM  Page 31
C A S E S T U D Y 5
Delivering Food Aid to Iraqi Refugees (Syria)
Issue: Alerting Refugees to
Food Aid Deliveries
eneficiaries of the United Nations
B(UN) World Food Programme(WFP) are the poorest of the poor.As the frontline agency mandated
to combat global hunger—and entirely re-
liant on voluntary funding—WFP must
make stark choices about whom it can pro-
vide with food assistance. This year, WFP
aims to assist 73 million people in 78 coun-
tries—knowing that there are a staggering
850 million hungry people worldwide.
About two million Iraqis have fled their needed. To facilitate this process, the UN Credit: WFP/John Wreford
country since 2003, and an additional agency recently instituted a text messaging
60,000 are leaving each month.16 Syria has program to notify refugees about the avail-
received the majority of these refugees and ability of food aid.
there are now an estimated 1.4 million
Iraqis in Syria. The WFP has estimated that
about 50,000 of the Iraqis in Syria need Response: Using Text
food aid. Messaging to Communicate
Every month at distribution centers and News of Food Supplies
warehouses of the Syrian Red Crescent, the With a responsibility for coordinating the
WFP and Syrian Red Crescent provide eli- logistics and emergency communications
gible refugee families with basic food com- for other UN agencies and NGOs, WFP is
modities, such as rice, lentils, and oil, and constantly looking for innovative ways of
complementary items, such as sugar, tea, stretching its donations to benefit as many
pasta, tomato paste, and bulgur. people as possible. The Iraqi beneficiaries
described in the case study are far from typ-
Charged with coordinating these distribu-
ical in that they have access to mobile tele-
tions, WFP alerts eligible families about
phones.
food rations and directs them to the appro-
priate distribution centers. Previously, the Describing the genesis of the project,
WFP had used local non-governmental or- Haitham El Noush, program officer at WFP
ganizations (NGOs) who work with Damascus, says: “Last year we started dis-
refugees to help get the word out. Since not tributing food to refugees in Damascus. But
all eligible families had regular contact with how were we going to announce distribu-
local NGOs, however, a new strategy was tion? We wanted to alert about 6,000 fami-
lies in a pilot project when food was ready
16al-Khalidi, Ashraf, Sophia Hoffman, and Victor for pick-up. Someone in the office came up
Tanner. Iraqi Refugees in the Syrian Arab Republic: A Field-
Based Snapshot (Washington, DC: The Brookings with the idea to use a text messaging service
Institution–University of Bern Project on Internal to alert these families.”
Displacement, 2007).
Wireless Technology for Social Change: Trends in Mobile Use by NGOs 31
Humanitarian
Assistance
57388_UNF_S1_R1:UNFoundation.qxd  5/6/08  9:21 AM  Page 32
C A S E S T U D Y 5 C O N T I N U E D
In August 2007, WFP’s program in Damas-
cus contacted one of the mobile telephone
operators in the country, to inquire about
covering a portion of the costs of the text
messaging. The operator agreed to provide
an initial 800 text messages at no cost. El
Noush notes: “The idea was new; this was
the first time this was ever done. And it was
simple: We sent a text message to people on
our list to go to the distribution site and re-
ceive the food.”
To bring the text message pilot program to
scale, the WFP set up an account with a mo- Credit: WFP/John Wreford
bile marketing vendor to accommodate their
bulk messaging needs. WFP buys text mes- However, says El Noush, even though
sages in bulk to secure a volume discount, “there are lots of internet cafes and people
and uses a list of phone numbers provided can have easy internet access, we still cannot
by the UN High Commissioner for be 100 percent sure that we don’t exclude
Refugees (UNHCR) to target its food distri- some people by this extra step. At the same
bution alerts. WFP manages and distributes time, text messaging really is the most effec-
messages using a do-it-yourself dashboard tive way to reach people—everyone has a
on the mobile vendor’s website. The mes- mobile phone and by sending some 35,000
sage that is delivered to refugees provides a messages we got a lot of visibility about the
URL (uniform resource locator) where po- program.” UNHCR is now asking individu-
tential food aid recipients can verify whether als picking up food to update their phone
they are eligible for food benefits. number at the distribution center in the
hope that this will reduce errors over time
Challenges: Reaching the and ensure a more accurate list of numbers.
Right Recipients with the Right Another challenge of texting is the limited
Information space-especially in Arabic. While a text
message in English can accommodate 160
One of the limits of a program like this is characters, a text message in Arabic can
that the messaging is only as targeted as the hold only 70. With such limited space, mes-
phone numbers on the contact list. Because sages must be very clear to be understood
people switch phone numbers or share by the recipient.
phones, delivery of a message to an intended
recipient is not always assured, especially in
a sometimes chaotic environment. As a re- Outcome: Improved
sult, during the first month of the program, Awareness and Targeting of
some messages were delivered to people not Food Aid
eligible for food aid, who were subsequently
turned away at the distribution center. The initial distribution of text messages to
800 families was successful in reaching tar-
El Noush notes that, “people thought the geted recipients of food aid, and the pro-
text message was like an entitlement and gram expanded rapidly. In the first six
then showed up and wanted the food but months of operation in 2007, WFP sent out
had to be turned down.” Learning this les- about 35,000 text messages to 140,000 eligi-
son, recipients are now directed to a website ble people—approximately one message per
to make sure that they are indeed eligible. registered family.
32 Wireless Technology for Social Change: Trends in Mobile Use by NGOs
Humanitarian
Assistance
57388_UNF_S1_R1:UNFoundation.qxd  5/6/08  9:21 AM  Page 33
While some text messages went to people Next Steps: Bringing the Food
not eligible for food, most were successfully Aid Alert Model to Scale
delivered and the families expressed grati-
tude and appreciation. Says El Noush, “The WFP’s food aid text message alert program
text messages have the side effect of creat- has grown rapidly. The first effort reached
ing news in the city by word of mouth. We about 6,600 people through some 800 mes-
are finding the program to be very effective. sages; approximately one message per
You give good news to people on their mo- phone number available for each family.
biles. People reported that they felt happy The second round of messaging targeted
when they received the text messages from some 30,000 individuals. At the time of
us, and told us that they felt that someone publication, the WFP’s list had grown to in-
cares about them.” clude more than 142,000 Iraqi refugees in
Syria that it is reaching via text messaging.
The target for 2008 is to notify a total of
362,000 Iraqi refugees in Syria about the
availability of food aid.
Although this program has yet to be repli-
cated elsewhere, the WFP is excited about
the potential of the program. When condi-
tions permit, as in the case of Iraqi refugees
in Syria, communicating with large groups
via text messaging can provide targeted de-
livery of essential information—including
where one might find one’s next meal. 
Credit: WFP/John Wreford
Wireless Technology for Social Change: Trends in Mobile Use by NGOs 33
Humanitarian
Assistance
57388_UNF_S1_R1:UNFoundation.qxd  5/6/08  9:21 AM  Page 34
C A S E S T U D Y 6
Facilitating Communication in Emergency Situations
(Peru, Indonesia)
Issue: Essential Emergency
Communications for Disaster
Relief
n the evening of 15 August
O2007, a 7.9 magnitudeearthquake struck the coast ofPeru, bringing down buildings,
cutting power supplies, and disrupting
communications. More than 500 people
died and 1,600 were injured, with tens of
thousands more left homeless.
As with other major international disasters,
relief agencies across various government,
non-governmental, and intergovernmental
bodies activated to deliver food, medicine,
and supplies to those in need. Yet none of
these groups could operate effectively
without a communications system enabling
them to share information among Credit: TSF
themselves, and with operational
headquarters. phones, mobile phones, routers, laptops, fax
machines, printers, and scanners.
Response: Deploying Rapid Within 24 hours of their arrival, the team
Response Emergency had established temporary
telecommunications centers in three of
Communications Peru’s hardest-hit areas: Pisco, Inca, and
Télécoms Sans Frontières (TSF), or Chicha. Over the next ten days, a broad
Telecoms Without Borders, a range of disaster relief agencies used TSF’s
nongovernmental organization (NGO) service to coordinate relief efforts and help
headquartered in France, uses mobile save lives. These included the Peruvian
telecommunications to help reestablish Ministries of Health and Education, the
these vital communications networks in the National Program for Food Assistance, the
response to and management of United Nations (UN), and local and
humanitarian crises. Within hours of the international NGOs. Satellite phones were
earthquake in Peru, five staff and volunteers also made available so that local residents
boarded a commercial aircraft from TSF’s could contact family and friends. In all,
Latin America regional office in Managua, more than 17 agencies and 1,400 families
Nicaragua to Peru’s capital city of Lima. accessed TSF’s services over the course of
With them, they carried everything they its deployment.
would need to set up emergency
telecommunication operations—satellite
34 Wireless Technology for Social Change: Trends in Mobile Use by NGOs
Humanitarian
Assistance
57388_UNF_S1_R1:UNFoundation.qxd  5/6/08  9:21 AM  Page 35
Outcome: Providing Vital TSF was founded in 1998 with the goal of
Communications Services providing disaster survivors with three-
minute phone calls that enable survivors to
When and Where Needed place a call to a loved one—often to confirm
Most family members’ whereabouts or to request
In 2006 and 2007 alone, TSF responded to assistance. Today, its services have grown to
17 emergency situations around the globe— include establishing communications centers
facilitating relief efforts in southern for relief groups, including UN agencies.
Lebanon during the Lebanon-Israel conflict, TSF has put in place a 24-hour emergency
helping survivors of a cyclone in monitoring system and coordinates closely
Bangladesh, and assisting victims of the with the UN Office for Coordination of
ongoing civil war in the Democratic Humanitarian Affairs (OCHA) and the UN
Republic of Congo. Children’s Fund (UNICEF) before deploying
to a particular location. Headquartered in
Pau, in southwestern France, TSF has field
How It Works offices in Managua, Nicaragua and Bangkok,
Thailand. The majority of the
In May 2006, after a 6.3 magnitude telecommunication experts TSF deploys areearthquake struck southern Java in volunteers, who receive a modest stipend forIndonesia, TSF was among the
their time in the field. Most are students or
agencies to respond. Rajan Gengaje,
recent university graduates in their twenties
head of the UN Disaster Assessment and
or professionals over 50 with backgrounds in
Coordination team—a stand-by team of
information and communications technology
disaster management professionals
(ICT) and engineering.
working closely with the UN Office for
the Coordination of Humanitarian Af- TSF’s work in support of UN agencies is
fairs (OCHA)—described his experience supported by a joint grant from the United
working with TSF in Java. Nations Foundation and The Vodafone
Group Foundation. TSF is also supported by
“TSF’s technical skills, the availability of
a diverse group of public and private sector
professional support staff, their speed of
donors, including the European
deployment, and excellent understand-
Commission’s Humanitarian Aid Office, and
ing of the international humanitarian re-
telecommunications and technology
sponse environment certainly add value
companies such as Inmarsat, Eutelsat, AT&T,
to the UN’s response initiatives,” he
Cable and Wireless, and Vizada.
said. "During the crisis in Yogyakarta,
TSF offered vital information manage-
ment support and helped train volun- Challenge: Keeping Apace
teers to use mobile GPS units to with Technology
monitor needs on the ground.” Developments While Staying
the Course
The origins of TSF’s work date back to the
late 1990s when TSF co-founders Jean- A key challenge, according to TSF
Francois Cazenave and Monique Information and Communications
Lanne-Petit were volunteering with Coordinator Oisin Walton, is keeping up
humanitarian missions that took them to with changes in technology and
Kosovo, Afghanistan, and Iraq. Refugees determining how best to adapt new
would pass Cazenave slips of paper asking if technologies to meet needs in the field.
he would contact their loved ones abroad. Currently, TSF maintains an inventory of
Wireless Technology for Social Change: Trends in Mobile Use by NGOs 35
Humanitarian
Assistance
57388_UNF_S1_R1:UNFoundation.qxd  5/6/08  9:21 AM  Page 36
C A S E S T U D Y 5 C O N T I N U E D
50 data transmitters, more than 100 phones, through helping communities prepare in
and assorted computers. A mainstay of advance of an emergency, particularly in
TSF’s work is the Inmarsat BGan, which cases where annual weather patterns
offers voice, fax, and broadband Internet predictably lead to flooding or droughts.
connections. For longer duration
emergencies, TSF employs a Very Small In Nicaragua, for example, following its
Aperture Terminal (VSAT), a satellite dish emergency response to Hurricane Felix in
that can facilitate data transmission from September 2007, TSF installed an emergency
several satellite phones. TSF’s mobile communications network in the remote
“visio-emergency” video system allows for North Atlantic Autonomous Region of the
satellite transmission of live videos filmed at country, where no traditional
the site of an emergency. Similarly, TSF can communications exist. The network will
set up a video conferencing system capable allow for improved response in the event of
of linking field staff with headquarters. future emergencies.
Looking ahead, Walton acknowledges that TSF is also looking at expanding its use of
the sustainability of TSF’s efforts is a key mobile technology, and setting up temporary
issue. The bulk of funds TSF receives are GSMA networks at base camps. “With GSM
directed at immediate disaster service networks being reestablished faster and faster
provision, and not at strengthening TSF’s in emergencies, we are looking at ways of
long-term capacity to respond to using more GSM technology.” He adds:
emergencies. TSF is making the case for the “When mobile networks are disrupted, we
vital importance of disaster communications could deploy equipment capable of
to corporations and other funding connecting to the network outside the
organizations that support more traditional affected area.”
relief measures such as the provision of TSF’s work alongside UN agencies, national
food, water, shelter, and education. governments, and other disaster relief groups
demonstrates the crucial role of mobile and
Next Steps: Expanding and other communications technology in all
Developing Services to stages of disaster relief. TSF has consistently
delivered rapid response emergency
Improve Emergency Response communications to support humanitarian
Following each assignment, TSF staff conduct activities, and has frequently provided a first
a thorough debriefing on what went well and line of communication for refugees and other
where future improvement is needed. Among populations affected by disasters. Continuing
those areas being looked at is how to expand its work on building the capacity of mobile
the use of TSF services by governments and communications to play a role in disaster
large NGOs, many of which rely on their prevention and preparedness could be a
own telecommunications capacity, and the promising area for TSF’s growth. Another
development of new services in cooperation area for exploration is the use of mobile
with TSF’s existing partners. phones for money transfer services (‘m-
transactions’) during disasters. M-transactions
TSF is exploring a number of ways to have the potential to meet a widespread need
improve and expand its emergency services. during challenging circumstances. 
For example, it is looking into what would be
required to set up ‘cyber cafes’ in relief areas
that would enable affected individuals to send
emails to family and friends about their
situation and needs. It is also exploring how
to play a greater role in prevention efforts
36 Wireless Technology for Social Change: Trends in Mobile Use by NGOs
Humanitarian
Assistance
57388_UNF_S1_R1:UNFoundation.qxd  5/6/08  9:21 AM  Page 37
C A S E S T U D Y 5 C O N T I N U E D
Credit: TSF
Text Messaging Critical News in the Aftermath of a Disaster
More than 5,000 people died and 1.6 million were displaced as a result of theMay 2006 earthquake in Yogyakarta and Central Java in Indonesia. During thedays and weeks following the disaster, ordinary citizens received valuable
news via text message. The text messaging service was put in place by Internews, a U.S.-
based NGO that works to improve people’s access to information around the world.
The service was run through an emergency AM radio station, Radio Punokawan,
established by the Indonesian Press and Broadcast Society, with support from Internews.
In addition to radio broadcasts, important information was sent and received from the
newsroom via text messaging. Outgoing messages warned of aftershocks and identified
communities that had not yet received government assistance. More than 180 Indonesian
journalists distributed and received information through the service.
Credit: TSF
Wireless Technology for Social Change: Trends in Mobile Use by NGOs 37
Humanitarian
Assistance
57388_UNF_S1_R1:UNFoundation.qxd  5/6/08  9:21 AM  Page 38
C A S E S T U D Y 7
Text Messaging as a Violence-Prevention Tool
(Kenya)
Issue: Providing Real-Time Manager in Kenya. “After the election, they
Information in Times of Crisis decided it would be valuable to have people
text into a nerve center, which could then pass
ollowing the December 2007 information along to relevant authorities and
Fpresidential election in Kenya, waves the police. Sometimes if you put a fewof political and ethnic violence swept policemen or elders in place, you can preventthe country. The election, which something unfortunate from happening.”
returned President Mwai Kibanki to office,
was marred by widespread allegations of vote Oxfam-GB’s contribution of roughly £36,000
rigging. To help stem the violence, human was used to support PeaceNet’s field
rights advocates in the country quickly operations and headquarters costs during the
mobilized by creating a text messaging ‘nerve crisis. Oxfam-GB also used its connections to
center.’ That center served as a vital tool for negotiate a deal with Celtel, the second largest
conflict management and prevention by mobile phone network in Kenya, to halve its
providing a hub for real-time information ordinary rates for those transmitting and
about actual and planned attacks between receiving messages through the text message
rival ethnic and political groups. The text ‘nerve center.’
messages, sent in by human rights advocates,
religious leaders, and others, were then Outcome: Communicating by
relayed to local Peace Committees for Mobile Phone to Avert Crisis
response.
Through facilitating emergency
The initiative was funded by Oxfam Great communications, PeaceNet’s text message
Britain (Oxfam-GB)—a development, ‘nerve center’ was able to prevent violent
advocacy, and relief agency—as part of its incidents in the weeks and months following
emergency response. Oxfam-GB has the election. For example, in the city of
employed several text messaging strategies as Eldoret, PeaceNet mobilized local non-
it develops its knowledge and evaluates the governmental organization (NGO) and
effectiveness of that platform as a fundraising, religious leaders to form Peace Committees to
awareness-building, and advocacy tool. offer early warning of violent activity and to
serve as intermediaries. When one local
Response: Connecting citizen learned of a pending attack against a
Communities in Crisis through camp for internally displaced people, a text
alert was sent to the text message ‘nerve
Mobile Communications center.’ It, in turn, alerted the Peace
As part of its emergency response during the Committee in Eldoret, which took steps to
crisis in Kenya, Oxfam-GB provided financial avert the attack.
support to PeaceNet, an umbrella body made During another instance, following the
up of Kenyan organizations and individuals murder of a member of the Kenyan
dedicated to human rights, peace, and justice. Parliament, a group of young people made
“Before the elections, PeaceNet was gathering plans to attack residents of a particular ethnic
information around Kenya to make sure community. Once the ‘nerve center’ was
nothing went awry,” explains Philippa alerted, it notified Peace Committee members
Crosland Taylor, Oxfam Country Programme who persuaded the youth to go home.
38 Wireless Technology for Social Change: Trends in Mobile Use by NGOs
Humanitarian
Assistance
57388_UNF_S1_R1:UNFoundation.qxd  5/6/08  9:21 AM  Page 39
tion by linking Nairobi to incidences as they
happened on the ground,” says Barasa
Mang’eni, PeaceNet-Kenya program officer.
“The initiative encouraged local level dia-
logue and mediation to stop violence and fa-
cilitated communication to security forces,
the Kenya Red Cross, and UN Office for
Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs. Civil
society actors were linked to peace processes
at the community level, enabling them to
contribute to nonviolence advocacy.”
Challenges: Diverting Time,
Credit: Tom Baldwin/Oxfam Attention, and Expertise to New
“In the wake of a government ban on live Outreach Efforts
broadcasting of incidences of violence, the While encouraged by the successes of the text
SMS Center became a lifeline for informa- message ‘nerve center’ in preventing violence
A Mobile Advocacy Case Study: The Make Poverty History Campaign
In 2005, Oxfam-GB launched a textmessage-based outreach initiative aspart of its role in the Make Poverty
History Campaign. Make Poverty History,
an alliance of United Kingdom charities,
advocacy groups, and faith-based organi-
zations, set out to mobilize people to sup-
port the Global Call to Action Against
Poverty, the largest anti-poverty move-
cated short code. It is currently using the code to en-
ment in the world, representing more than 150 million
courage people to sign up for various campaigns or
people in over 100 countries.
set up a regular gift. For example, individuals can text
Advertisements were placed on several campaign in to receive updates on actions they can take and
websites and in newspapers urging people to text the events related to issues like climate change. “The
keyword “BAND” to receive a white wristband, the beauty of texting is its immediacy,” says Pierino Cioffi,
global campaign’s symbol. Users would then receive marketing and communications officer for Oxfam-GB.
an automatic response requesting their name, street “We believe nearly all text messages get read.” Emails
number, and postal code. Oxfam-GB benefited from sent by charities and commercial players in the United
the fact that they were able to use a shared short Kingdom, on the other hand, have an open rate of
code, provided by a mobile marketing solutions roughly 20 percent, he adds.
provider, to facilitate the campaign. Approximately
A valuable byproduct of the campaign was the collec-
50,000 people ordered their white band through the
tion of names and phone numbers to be used in future
Oxfam text messaging campaign. Users were charged
outreach efforts. Oxfam-GB continues to send text
£1.50 per text conversation to cover packaging and
message alerts about public demonstrations and
postage costs, taxes, and network and aggregator fees.
fundraising appeals to several thousand of its white
While Oxfam-GB relied on a shared short code for its band responders who agreed to receive future an-
White Band appeal, it has since purchased a dedi- nouncements.
Wireless Technology for Social Change: Trends in Mobile Use by NGOs 39
Humanitarian
Assistance
57388_UNF_S1_R1:UNFoundation.qxd  5/6/08  9:21 AM  Page 40
C A S E S T U D Y 7 C O N T I N U E D
in Kenya, and its text message outreach efforts
related to the Make Poverty History
campaign, Oxfam-GB emphasizes that its use
of mobile applications remains in the
preliminary stages, and has yet to develop
into a cohesive strategy for employing mobile
applications in the future. Part of the challenge
lies in developing the necessary expertise.
Oxfam-GB relied heavily on a mobile
marketing firm for support and advice during
the White Band campaign.
Oxfam-GB’s experience in using text
messaging as an awareness-building tool
mirrors that of many NGOs. Because text
message-based advocacy is relatively new,
expertise is limited and few successful case
studies exist. Set-up costs are also a big factor.
Particularly in the area of fundraising via text
messages, those NGOs that have claimed
successes tend to be well known and represent
causes that elicit an emotional response that
drives people to take immediate action.
Mobile Fundraising: Supporting Disaster Victims in the United States
In the aftermath of Hurricane Katrina in the United service are charged the customary fee for transmitting aStates, the Wireless Foundation partnered with the text message. Individuals are able to make up to fourAmerican Red Cross to develop a mechanism $5.00 donations on their account at a time.
through which citizens could make fast, easy donations.
Text 2HELP™ is made available in the event of a large-
In just two months, more than US $100,000 was raised for
scale national disaster. In February 2007, for example, the
the American Red Cross to assist hurricane victims.
program was activated to raise support for tornado
Realizing this arrangement could help victims of future
victims in central Florida. It was activated again during
natural disasters, the partnering organizations established
the wildfires in California in late 2007. Funds were used to
a permanent text messaging response system.
provide food, shelter, counseling, and other assistance.
The result was Text 2HELP™. Through the program,
The American Red Cross is part of the International Red
customers of participating wireless carriers simply text
Cross and Red Crescent Movement, a global network of
message “2HELP” (24357), with the keyword “GIVE,” to
over 180 national societies that work to restore hope and
make a $5.00 donation to the American Red Cross
dignity to the world’s most vulnerable people.
Disaster Relief Fund to support relief efforts in the event
Established in 1881, the American Red Cross provides fast
of a large-scale disaster.
relief to victims of natural disasters and helps people to
The amount appears on the customer’s bill, or is debited prevent, prepare for, and respond to emergency
from prepaid account balances, with 100 percent of the situations.
donation amount going to relief efforts. Those using the
40 Wireless Technology for Social Change: Trends in Mobile Use by NGOs
Humanitarian
Assistance
57388_UNF_S1_R1:UNFoundation.qxd  5/6/08  9:21 AM  Page 41
C A S E S T U D Y 7 C O N T I N U E D
Next Steps: Increasing Text messaging has emerged as an increasingly
Organizational Reach through powerful tool in humanitarian crises—helping to
disseminate life-saving information, providing
Mobile Phones critical news updates, andmobilizing people to
Looking ahead, Cioffi is encouraged by the make donations to help those in need. As the
potential for people to be able to make use of mobile phones keeps expanding, the
donations via the Internet on mobile phones power and reach of these strategies will only
that are wireless access protocol (WAP)- continue to grow.
enabled. “From our point of view,” says Cioffi,
“we see mobiles as a way that people can
spontaneously donate. If they see a billboard or
a poster, they can do so right away.”
Text Messages Received by the ‘Nerve Center’ About Election-
Related Violence in January 2008
“We have been alerted that it is not safe tonight, in Bamburi, Utange, home area. We a
asking 4 security here please.”
“Over 400 people with no food or water holed in Huruma PCEA church in Eldoret for
three days. Help needed immediately.”
“I humbly ask for security in the church we are in, Elgon view, Eldoret as we have heard
of the killings in the Kiambaa church.”
“People evicted from their homes in Saboti, are starving no basic needs, food, blankets,
etc. People are camping at Kiungani, Kiminini and Sikhendu Kitale.”
“People fleeing to Kitale from Gitwamba (very serious) torching of houses, lootings, etc.
RED CROSS if possible, should assist.”
“The situation in Narok south is bad. People have camped at the catholic church in Mulot
and there are fears that they may be attacked tonight.”
Wireless Technology for Social Change: Trends in Mobile Use by NGOs 41
Humanitarian
Assistance
57388_UNF_S1_R1:UNFoundation.qxd  5/6/08  9:21 AM  Page 42
42 Wireless Technology for Social Change: Trends in Mobile Use by NGOs
57388_UNF_S1_R1:UNFoundation.qxd  5/6/08  9:21 AM  Page 43
III. Environmental Conservation
Using Mobile Phones to Protect the Environment
round the world, mobile phones are being used in the
Aenvironmental arena—from efforts to promote wildlifeconservation to environmental advocacy to educating andinfluencing consumers about the environmental impact of
their purchasing decisions.
In the area of conservation, mobile phones are used to track wildlife and
provide an early warning system designed to mitigate human/animal
conflict. Central to these efforts is improving communication among
Credit: FishMS
local stakeholders, non-governmental organizations (NGOs), and
Text Messaging to Save Trees government agencies. For conservation efforts to be successful, all
(Argentina) . . . . . . . . . . . . . .45 stakeholders, including local residents of sensitive areas, must be
engaged and their interests taken into consideration. As the case study
A Survey of Text Message on wildlife conservation in Kenya shows, opening up communication
‘Infolines’ (South Africa, United channels using mobile phones can play a valuable role in community-
Kingdom) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .48 based conservation efforts.
Mobile technology is also being used to monitor wildlife. One pilot
Environmental Monitoring with
project initiated by Save the Elephants in Kenya employed Global
Mobile Phones (Ghana) . . .52
Positioning System/Groupe Spéciale Mobile collars to track elephant
movements. Unlike the more expensive satellite/very high frequency
Protecting Wildlife and Human
tracking systems, mobile communication inexpensively pinpoints the
Wellbeing (Kenya) . . . . . . . .55
elephant’s location and text messages the coordinates back to the
researchers. These efforts are in the beginning stages but show great
potential for making animal tracking easier and more precise.
The case study on Greenpeace Argentina’s efforts to protect forests and
pass environmental legislation demonstrates the use of mobile phones in
environmental advocacy. Text messages, because they are immediate
and direct, offer an effective way to alert constituents about important
news and move them to action. If the action is a phone call to a decision
maker (e.g., a legislator), mobile communication is especially useful.
There is growing evidence that mobile phones can move people to
action more effectively than other media. A number of campaigns
reported to us a response rate of 20 to 45 percent for text appeals, which
is considerably higher than that recorded for email alerts.
This data is supported by research from the commercial market that
shows that text messaging works to influence decision-making and
purchasing behavior. Existing research studies reflect that mobile
communication can influence how people feel about a product or
brand, and affect their behavior. One study concludes: “The reported
Wireless Technology for Social Change: Trends in Mobile Use by NGOs 43
Environment
57388_UNF_S1_R1:UNFoundation.qxd  5/6/08  9:21 AM  Page 44
increased likelihood to purchase is the most important finding of
this research; on average this was 35%, but it was as high as 71%
for one [text message] campaign.”17
Given these findings, we sought to investigate some of the text
message services that disseminate data on products and companies
with the goal of getting consumers to buy or use environmentally
sustainable products. While text messaging information lines are
proliferating, we have not seen direct evidence that they influence
consumer behavior other than by inference based on data from the
commercial sector.
Lastly, we looked into using mobile phones as environmental
sensing devices, an emerging area that is attracting both
commercial and academic interest. Several pilot projects illustrate
what may be possible in the future when it comes to applications
such as monitoring air quality. Such applications are in the
experimental stage and remain relatively expensive for widespread
public use.
17Rettie, Ruth and Ursula Grandcolas. “Text Message Advertising: Dramatic Effect on
Purchase Intentions.” Unpublished paper. Accessed 1 March 2008 at
www.kingston.ac.uk/~ku03468/docs/.
44 Wireless Technology for Social Change: Trends in Mobile Use by NGOs
Environment
57388_UNF_S1_R1:UNFoundation.qxd  5/6/08  9:21 AM  Page 45
C A S E S T U D Y 8
Text Messaging to Save Trees (Argentina)
Issue: Protecting Argentina’s
Forests
very hour, trees covering an area
Ethe size of forty soccer fields arecleared from the old growth forestsof Argentina, home to indigenous
tribes and numerous endangered species.
According to Greenpeace, 300,000 hectares
(3,000 square kilometers or 1,150 square
miles) of native forest are cleared in Argentina
each year. To confront this rapid deforestation,
Greenpeace Argentina used the web, mobile
phones, and publicity on television and in
newspapers to gather 1.5 million signatures for
a petition supporting La Ley de Bosques, or the Greenpeace used their mobile phone network
Forest Law. in several ways. The organization collected
about 3,000 signatures for the petition via text
Response: Mobilizing the messaging. Greenpeace also sent out text
Public for Environmental messages asking people to call specificlegislators to lobby for the law. Text messages
Protection were sent out to specific target audiences, so
The Forest Law, Argentina’s first federal forest that people would be directed to their
protection act, was passed in 2007. It includes legislator. Finally, Greenpeace used the mobile
a one-year moratorium on clearing native network to send urgent alerts about other
forests, giving the forest service time to actions or news.
develop appropriate forest management
regulations. The law, funded in part by an Using text messaging for advocacy requires an
export tax on genetically engineered soy, also active list of mobile subscribers who have
establishes public hearings and environmental agreed to receive communications from a
impact studies. campaign. Hernan Pablo Nadal, Greenpeace
Greenpeace was able to effectively advocate for Argentina’s online organizer, describes how
the Ley de Bosques by building a large database Greenpeace expanded its mobile list: “Two
of supporters. Through a form on the years ago, we had 10,000 mobile numbers. By
organization’s website, individuals were asked October 2007 with a lot of outreach, we had
to sign a petition supporting the Forest Law, and 45,000 numbers. With the campaign for the
submit both email addresses andmobile phone Forest Law, we gave signers of the petition the
numbers. About 300,000 phone numbers were option of giving us their mobile number. As a
collected from this web form, and an additional result, we now have 350,000 mobile activists
50,000 were collected via other means, such as and 1.5 million people on our list—and a law
email or through volunteers stationed on busy on the books that protects Argentinean
streets. This 350,000-numbermobile phone list forests.”
is one of the larger active mobile phone lists The Forest Law campaign was not the first
used in advocacy today. By the end of the time that Greenpeace Argentina successfully
campaign, over 1.5 million people had signed used mobile phones for a campaign. In 2005,
the petition supporting the Forest Law. Greenpeace lobbied for a “Zero Waste” law in
Wireless Technology for Social Change: Trends in Mobile Use by NGOs 45
Environment
57388_UNF_S1_R1:UNFoundation.qxd  5/6/08  9:21 AM  Page 46
C A S E S T U D Y 8 C O N T I N U E D
Buenos Aires that mandated that the Challenges: Managing and
government reduce urban waste sent to Maintaining a Growing List
landfills by 50 percent by 2012, and by 100
percent by 2020. The city produces between With relatively scant resources, Greenpeace
4,000 and 5,000 tons of waste each day. Using Argentina has long shown that it can still
text messages, Greenpeace encouraged achieve impact. The organization used an in-
supporters to call their legislators and urge house technical team to write the software
them to pass the bill during critical hearings, handling bulk text messaging, keeping costs
and prior to city council votes. Greenpeace low. Beyond those programming costs,
also used text message alerts to coordinate Greenpeace Argentina spent about 1,000
lobbying meetings and demonstrations. As a euros18 per month on text messaging
result of this comprehensive approach, the transmission charges, at about 5 euro cents
Zero Waste Law was successfully passed. per message. As Nadal notes, “Negotiating the
costs with the telecom carriers is imperative
Outcome: A Rapidly now that we have such a large mobile list of
350,000 numbers.”
Deployable Cadre of Activists
With so large a list of mobile constituents, list
Greenpeace Argentina has established itself as segmentation—or the process of targeting
one of the premier advocacy organizations in specific constituents based on some
the country and region. Alongside the direct- characteristic—becomes important. Yet this
action flair for which Greenpeace is famous, its would require merging mobile contact
grassroots organizing, online advocacy, use of information with a sophisticated database of
social media, and innovative use of mobile constituent information. Because the mobile
technology has enabled it to win remarkable constituent system that Greenpeace Argentina
legislative victories in Argentina. is using is homegrown, integrating it with their
Organizers are clear about what makes member and supporter database has
mobile messaging effective in an advocacy presented challenges.
context: the ability to mobilize large numbers Response metrics for text messages are
of people wherever they are at a given notoriously hard to determine, so it is not
moment. As demonstrated by its legislative clear how many people read a message or
victories, Greenpeace Argentina has been forward it to a friend. Greenpeace Argentina
particularly effective at deploying this tactic reports anecdotal evidence that about 15 to 25
during strategic times, such as in the lead-up percent of mobile activists report back to the
to legislative deliberations. Greenpeace organization that they participated in a
Argentina has also used text messaging to particular action. This is a high response rate
mobilize supporters to attend mass rallies. for a direct marketing effort, and can be
Says Nadal, “We mobilized our database of explained in part by the strong commitment
móvil activistas even from inside the Congress of the organization’s supporters.
building several times. City politicians from But as Nadal notes, “Mobile marketing for
Buenos Aires are used to being pushed by NGOs [non-governmental organizations] is
Greenpeace, but this was a national campaign hard and is just starting. There needs to be a
and representatives in Congress are not used greater depth of discussion with the carriers
to our pressure. Our constituents made some and vendors in many countries about what
300 calls an hour to legislators. That definitely
made an impression.” 18Greenpeace Argentina uses the euro as its
benchmark currency because the organization’s
headquarters are based in Europe.
46 Wireless Technology for Social Change: Trends in Mobile Use by NGOs
Environment
57388_UNF_S1_R1:UNFoundation.qxd  5/6/08  9:21 AM  Page 47
nonprofits need.” In Argentina, as in most
other countries, text message marketing is
almost entirely focused on commercial uses
and often associated with selling content. Live Earth’s Mobile
Greenpeace is now exploring hiring a mobile Campaign
vendor that is capable of handling the volume
of supporters on its mobile list, and is also ive Earth, a global music event on
negotiating directly with Argentinean mobile 7 July 2007, raised awareness
carriers for more favorable text messaging Labout climate change through live
rates. concerts in Hamburg, Johannesburg,
London, New York, Rio de Janeiro,
Next Steps: Replicating the Shanghai, Sydney, and Tokyo. The 24-
Greenpeace Argentina Model hour concert was broadcast on television
and streamed online to an audience of an
The work of Greenpeace Argentina in using estimated two billion people. Live Earth
mobile phones in advocacy campaigns is also featured a coordinated four-country
closely watched—not just by intermediaries text message advocacy campaign
such as MobileActive.org that are monitoring encouraging individuals to pledge to
the industry—but also by other advocacy take action to solve the climate crisis.
organizations, and, of course, by Greenpeace
affiliates in other countries. Several other The campaign generated thousands of
Greenpeace offices will test the Argentinean text message sign-ups and action pledges
method of mobile activism in 2008. via text message (exact figures were not
Greenpeace Argentina, meanwhile, has set its released by the campaign). Audience
own goals, including expanding its mobile members in the four countries were able
infrastructure with a more robust platform; to see their mobile pledges projected on
integrating its mobile activist list and giant screens at event venues and on
constituent database for better list television.
segmentation; increasing sending speeds and
delivery rates; and generating better reports
However, with little time to prepare and
on actions taken.
no engagement prior to the events, the
Greenpeace Argentina’s text messaging text messaging component was well
campaign clearly struck a chord with the integrated with the broadcast of the show
general population. The tremendous in only three countries—a critical success
participation rates have not only empowered factor for a live-event mobile campaign.
the organization with a core group of mobile
activists, but have also demonstrated the Catherine Geanuracos, senior strategist
power of mobile phones to serve as an for interactive media for the campaign,
effective tool to influence political change.  notes: “It’s amazing how few people are
thinking about how to use a mobile as
community organizing tool. One of our
successes was a group on Twitter (a
mobile and online social network) that
had thousands receiving updates on the
event and a daily climate change tip,
fostering a sense of community via
mobile.”
Wireless Technology for Social Change: Trends in Mobile Use by NGOs 47
Environment
57388_UNF_S1_R1:UNFoundation.qxd  5/6/08  9:21 AM  Page 48
C A S E S T U D Y 9
A Survey of Text Message
‘Infolines’ (South Africa, United Kingdom)
number of environmental According to SASSI coordinator Jaco
Agroups are embracing text Barendse, mobile phones are “the ideal waymessaging as a means of to combine technology and informationengaging key stakeholders, with the growing awareness that the ocean’s
whether in their capacity as community resources aren’t infinite.” And because the
members or consumers. This case study data are interactive (unlike the wallet cards),
surveys several of these initiatives. FishMS also provides data about trends in
consumer behavior. “We can see that the
FishMS: Alerting Consumers market is responsive, especially to press
stories,” he says. “If something was in the
to Endangered Stocks news about a certain type of fish, you can
Imagine this scenario: A woman in also see the spikes [in text-based queries
Johannesburg, South Africa, stands at the about that fish] the next day.”
fish counter in her local supermarket and Between December 2006 and February of
texts the name of a fish to a phone number. 2008, the service received 30,000 queries
Within seconds, she receives back from 7,254 individual users, indicating that
information via a short text message some users send repeated queries.
informing her whether the fish is legally and
sustainably harvested, and advising her
whether “to tuck in, think twice or avoid Other Text Message ‘Infolines’:
completely.” Climate Change, Healthy Toys,
The shopper is using FishMS, a text airTEXT
messaging-based service that provides FishMS was the first of a growing number
point-of-sale information about the impact of environmental text message information
of fishing on fish stocks, enabling services that use mobile technology to
consumers to make informed choices about provide just-in-time information about the
the seafood they purchase. environmental impact of products and
The Southern African Sustainable Seafood companies. Text message ‘infolines’ work
Initiative (SASSI), a project of the World when consumers text the name of a product
Wildlife Fund South Africa, condensed or company to a short code (a five-digit
available research on local fish stocks into phone number) to receive back information,
wallet-sized cards that organized species providing ‘just-in time’ information at the
into three color-coded categories: green for point of purchase. For the information lines
species that are not over-fished; orange for
fish that are legal to sell, but where stocks
are jeopardized; and red, indicating fish that
are illegal to buy and sell in South Africa.
With the collaboration of local information
technology company iVeri Payment
Technology and their programmers, SASSI
moved this system to a mobile platform,
enabling a wider group of consumers to
access more regularly updated data.
Credit: FishMS
48 Wireless Technology for Social Change: Trends in Mobile Use by NGOs
Environment
57388_UNF_S1_R1:UNFoundation.qxd  5/6/08  9:21 AM  Page 49
described here there are no costs to the mobile phone or the web, and contains
consumer other than standard text message more than 1,200 products.
charges.
airTEXT
Climate Counts Similarly, numerous air quality information
One of these text message-based information services are available that push information
services is the U.S.-based Climate Counts, about dangerous levels of pollution to
which enables consumers to check companies’ citizens. In the United Kingdom (UK),
environmental sustainability ratings, and airTEXT is a free air quality information
compare them with their competitors. The service for people in London. Users who
information, in the form of a scorecard that is sign up for airTEXT receive voice or text
delivered via text message back to the user, message alerts when air pollution is forecast
reflects the self-reported efforts of companies to be higher than normal. The service is
to address climate change. aimed at people who suffer from heart and
breathing problems, whose health or quality
Climate Counts has compiled an index
of life may be affected by air pollution.
based on whether companies have
Similar services exist for specific locations
measured their climate ‘footprint,’ reduced
in the United States.
their impact on global warming, supported
(or suggested intent to block) progressive
climate legislation, and publicly disclosed
their climate actions. It is funded by U.S. Air Quality ‘Infoline’
yogurt company Stoneyfield and powered
by Mobile Commons, a mobile vendor that Services
provides the messaging technology.
airTEXT (www.airtext.info/): Whenusers register with the UK-basedairTEXT service, they specify for
which borough of London they’d like to
receive information. When the pollution
level for that borough reaches a moder-
ate or high level of air pollution, they
receive an alert from the system.
Arizona Department of Environmental
Quality (ADEQ) text messaging alerts
(www.azdeq.gov/sms.html): The ADEQ
offers a text service that sends users
alerts when there is a high pollution
alert in the Greater Phoenix Area.
Credit: HealthyToys
Ergo (www.urban-atmospheres.net/Ex-
Healthy Toys
periments/Ergo/index.html): Ergo is a
Healthy Toys is a project of two U.S.
U.S.-based system that provides real-
environmental organizations and Moms
time air quality readings based on data
Rising, an advocacy organization. It enables
from the Environmental Protection
parents or guardians to verify whether
Agency. Users can receive daily mes-
children’s toys or products are safe to use.
sages with air quality information for a
Users can send via text message the name
specific zip code or can receive a one-
of a toy or product and receive back
time reading for an area of their choice.
information about the chemical content of
toys. The database can be queried via
Wireless Technology for Social Change: Trends in Mobile Use by NGOs 49
Environment
57388_UNF_S1_R1:UNFoundation.qxd  5/6/08  9:21 AM  Page 50
C A S E S T U D Y 9 C O N T I N U E D
Unlike the text information services that
function as a ‘pull’ service, where a
consumer actively queries a database, most
air quality information services function on
a ‘push’ basis, that is, a consumer signs up
and then automatically receives updates
about dangerous air quality levels and
pollution information via text message.
How ‘Infoline’ Services Work
All text infoline services rely on a platform
to handle the query and delivery of
messages, and a database that contains
information pertaining to users’ queries.
When information is needed, a user actively
queries a database via a text message
keyword sent to a short code or a regular reliable, well indexed, and ready for queries
phone number. The user receives a text are not simple tasks. In fact, all of the
message response with the results from that services profiled here already had data
database, customized to fit the 160-character compiled and available through other
limitation of most text messaging services. channels, such as in print or on the Web.
Alternatively, a user can sign up (such as on And all groups already had made
the Web) to receive text message alerts to considerable investments in collecting,
his or her mobile phone. verifying, and organizing this information.
For these groups, all that was needed was to
Most text messaging infoline services also make the data they already had available
follow a similar model in how they convey via a mobile channel.
results. Similar to the three-tiered system of
FishMS’ response—used to indicate whether Another cost to consider is the fee to the
a consumer should buy, consider, or abstain vendor that provides the delivery platform.
from buying a particular fish—Climate Vendor costs range widely, depending on
Counts uses a three-point scorecard to country and complexity of delivery, but
indicate whether a company is ‘stuck,’ average a few thousand U.S. dollars per
‘starting,’ or ‘striding’ in its efforts to lower month. Lastly, groups need to consider the
its carbon footprint. Research shows that it transmission costs for communicating via
is helpful to associate an indexed result with text messaging with their constituents.
a recommended action. An air quality Obviously, the more popular an infoline
numeric value, for example, is not as useful service, the more text messages need to be
as a message that states “unhealthful air, sent to consumers and the higher the
stay inside.” message delivery charges will be. In-kind
donations from telecommunications
providers can drive these costs down, but
Challenges: Managing an this strategy can also raise questions about
Effective ‘Infoline’ Service project sustainability.
For groups with limited funds, text There are also significant social marketing
messaging infoline services can be challenges that limit user uptake. Non-
expensive to set up and maintain. Gathering governmental organizations offering these
and compiling comprehensive data that are infoline services must deploy an intensive
50 Wireless Technology for Social Change: Trends in Mobile Use by NGOs
Environment
57388_UNF_S1_R1:UNFoundation.qxd  5/6/08  9:21 AM  Page 51
and effective marketing campaign to get mobGAS: Tracking
consumers to remember to use the service, Greenhouse Gas Emissions
and which number to text to. Another
limiting factor is that aggregating reliable Amobile application calledand accurate data on hundreds or mobGAS can be used to trackthousands of products, services, companies, individual emissions of
or other data points is very expensive and greenhouse gases. The application,
time-consuming.19 Climate Count’s developed by scientists at the European
database, for example, so far includes Commission’s Joint Research Centre,
climate change information on only 56 tracks the emissions of carbon dioxide,
companies. nitrous oxide, and methane based on
information on daily activities entered
Next Steps: The Future of by the user. Users can enter the
information on a website or their
‘Infolines’ Advocacy mobile phone and then compare their
At the present time there is still little evidence emissions with national and
to demonstrate that these services are actually international averages.
changing consumer behavior. Overall usage, The application is particularly useful on
measured by total number of subscribers to mobile phones because users can enter
infoline services described in this case study, data about activities that cause
is small, ranging only in the thousands. Yet emissions—like watching television,
the potential of this tool is clear. driving, or cooking—at any time. By
Just-in-time information sharing via text helping users make connections
message infolines, as in the case of FishMS, between their daily activities and
can transform consumers into activists whose greenhouse gas emissions, mobGAS
purchasing power can exert pressure on hopes to encourage individuals to make
retailers or fishing companies. Groups lifestyle changes. The application also
considering using an infoline service should offers tips on how to modify activities to
ask themselves not only what information decrease emissions.
they want to relay to the consumer, but also According to Tiago de Sousa Pedrosa, a
what further steps they recommend the project coordinator, mobGAS was
consumer take. In the final analysis, the real downloaded more than 3,000 times
value of these services will be judged by their between December 2007 and February
ability to use information to change behavior, 2008. By raising awareness of individual
resulting in concrete and measurable actions emissions, mobGAS hopes that the
by consumers and other constituents.  application can spark higher-level
change.
19A team at the University of California at Berkeley
(United States), is compiling a massive database of the
health and environmental impact of thousands of
products and services. This meta-database would be
accessible to environmental advocacy and consumer
organizations worldwide, decreasing the relative costs
to individual organizations of having to aggregate this
information themselves.
Wireless Technology for Social Change: Trends in Mobile Use by NGOs 51
Environment
57388_UNF_S1_R1:UNFoundation.qxd  5/6/08  9:21 AM  Page 52
C A S E S T U D Y 1 0
Environmental Monitoring with Mobile Phones
(Ghana)
Issue: A Need for More points transmitted by individual mobile phones,
Comprehensive Data on mobile sensing can paint a complex and
dynamic portrait of the environment in which
Urban Air Quality users are based. There are efforts underway to
“ e need to shatter our use sensing-equippedmobile phones to monitorWunderstanding of mobile a range of environmental factors, from ambientphones as merely phones and air pollution to transportation and traffic
celebrate them in their new patterns to noise pollution.
role as measurement instruments,” says Eric The World Health Organization estimates
Paulos of Intel Research in California (United that more than 4.6 million people die
States), a pioneer in the so-called urban- annually from the direct impact of air
sensing movement. His desire is to add pollution—more than from car accidents
‘super-sensing’ tools that transform ordinary every year.20 According to Paulos, in many
mobile devices into tools that can collect and cases our knowledge of ambient air quality is
help track environmental trends. limited to “a small handful of government-
More than 3.5 billion people carry mobile installed environmental monitoring stations
phones today, and researchers are beginning that use extrapolation to derive a single air
to notice mobile phones’ ability to become quality measurement for an entire
the ‘ultimate data collection machines.’ metropolitan region.” He argues that this
Mobile sensing—also known as ‘participatory “sparse sensing strategy does little to capture
sensing,’ ‘urban sensing,’ or ‘participatory the very dynamic variability of air quality that
urbanism,’—enables data collection from large depends on automobile traffic patterns,
numbers of people in ways that previously human activity, and output of industries.”
were not possible. By affixing a sensory To demonstrate the potential of citizen-
device to a mobile phone, mobile sensing generated environmental data, Paulos and his
provides the opportunity to track multiple team ran a small-scale project in Accra,
data points and collect dynamic information Ghana, where they equipped a small group
about environmental trends from ambient air of taxi drivers with devices that gauged the
quality to urban traffic patterns. amount of pollution in the air. Accra has
Or as Debora Estrin, a prominent researcher generally poor air quality, generated by
in this field from the University of California tailpipe emissions, dust, and the common
at Los Angeles, put it: “We can now manifest practice of domestic cooking outside using
the previously unobservable in science.” wood, charcoal, and other fuel sources that
can spread harmful pollutants across the city.
To help monitor air quality, Accra has a
Response: Empowering stationary monitoring system installed by the
Citizens with Data Collection U.S. Environmental Protection Agency. This
Devices tool makes it possible to compare data from a
stationary point with the mobile air
Mobile sensing represents an important shift
in mobile device usage from communication 20World Health Organization (WHO).WHO Air
tool to a ‘networked mobile measurement Quality Guidelines for Particulate Matter, Ozone, Nitrogen
Dioxide and Sulfur Dioxide: Global Update 2005 (Geneva:
instrument.’ By aggregating thousands of data WHO, 2006).
52 Wireless Technology for Social Change: Trends in Mobile Use by NGOs
Environment
57388_UNF_S1_R1:UNFoundation.qxd  5/6/08  9:21 AM  Page 53
monitoring of the Intel Berkeley research
project.
Outcome: A Clearer Picture of
Polluted Air
In the Accra study, seven taxi drivers were
provided with a dash-mounted global
positioning system (GPS) device and a tube to
hang from their passenger window. The tube
contained a carbon monoxide sensor.
Similarly, three students were each given a
mobile clip sensor pack containing a GPS
device, and a carbon monoxide sensor. The
taxi drivers and students were asked to carry
their sensors as much as possible during their
normal everyday activities. Throughout the A heat-map visualization of carbon monoxide readings across Accra,
Ghana rendered atop Google Earth. Colors represent individual
day, the sensing system automatically logged intensity reading of carbon monoxide during a single 24-hour period
sensor data. At the end of each day, the pilot across the city. Red circles are locations where actual readings were
participants dropped off their sensor packs at taken.
a central location where the data was then
resulted from the participatory data collection
extracted and the sensors recharged.
process. Paulos tells the story of how Accra
Paulos notes: “This study allowed us to col- taxi drivers, who met at the end of the day at
lect actual air quality sensor data by citizens the mobile sensing device charging station,
across an urban landscape. It also influ- began to share their data, look at roads and
enced our design for an integrated air qual- areas that were particularly polluted, and
ity sensor with a mobile phone.” Variations trade tips on how to avoid certain routes. He
across smaller neighborhoods and different notes that this incident illustrates the potential
parts of the city are clearly visible. of ‘participatory sensing’ to both yield rich
and interactive environmental data critical for
The data gathered provided a previously public health and pollution reduction, and
unmeasured map of carbon monoxide and motivate people to become active
air quality across the city. Colors in this participants in their environment.
image represent the individual taxi drivers’
readings while the size of the patch indi- Another area for further exploration is the
cates the intensity reading of carbon ability of mobile sensing to contribute to
monoxide during a single day. Variations public health by linking health with
across smaller neighborhoods and different environmental factors that have not been
parts of the city are clearly visible. available before. For example, even though
we know that there is a link between asthma
symptoms and air pollution, previously it was
Challenge: Harnessing the not possible to directly correlate an
Potential of the Mobile Sensing individual’s symptoms with their exposure to
Platform air pollutants. Measuring people’s lung
performance while measuring ambient air
Intel’s mobile sensing pilot in Accra pollution exposure could shed new light on
produced some interesting unanticipated the links between air pollution and asthma,
outcomes, including a ‘human aspect’ that perhaps resulting in better treatments.
Wireless Technology for Social Change: Trends in Mobile Use by NGOs 53
Environment
57388_UNF_S1_R1:UNFoundation.qxd  5/6/08  9:21 AM  Page 54
- - - - C A S E S T U D Y 1 0 C O N T I N U E D
Research is also underway to assess whether Mobile Sensing Device or
it is possible to detect avian influenza viruses Mobile Sensing Phone?
and other diseases through mobile sensing
devices. Similar linkages may be possible in hile the early Accra project
other issue areas, such as in emergency used mobile sensing devices
detection and warnings, which are important Wbut not mobile phones, Paulos
to public safety, and emergency and disaster and his team are now working on
response applications. integrating a sensor into a mobile phone
as a prototype of a more integrated
Next Steps: Securing a Future platform for collecting data in California.
for Mobile Sensing Meanwhile, in Cambridge, England,
mobile phones are being used by bicycle
Users in mobile participatory data collection
couriers to gather pollution information.
projects are divulging private information
Each phone is connected via Bluetooth to
about their location and context. Security and
a sensor attached to a courier’s bike. The
privacy are therefore of concern. There is
sensor monitors air pollution while the
considerable discussion about how to ensure
phone transmits the data back to a
privacy while still transmitting useful
research lab at the University of
information. This could include giving users
Cambridge. Custom software reports
the choice of only selectively sharing direct
levels of air pollutants and a GPS
observations, and designing protocols that
transmits the exact location of the courier.
ensure a person’s anonymity.
Commercial players such as Nokia are
Mobile sensing is an emerging area where
beginning to enter this field as well.
costs and benefits to date are hard to
Nokia recently featured a concept phone
determine because it is still so early in the
with a wearable eco-sensor that detects
research cycle. However, it is also a rapidly
carbon monoxide, particulate matter, and
developing area of inquiry that will likely see
ground-level ozone. Data would be
considerable activity and interest, not just on
transmitted to the phone where a user
the part of university or commercial
could choose to share the environmental
researchers but also on the part of citizen
data, aiding in research and increasing
groups and environmental advocates.
environmental awareness.
Using mobile phones as sensing devices and
aggregating “crowdsourced” data into
sophisticated and previously impossible
environmental maps is an emerging field
with only preliminary trials. Yet while still in
early phases of concept development, the
potential of mobile sensing to contribute to
environmental conservation and related fields
is clear. Ongoing research in this area will
continue to provide fascinating data for
researchers, citizen groups, and
environmental advocates. 
54 Wireless Technology for Social Change: Trends in Mobile Use by NGOs
Environment
57388_UNF_S1_R1:UNFoundation.qxd  5/6/08  9:21 AM  Page 55
C A S E S T U D Y 1 1
Protecting Wildlife and Human Wellbeing (Kenya)
Issue: Humans and Animals Response: Push-to-Talk
Competing for Land Technology Program Launched
he Laikipia District of north in Laikipia
Tcentral Kenya is a popular tourist Believing that mobile technology coulddestination, teeming with wildlife. offer a solution, the GSMA DevelopmentCovering 9,700 square Fund, together with Safaricom Ltd.,
kilometers, Laikipia comprises a patchwork Wireless Zeta Telecomunicaciones (Wireless
of small farms, large ranches, privately ZT), Nokia, the Nokia Siemens Networks,
owned conservancies, and government and local conservation organizations,
land. Some 5,000 elephants, the second- collaborated in launching a pilot project in
largest elephant population in the country, Laikipia. Using GSM technology, the
inhabit the region. As farmers, ranchers, project sought to facilitate cost-effective
and these animals struggle to co-exist, the communication among local communities,
region has gained a reputation for being government wildlife service personnel, and
one of the worst areas for human–elephant private landowners through an early
conflict, with more than 3,000 incidents warning system that would allow farmers to
occurring annually. preserve their crops while protecting
Human-wildlife conflict is a growing wildlife.
phenomenon around the world as human The pilot utilized ‘Push to Talk on Cellular
populations place mounting pressure on (Phones)’ (PoC) technology, which
ecosystems, wildlife habitat is reduced, and combines the functionality of a walkie-talkie
animal migration routes are made or two-way radio with a mobile phone. PoC
inaccessible. As a result, humans are enables communication between two
susceptible to injury, and even death, and individuals, or a group of people, and is
animals suffer attacks by humans. In particularly useful in connecting a user
Laikipia alone, an average of five people group intermittently over a period of time
and ten elephants are killed each year as a (e.g., a working day).
result of human–elephant conflict.21
“The tension [in Laikipia] stems from
communities having their crops damaged
by elephants,” explains Dr. Max Graham,
Associate at the Department of Geography,
University of Cambridge (United
Kingdom), who has been studying and
working in Laikipia for almost a decade.
“There’s a perception that the elephants
belong to the government and ranchers,
both of whom benefit from tourism.
Meanwhile, communities suffer. Farmers
get killed. Elephants get speared or
poisoned.”
21Conservation Kenya: Final Report (GSM Association &
Safaricom Ltd., 2007).
Credit: GSMA
Wireless Technology for Social Change: Trends in Mobile Use by NGOs 55
Environment
57388_UNF_S1_R1:UNFoundation.qxd  5/6/08  9:21 AM  Page 56
C A S E S T U D Y 1 1 C O N T I N U E D
A benefit of PoC is that it can be used commercially as an incentive to keep it
alongside voice and data services on a running in the field,” explains Christina
single handset. Users can make standard Greenwood, Project Manager, GSMA
phone calls and send text messages, while Development Fund, who worked on
also accessing two-way communication and developing the pilot. “At the same time, we
group talk through the press of a button. were looking to offer the service at a
Because network resources are used only
for the duration of each talk ‘spurt,’ PoC
technology requires less airtime, demands
less energy, and is less costly than a
conventional phone call.
Equally important was finding a solution
that would be sustainable and scalable over
the long term. To address this need, the
pilot was designed to test the commercial
viability of the proposed solution. If the
product could be successfully sold—at a
discounted rate to nonprofits—it would stand
a far better chance of making it in the
marketplace.
“The goal was to develop a sustainable
project that an operator could use
Credit: GSMA
Planning the Push-to-Talk Pilot
The PoC pilot was carried out at three sites in Laikipia from 3 November to 3 December
2007. Prior to launching the service, community members filled out a simple
questionnaire aimed at identifying existing warning systems and challenges. The
questionnaire pointed to a prevailing atmosphere of mistrust, with ranch owners and
government rangers perceived as not doing their part to alert local community members
of elephant dangers.
Key indicators for measuring the project’s effectiveness were also identified. These
included reducing the number of elephant crop-raiding incidents, improving crop
harvests, reducing the number of human injuries and deaths, and reducing injuries to
elephants.
Fifty people, including community-elected scouts, government rangers, and private
landowners, received training in how to use the handsets, how to make group and one-to-
one PoC calls, and the protocol for communication between users (e.g., “copy that” to
mean you have received a message, or “over” to indicate that a user has finished
speaking).
Once trained, individuals patrolling the fences surrounding farms and ranches were
charged with calling other group members to warn of elephants coming in close
proximity to private landholdings. The trial was carried out across three different
human–elephant conflict sites. Over the course of the 30-day trial, 84 incidents were
reported.
56 Wireless Technology for Social Change: Trends in Mobile Use by NGOs
Environment
57388_UNF_S1_R1:UNFoundation.qxd  5/6/08  9:21 AM  Page 57
subsidized rate, or with lower tariffs, to In Mwenji, for example, the trial focused on
nonprofits to make sure they could access it.” the monitoring of an electrified fence.
When elephants tried to break the fence,
Outcome: Successfully man- security guards hired to patrol the
perimeters of private ranches were able to
aged human–elephant conflict report the incidents to community members
Based on data collected and exit surveys, and conservancy rangers who could take
the pilot was found to reduce the number action. “It forced the guys who were meant
and severity of human–elephant conflicts in to act to act,” says Graham. “Because there
the four areas covered. Said Dickson were ten people listening it created
Kamau, Chairman of the Rumuruti Forest collective pressure and improved
Association: “Push-to-talk has helped us a accountability.”
lot. Before they [the game rangers] would In Rumuriti, the trial had an unexpected
never come to scare the elephants back [to effect. Local scouts assigned by a
the forest] but with this they could not make community association to patrol the area
excuses because there were many of us used the phones to alert KWS officials of
listening.” the location of elephants to reduce incidents
of human–elephant conflict. With the
phones, they were also able to report illegal
logging and animal theft in the area. The
trial “helped with policing elephants and
the forest,” says Graham. “It was the first
time we were able to empower the
community to play such a role.”
In Ex-erok, the phones were used by
security patrols to alert KWS officials to
both elephant incursions and animal stock
theft. Graham cites three occasions when
Credit: GSMA farm animals such as goats were recovered
as a result of easy and fast communication.
One hundred percent of PoC users engaged
in the trial found the service to be helpful in
managing human–elephant conflict, with 72 Challenges and Lessons
percent of users reporting that PoC helped Learned
provide an early warning system to reduce
crop raiding, and 41 percent claiming that The primary challenge this project faced
PoC was most useful in improving was securing the right partners to address
communication among all stakeholders. the diverse needs of the stakeholder groups.
Preparations for the program required
A significant result of the pilot was reduced coordination among a broad range of
tension and improved trust among farmers stakeholders—from telecommunications and
and community members, the Kenyan technology groups to local nature
Wildlife Service (KWS), private conservancies. Only a multi-sector
landowners, and local law enforcement partnership could adequately cover all
officials. The PoC trial enhanced aspects of project work, from assessing the
communication among these stakeholders needs of Laikipia communities to the
and, in particular, helped community project’s commercial feasibility.
members recognize that conservationists
were there to help them.
Wireless Technology for Social Change: Trends in Mobile Use by NGOs 57
Environment
57388_UNF_S1_R1:UNFoundation.qxd  5/6/08  9:21 AM  Page 58
C A S E S T U D Y 1 1 C O N T I N U E D
The project would only work if local
communities adopted the technology
solution. Here, non-governmental
organization partners such as the University
of Cambridge Laikipia Elephant Project
and Laikipia Wildlife Forum were essential.
These groups developed trusted
relationships with the community that
engendered good will for the project. They
also could identify community users, and
assist with the training, monitoring, and
assessment.
While the results were positive overall, an
important lesson emerging from the trial
was the cost and time needed to keep the
phones charged. Because they were used
more often than traditional handsets, the
phones needed to be charged more Credit: GSMA
frequently. This required that users visit message-based ‘early warning’ system has
charging stations several kilometers away, been established in South Africa, enabling
and incur additional costs. To address this Kruger National Park authorities to contact
issue, project partners are exploring the local communities outside of the park’s
inclusion of a solar or wind-up charger in borders in an effort to reduce human–
future applications of PoC technology for elephant conflict there.
conservation uses.
Mobile technology is also being employed
Another lesson involved the time needed to to raise awareness of endangered species.
train local citizens to use the product. Given In 2003 and 2004, Fauna Flora
that most trial participants were accustomed International (FFI), a UK-based global
to more rudimentary phones, each needed conservation charity, launched Wildlive!
to learn to operate the more sophisticated with support from Vodafone UK and The
handsets donated for the trial. Vodafone Group Foundation. Through the
initiative, subscribers were able to track the
Next Steps: Further Exploring progress of FFI conservation projects,
PoC Strategies for Environ- access conservation news, and enter
competitions. Customers paid a fee to
mental Conservation download animal screensavers and animal
A decision is still pending with respect to sounds as ringtones, with 100 percent of
future expansion and/or replication of the profits going to FFI. The initiative was
PoC trial in Kenya. What is clear is that timed to coincide with FFIs 50th
mobile technology holds considerable anniversary celebration and in 2004 raised
potential for strengthening wildlife £100,000 to support FFI’s mission. Similar
conservation efforts in such areas as mobile fundraising efforts aimed at
monitoring animals, reducing conflict protecting endangered animals have been
among humans and wildlife, enhancing launched in other parts of the world. 
stakeholder communication, and increasing
public awareness of endangered species. In
much the same vein as the PoC trial, a text
58 Wireless Technology for Social Change: Trends in Mobile Use by NGOs
Environment
Recommended Readings
Banks, Ken, and Richard Burge. Mobile Phones: An Appropriate Tool for Conservation and Devel-
opment? (Cambridge, UK: Fauna and Flora International, 2004).
Chetley, Andrew (ed.). Improving health, connecting people: The role of ICTs in the health
sector of developing countries (Washington, DC: InfoDev, 2006).
Coyle, Diane/Enlightenment Economics. The Role of Mobiles in Disasters and Emergencies
(London, UK:GSM Association, 2005).
Crawford, Diane. Role of IT in emergency response and crisis management. Communica-
tions of the Association of Computer Machinery 50 (2007).
Currion, Paul. Information and Technology Requirements Initiative: Assessment Report - Global
Response (Emergency Capacity Building Project, 2006).
Kaplan, Warren. Can the ubiquitous power of mobile phones be used to improve health out-
comes in developing countries? Globalization and Health 2 (2006): 9. www.globalizationand-
health.com/content/2/1/9.
Löffler, Jobst, and Markus Klann (eds.). Mobile Response: First International Workshop on
Mobile Information Technology for Emergency Response. Mobile Response 2007, Sankt
Augustin, Germany, 22-23 February 2007, Revised Selected Papers. Lecture Notes in Computer
Science 4458 (Springer, 2008).
MTC Group. Mobility: A Nation Under Siege. An insight into mobile communications during the
2006 Lebanon conflict (MTC Group, 2007).
Shackleton, Sally Jean. Rapid Assessment of Cell Phones for Development (UNICEF, 2007).
Wattegama, Chanuka. ICT for Disaster Management (Bangkok, Thailand: United Nations
Development Programme – Asia-Pacific Development Information Programme and
Asian and Pacific Training Centre for Information and Communication Technology for
Development, 2007).
Wireless Technology for Social Change: Trends in Mobile Use by NGOs 59
www.unfoundation.org/vodafone
