OppiaMobile is being 
tested to deliver in mobile 
phones the complete 
national health extension 
worker (HEW) training 
materials, approved by the 
Ministry of Health.
OPPIAMOBILE
IMPLEMENTATION DATE:  August 2013, when started the project and content adaptation, to October 2016 
Mobile delivery of health extension worker training materials
Health workers in Ethiopia are generally under-trained. The standard training pedagogy can often 
involve an excessive use of text-heavy, didactic lecturing that lacks the interactive, participatory 
pedagogy needed for effective adult learning. Moreover, there is little follow up on how health workers 
use their newly acquired knowledge and skills.1 Research on the introduction of ICT in education 
has shown that it is effective only when developers understand the strengths and weaknesses of the 
technology and integrate the technology into appropriate pedagogical practices.2,3,4 To supplement and 
enhance learning within existing training programs, the UK-based company Digital Campus’ technical 
and medical team have developed OppiaMobile, an open source mobile learning platform for delivering 
learning content, video, and quizzes, specifically designed for-low resource environments with poor 
Internet connectivity, such as rural Ethiopia.
About OppiaMobile
The OppiaMobile platform consists of three main Supports video/multimedia: Multimedia content can be components: a Moodle plugin for authoring, the included in courses; this would usually be copied directly 
OppiaMobile server, and phone client application. All of onto the phone SD card to reduce the course package 
the code is open source (GPLv3 license), enabling anyone to size, especially when the user has poor or slow Internet 
set up their own server/client application and customize as connectivity. 
necessary. Key features of OppiaMobile include: Embedded quizzes and self-assessment tests: Quizzes can 
Offline access: OppiaMobile assumes that the user has be included in the courses, supporting a range of question 
limited Internet connectivity. All features of the learning types, including multichoice, multiselect, matching, numeri-
content and activities are stored directly on the phone’s cal, and short answers. Feedback can also be provided.
SD card and therefore function even when offline. When a Tracking and monitoring: An analytics dashboard on the 
connection is available, the stored tracking information, quiz server allows teachers, trainers, and supervisors to monitor and 
scores, details of videos watched are sent back to the server.
76  n  SERVICE DELIVERY 
Warren Zelman
track students’ progress in almost real time. This includes quiz The training course, comprised of 13 modules, taught over 
scores (including responses given for individual questions) and 8-12 months, covers a variety of health topics, including ante-
the length of time users spent on a particular activity. natal and postnatal care, labor and delivery, nutrition, family 
Multilingual content supported: Activities can be provided planning, immunization, adolescent and youth reproductive 
in multiple languages, allowing users to switch to their health, hygiene and environmental health, communicable 
preferred language. and noncommunicable diseases, and health management. All 
the materials are released under a Creative Commons license. 
Collaborative editing: Moodle is used for course content It provides a source of information that can be used for both 
development, taking advantage of the existing authoring preservice and inservice training and to reinforce critical health 
environment and allowing existing courses in Moodle format messages so that health workers feel confident and empowered 
to be easily converted to run on OppiaMobile. to deliver effective services in their communities.
Automatic notification of content updates: When a course 
is updated, users are automatically notified that an update is 
available and they will not lose the progress indicators. Lessons Learned 
Customized app and server: All the server and app n Use well-established open source software with a 
components are open source. large community of developers and Institutional users.
Gamification: Learners can earn points and badges for n Student engagement increases when working with 
completing activities, quiz scores, and watching videos. official accredited training courses.
n Always use open source software and content 
Evaluation and Results licenses (GPLv3 license).
n This mHealth intervention requires initial and recurring 
OppiaMobile is being tested to deliver in mobile phones the costs, although OppiaMobile is designed to reduce 
complete national health extension worker (HEW) training information and communication technology support to a 
materials, approved by the Ministry of Health, to upgrade its minimum of mHealth solutions; it cannot be viewed as 
more than 34,000 HEWs. The main outputs of the first phase a quick fix to an underlying complex educational system 
of this project (18 months) in Ethiopia has been the technical problem. Learning on mobile devices will never replace 
development of the mobile learning platform and the adap- the classroom; however, if leveraged properly, mobile 
tation of the complete HEW training materials: 13 modules technology can complement and add value to education.
covering all aspects of primary healthcare, with additional vid-
eo content from Medical Aid Films and Global Health Media 
Project, and hundreds of new self assessment quiz questions. Conclusion 
This is still an ongoing study, having enrolled a first cohort 
of 200 HEWs in one training center (Mekelle) in northern The OppiaMobile platform allows mobile-ready offline 
Ethiopia from September 2014 to July 2015, with a courses to be developed without the need for technical 
15-month follow-up of HEWs when they have returned to development. The platform is already in use in Ethiopia, 
their health posts. Nigeria, Ghana, and India, and collaboration with the 
mPowering partnership (http://mpoweringhealth.org/)  
will ensure the platform and adapted content be used  
more widely. n
Geographic Coverage:  Ethiopia, Nigeria, India 
Implementation Partners: Jhpiego 
Donors: UKAid; mPowering Frontline Health Workers 
Contact Information: Roman Blanco/ Alex Little Digital Campus 
Ltd.  http://www.digital-campus.org
mHEALTH COMPENDIUM  VOLUME 5  n  77
