 
JAMII SMART | KimMNCHip – REFERRALS, 
mSAVINGS  AND eVOUCHERS  
Community Module Clinical Module Clinical Module mHealth solution that significantly improves MCH by 
modeling on existing, sustainable mobile technologies 
with inputs from end users. Through the Kenyan 
integrated mobile Maternal and Newborn Health 
information platform (KimMNCHip), this national-scale 
mHealth initiative offers pregnant women more choices, 
 
control and medical care for them and their babies 
during and after their pregnancy. 
The solution is scheduled to go live in April 2013. Phase-
ins will run in the Eastern region, Kilifi, Kwale and 
Kakamega Counties of Kenya, with work already 
commencing in Kilifi County, and will eventually lead to 
a nationwide scale-up. 
ABOUT JAMII SMART | KimMNCHip 
Jamii Smart has three critical phases: 
BRIEF OVERVIEW 
According to the World Bank, Kenya is among the 1. Strengthening Kenya’s community health referral 
highest 15% of countries for maternal mortality and the system through the use of a dynamic mobile phone 
highest 20% for infant mortality, As part of its and web portal solution linking the demand and 
commitment to the UN Global Strategy for Women’s supply of MNCH services 
and Children’s Health, Kenya will recruit and deploy an 
2. Promoting mSavings and eVouchers for pregnant 
additional 20,000 primary care health workers; establish 
mothers, leveraging the existing M-Pesa which also 
and operationalize 210 primary health facility centers of 
offers micro-insurance services 
excellence to provide maternal and child health services 
to an additional 1.5 million women and 1.5 million 3. Scaling up nationally and regionally in Africa 
children; and will expand community health care and 
decentralize resources. With integrated mobile financial KimMNCHip aims to reach 8,000 public health facilities, 
services, mHealth solutions are especially able to six million mothers and their children, 88,000 
enhance health outcomes at scale, including essential community health workers, and health policy and 
health services in the context of Reproductive Health decision makers. 
and Maternal Neonatal Child Health (MNCH). 
Currently, most mHealth approaches are project based 
and often at the pilot level. There is urgent need to EVALUATION AND RESULTS 
move from this stage to national mHealth solutions that To date, the program has automated Kenya’s mother 
are cost-effective and evidence-based in terms of health and child health booklet which the Government of 
benefits. Brokering multi-stakeholder partnerships Kenya (GoK), Ministry of Health uses to track critical 
towards creating convergence and new business models, areas of MCH. It contains critical content for mothers, 
such as Jamii Smart, is needed to bring solutions to information on the four delay-related barriers to 
scale. obtaining emergency obstetric services, and methods for 
community health workers (CHWs) to proactively 
Jamii Smart (meaning “smart families”) aims to convert support mothers and the role of fathers and men in 
the huge success of M-Pesa - Safaricom ’s mobile wallet caring for pregnant women and their children below the 
solution adopted throughout Kenya into an effective age of 24 months. To avert printing costs that lead to 
42 mHEALTH COMPENDIUM   │    VOLUME 2 
  
  
  
 
 FINANCE 
shortages and data management and data quality broker in the process was critical for cross-sector 
challenges, KimMNCHip has automated the booklet for partnership success, providing a central 
use at the clinic level on both mobile and web portals, as coordination point and ensuring equity, conflict 
well as to the GoK’s DHIS database which is accessible resolution, and a central point of communication. 
by both CHWs and health facility staff. A prototype This role will eventually transition to the forming 
shared with the GoK has met their approval and the full governing body of the solution. 
application was launched in May 2013. 
Additionally, the program has created mSavings for CONCLUSION 
mothers through Linda Jamii (meaning “family 
Jamii Smart and KimMNCHip demonstrated its ability to 
protection”), an innovative and affordable healthcare 
create business models that are affordable for all with 
insurance option targeting 35 million uninsured Kenyans. 
the ability to scale up to a national level.   
For Kshs.12,000 ($150) per family a year, families will be 
able to register on a mobile phone and access  
comprehensive medical coverage. Coverage also GEOGRAPHIC COVERAGE 
includes support for the birth planning process which Kenya 
requires expectant mothers to establish a financial plan. 
It will also explore the option of communities building a 
IMPLEMENTATION PARTNERS 
mobile wallet community fund to support women. 
Government of Kenya, Safaricom, World Vision, CARE 
Future plans include adopting and automating the Kenya, African Medical Research Foundation (AMREF) 
currently manual reproductive health Output Based Aid Kenya, and Aga Khan University/Foundation  
voucher program initiated by the GoK. 
FUNDER 
Both financial and nonfinancial resources have been provided 
LESSONS LEARNED solely by Implementing Partners  
 Government engagement is critical in mHealth 
initiatives and in linking technology to programmatic CONTACT INFORMATION 
interventions 
World Vision International  
 A funder is not necessary to begin implementing  Stefan Germann, Director for Partnerships, 
creative ideas. Starting with zero funds enabled the Innovation and Accountability, Global Health 
initiative to align to the needs on the ground as & Wash Team  
opposed to donor objectives. The implementation Email: Stefan_Germann@wvi.org  
team is also able to contribute to financial and  Miriam Mbembe, Associate Director 
nonfinancial resources. Integrated Child Development, World Vision 
Kenya  
 The initiative completed many firsts, including Email: Miriam_mbembe@wvi.org  
prioritizing approaching the government to Jamii Smart  
determine national e/mHealth priorities and aligning  Khalila A. A. Salim, Jamii Smart Partnership 
technology to the priorities, rather than designing a Broker  
platform and later engaging users Email: khalilasalim@yahoo.com  
 The role of an independent consultant/partnership 
Information was excerpted from:  
Germann, Stefan, et. al. “The Illness of ‘Pilotitis’ In mHealth – Early Lessons from the KimMNCHip Partnerships in Kenya.” Global Health Forum. n.d. Web. 
Admin. “Linda Jamii, Affordable Healthcare Insurance.” Tuvuti. 28 November 2012. Press Release. 
  MHEALTH COMPENDIUM  |  VOLUME 2 43 
