 	Log	in		|		Register 

Journal
Journal	of	Health	Communication	
International	Perspectives
Volume	17,	2012	-	Issue	sup1
3,559 115 0
Views 	CrossRef	citations	to	date 	Altmetric
ARTICLES
A	Development	and	Evaluation	Process	for	mHealth	Interventions:	Examples
From	New	Zealand
Robyn	Whittaker	 , Sally	Merry, Enid	Dorey	& Ralph	Maddison
Pages	11-21	|	Published	online:	01	May	2012
 Download	citation
 https://doi.org/10.1080/10810730.2011.649103
Select	Language ​ ▼
Translator	disclaimer
	Full	Article 
	Figures	&	data 
 References 
	Citations 
Metrics 
 	Reprints	&	Permissions 
Get	access
			
Abstract
The	authors	established	a	process	for	the	development	and	testing	of	mobile	phone-based	health	interventions	that
has	been	implemented	in	several	mHealth	interventions	developed	in	New	Zealand.	This	process	involves	a	series	of
steps:	conceptualization,	formative	research	to	inform	the	development,	pretesting	content,	pilot	study,	pragmatic
randomized	controlled	trial,	and	further	qualitative	research	to	inform	improvement	or	implementation.	Several
themes	underlie	the	entire	process,	including	the	integrity	of	the	underlying	behavior	change	theory,	allowing	for
improvements	on	the	basis	of	participant	feedback,	and	a	focus	on	implementation	from	the	start.	The	strengths	of
this	process	are	the	involvement	of	the	target	audience	in	the	development	stages	and	the	use	of	rigorous	research
methods	to	determine	effectiveness.	The	limitations	include	the	time	required	and	potentially	a	less	formalized	and
randomized	approach	than	some	other	processes.	This	article	aims	to	describe	the	steps	and	themes	in	the	mHealth
development	process,	using	the	examples	of	a	mobile	phone	video	messaging	smoking	cessation	intervention	and	a
mobile	phone	multimedia	messaging	depression	prevention	intervention,	to	stimulate	discussion	on	these	and	other
pWoe utseen cotoiakiel	sm to eimtphrooved ysou.r website experience. To learn about our use of cookies and how you can manage your cookie settings, please see our Cookie Policy. Accept
By closing this message, you are consenting to our use of cookies.
Additional	information
Acknowledgments
The	authors	acknowledge	the	investigators	on	the	three	mHealth	intervention	trials:	A.	Rodgers,	R.	B.	Lin,	M.	Wills,
M.	Jones,	T.	Corbett,	D.	Bramley,	T.	Riddell,	C.	Bullen,	H.	McRobbie,	S.	Denny,	V.	Parag,	P.	Salmon,	H.	McDowell,	I.
Doherty,	K.	Stasiak,	M.	Shepherd,	and	S.	Ameratunga.	The	authors	also	acknowledge	the	many	others	who	were
involved	in	the	development	process,	including	R.	Smith,	P.	Wilson,	M.	Ellis	Pegler,	J.	van	Rooyen,	J.	Strydom,	S.	Chua,
P.	Chao,	The	Hyperfactory,	V.	Gaitan,	G.	Burt,	D.	Taylor,	and	the	staff	at	the	Clinical	Trials	Research	Unit.	The	authors
acknowledge	the	funders	of	these	projects:	the	Health	Research	Council	of	New	Zealand,	Oakley	Mental	Health
Foundation,	University	of	Auckland,	Digital	Strategy	Community	Partnership	Fund,	Vodafone	New	Zealand	Ltd,
Auckland	UniServices	Ltd,	National	Heart	Foundation,	Cancer	Society	of	New	Zealand,	Alcatel.
People	also	read
Article
Mobile	Health	Evaluation	Methods:	The	Text4baby	Case	Study 
W.	Douglas	Evans	et	al.
Journal	of	Health	Communication
Volume	17,	2012	-	Issue	sup1
Published	online:	1	May	2012
Article
Advancing	the	Science	of	mHealth 
Wendy	Nilsen	et	al.
Journal	of	Health	Communication
Volume	17,	2012	-	Issue	sup1
Published	online:	1	May	2012
Article
Using	thematic	analysis	in	psychology 
Virginia	Braun	et	al.
Qualitative	Research	in	Psychology
Volume	3,	2006	-	Issue	2
Published	online:	21	Jul	2008
Article
Effectiveness	of	mHealth	Behavior	Change	Communication	Interventions	in	Developing
Countries:	A	Systematic	Review	of	the	Literature 
Tilly	A.	Gurman	et	al.
Journal	of	Health	Communication
Volume	17,	2012	-	Issue	sup1
Published	online:	1	May	2012
Review	article
Assessing	the	impact	of	mHealth	interventions	in	low-	and	middle-income	countries	–	what	has
been	shown	to	work? 
Charles	S.	Hall	et	al.
Global	Health	Action
Volume	7,	2014	-	Issue	1
Published	online:	27	Oct	2014 
Article
mHealth	Adoption	in	Low-Resource	Environments:	A	Review	of	the	Use	of	Mobile	Healthcare
in	Developing	Countries 
Arul	Chib	et	al.
Journal	of	Health	Communication
Volume	20,	2015	-	Issue	1
Published	online:	10	Feb	2015
	
Information	for
Authors
Editors
Librarians
Societies
Open	access
Overview
Open	journals
Open	Select
Cogent	OA
Help	and	info
Help	&	contact
Newsroom
Commercial	services
Keep	up	to	date
Register	to	receive	personalised	research	and	resources	by	email
 Sign	me	up
  
 
Copyright	©	2019	Informa	UK	Limited
Privacy	policy	&	cookies
Terms	&	conditions
Accessibility
Registered	in	England	&	Wales	No.	3099067
5	Howick	Place	|	London	|	SW1P	1WG
 Taylor	&	Francis	Online	may	be	unavailable	for	up	to	2	hours	on	 Friday	21	June,	22:00	-	02:00	GMT ,	due	to	scheduled	maintenance
work.
