By using specialized and 
regionally based logistics 
professionals to carry out 
logistics tasks such as 
quantification, data 
collection, and distribution, 
logistics performance 
improves and health 
workers are free to focus 
on what they do best—
health service provision.
INFORMED PUSH MODEL
IMPLEMENTATION DATE:  August 2013 to Present
Scaling logistics management information systems via push models 
for increased family planning access and use 
In Senegal, the absence of a well-functioning family planning product supply chain has been a barrier 
that has contributed to Senegal’s low contraceptive prevalence rate (CPR) (12.3 percent in 2010) and 
high unmet need for family planning among married women (29 percent). Recurrent family planning 
product stock-outs at nearly 80 percent of public service delivery points (SDPs) continue to hinder the 
government’s ability to achieve its goal of more than doubling CPR to 27 percent by 2015. To improve 
the supply chain and ensure the steady availability of contraceptive products, IntraHealth International 
is expanding the approach known as the Informed Push Model (IPM) nationally in Senegal. Successful 
IPM implementation depends on the availability of routine SDP-level product consumption data, but the 
data have historically been unreliable or unavailable in Senegal. IntraHealth is collaborating with Dimagi 
to solve this problem by implementing a customized version of CommTrack as the IPM’s logistics 
management information system (LMIS).  
About IPM
The IPM is a distribution model that adapts principles product designed to strengthen logistics management through used in commercial distribution to the public health the use of mobile technology. With this support from Dimagi, 
sector. The IPM addresses common supply chain obstacles of the IPM project has identified a low-cost and highly scalable 
transportation, quantification, data availability, and financial mHealth solution that makes it possible to substantially reduce 
flows. The model involves dedicated logistics professionals, contraceptive stock-outs and broaden Senegalese women’s 
who deliver contraceptives from the regional level directly to access to a wide range of family planning products. 
SDPs on a monthly basis. IPM’s key features include:
A key component of the IPM project’s success has been 
n Task shifting. By using specialized and regionally based 
the use of an LMIS. CommTrack is an open source turnkey logistics professionals to carry out logistics tasks such as 
62  n  LOGISTICS
Clément Tardif, IntraHealth International
quantification, data collection, and distribution, logistics Lessons Learned 
performance improves and health workers are free to 
focus on what they do best—health service provision.
n The IPM’s distribution of products directly from the 
n Public-private partnerships. The Senegal IPM uses regional level to SDPs allows district health teams 
private operators, or third party logistics providers, to to maintain their focus on management of SDPs 
store and distribute the family planning products. and service provision rather than being sidetracked by 
n Payment based on consumption. Before the IPM, SDPs physical supply chain operations.
were required to pay for family planning products at the n The IPM’s task-shifting approach leverages the limited 
time of order, which resulted in cash flow problems and supply chain management expertise in Senegal by using 
a broken cost-recovery system. With IPM, payments are a small number of trained professionals to serve a 
based on quantities of product delivered and consumed. large number of SDPs.
n Aligning incentives. The IPM aligns the incentives of n Shifting nonmedical tasks from health providers to 
all parties involved in making sure that family planning logistics professionals frees up providers’ time, 
products reach SDPs and clients. improving service quality and ensuring that women have 
n Open LMIS. The logistics professionals enter logistics access to a steady supply of family planning products. 
data into CommTrack on tablets at the moment of n The IPM strengthens public-private partnerships 
delivery, and CommTrack automatically calculates while incentivizing all parties to ensure that facilities and 
delivery quantities based on previous consumption. communities have access to family planning products.
Evaluation and Results Conclusion 
Most public health medicine distribution systems involve IntraHealth International, in collaboration with Senegal’s 
high numbers of users at each level of the system, with each Ministry of Health and Social Action, is expanding access 
level required to contribute data to the LMIS. In Senegal, to—and use of—family planning by reducing contraceptive 
the IPM has decentralized logistics management tasks to stock-outs. Implementation of the IPM reinvests proceeds 
the regional level. The result has been a dramatic reduction from clients’ contraceptive purchases back into the public 
in the number of individuals interacting with the LMIS, contraceptive supply system to ensure the constant flow and 
from approximately 1,450 providers, supervisors, or facility availability of products. By making a wide range of family 
workers to 14 logistics operators (one per region). planning commodities available, the IPM enables women 
Among its many benefits, the small number of LMIS users to more freely choose the methods they want at affordable 
required by the IPM results in simplified training needs prices. The model also generates data on the consumption 
and less costly hosting and maintenance. Also key to the of family planning commodities, which can then be used to 
IPM approach is the flexibility and mobility of the LMIS. inform and improve how health services are provided. 
Previously, data were entered via paper registers. Now, users With the IPM, the logistics management burden is shifted 
are able to access and enter data directly into the system via from health workers to dedicated logistics professionals, 
portable tablets at each facility or depot anywhere in Senegal. leaving more time for providers to focus on service delivery 
By customizing open source software, the IPM project has quality. Over time, therefore, improvements in the family 
kept development costs to a minimum. Implementing Com- planning commodity supply chain have the potential to 
mTrack as the IPM’s LMIS costs less than $140 per SDP and boost health worker retention, improve client satisfaction, 
has proved to be a low-cost, highly scalable mHealth solution. and increase women’s access to contraceptives. The IPM also 
As the IPM and its customized LMIS undergo national strengthens the quality of service delivery, reinforces provider 
scale-up, health workers who are using the model have roles and responsibilities, and improves workflow at the 
described it as a “revolution.” Now, providers are able to facility level. n
more accurately plan for and receive contraceptive products. 
Moreover, clients are benefiting from the regular resupply of Geographic Coverage: National scale in all 14 regions of Senegal 
family planning products and—because providers’ time is to cover 1,400 service delivery points 
freed up—increased provider-client interactions. Clients are Implementation Partners: IntraHealth International; Dimagi 
expressing greater satisfaction with family planning services, Donors: Bill & Melinda Gates Foundation, Merck for Mothers
and providers report greater job satisfaction, improved work 
flow, and better-quality reporting of data. Contact Information: Carol Cissé, Program Manager; IntraHealth International, cecisse@intrahealth.org
mHEALTH COMPENDIUM  VOLUME 5  n  63
