Promoting maternal and child health in South 
Africa through mobile health messaging and 
feedback on services received
Photo by MomConnect
48  n  MOM CONNECT 
MOM CONNECT
The MomConnect technical solution has a number of linked 
elements that enable pregnant women to receive information 
about their own health and also that of their infants. Women can 
both ask for more information and supply feedback to improve 
the quality of health care.
In 2014, the South African Minister of Health, Dr. Aaron Motsoaledi, launched an initiative (MomConnect) to use 
mHealth technology as part of a suite of interventions, such as increased access to contraception and improved 
coverage of breastfeeding, to address the relatively high maternal mortality ratio (MMR) and child mortality rate in 
South Africa. The Medical Research Council estimated the MMR in the country at 155 deaths per 100,000 live births 
in 2013. South Africa’s Sustainable Development Goal (SDG) for MMR is 70 deaths or less per 100,000 live births by 
2030. Similarly, the child mortality rate of 39 deaths per 1,000 births in 2014 has an SDG target of 25 or less deaths 
per 1,000 by 2030.
MHealth projects in a number of countries have successfully used mobile phone technologies to enhance interventions 
which have been shown to improve maternal and child health (MCH) outcomes. In South Africa, virtually every 
pregnant woman has either her own mobile phone or access to one. Because of this virtual universal access, 
MomConnect was introduced.
MomConnect aims to improve both the demand for MCH services, through providing pregnant women with 
information via messages, and the supply side through impacting on quality via user feedback.  
About MomConnect
The MomConnect technical solution has a number of with other national information systems under develop-linked elements that enable pregnant women to receive ment. The women can choose one of the 11 official languag-
information about their own health and also that of their in- es for messages.
fants. They also enable interaction with a helpdesk. Women There are 150 messages in the full suite. These include hard 
can ask for more information and give feedback to provide health messages that address hypertension, HIV, and immu-
impetus for the supply side of the health system to improve nization for the baby. There are also softer messages about 
the quality of care. the growth of the baby and importance of bonding.  These 
Women who think they are pregnant subscribe to Mom- messages continue until the infant is one year old.
Connect using a free of charge unstructured supplementary Several components allow women to give feedback to the 
service data (USSD) number on their phones (*134*550#). helpdesk located in the national Department of Health 
This number works on all mobile networks in South Africa. (DOH). These include: frequently asked questions (FAQs); 
They initially receive messages encouraging them to register a five-question service quality rating survey the day after 
their pregnancy at an antenatal clinic. women register their pregnancy; and a compliments and 
Women attending the antenatal clinics are registered into complaints system which the women can use at any time. 
a central database. Based on the estimated gestational age MomConnect sends information via a national health infor-
of the fetus, stage-based messages are sent to the pregnant mation exchange to a central database in the DOH, where it 
woman. Similar messages linked to the age of the infant are can be linked with other information in the DOH.
sent after delivery. Variables linked to the identification of 
the women and the facilities allow MomConnect to link 
mHEALTH COMPENDIUM  SPECIAL EDITION 2016  n  49
Program Design Process
Between 2008 and 2013, a number of small-scale pilot The feedback mechanism has a number of discrete components.
mHealth projects were started in South Africa, many of 
n FAQ service: Pregnant women, who are registered for 
these dealing with maternal health. After reviewing these the service, are able to ask question via SMS. The Mom-
projects, the DOH set up a task team to design a national Connect helpdesk, with a professional nurse in charge, 
mHealth program to register all pregnant women and send responds by giving standard approved answers or directs 
them messages. the women to a clinic for further assistance.
The team was made up of DOH staff as well as people with n Service Rating: The day after registering her pregnancy 
expertise in various aspects of mHealth, including those with on MomConnect, the pregnant woman is sent an SMS 
links to mobile network operators; expertise in the back-end which prompts her to complete a free survey. This survey 
of data systems, databases, and information interoperability; covers friendliness of staff, patient privacy, facility clean-
prior experience of sending mHealth messages; and links to liness, and waiting times. A single follow-up message is 
the international mHealth community. The DOH gave lead- also sent if women do not complete the survey.
ership and ownership to MomConnect, which enjoyed con-
siderable political support as a ministerial flagship project. n Compliments and Complaints: Women are able to send a complaint or compliment via a free SMS. 
While the team developed the technical aspects of Mom- These are logged at the helpdesk. Each of the 52 health 
Connect, the political mandate was to make it a nationally districts in South Africa has a focal person in charge of 
scaled-up project to be implemented throughout South MCH. After sorting the complaints into the relevant 
Africa. In addition, the political mandate was to incorporate health district, based on the clinic where the complaint 
a feedback mechanism so that the voices of pregnant women arose, these are sent to focal persons. They are expected 
could be heard loudly and clearly. to act on these and give feedback to the helpdesk within 
Because the task team was chaired by a senior manager of the 10 days. If no action is taken the complaint is escalated 
DOH, national managers are consulted in all aspects of the to the provincial health management.  
project to ensure that it aligns fully with the overall direction 
of the DOH. For example, a message set was initially devel- Growth in Scale
oped by the task team. Several managers in the DOH then 
reviewed all of the messages to ensure that they were fully There are about 4,000 public sector facilities in South Africa, 
aligned with DOH policies and guidelines. so implementing the MomConnect technical solution on 
a national scale required partnerships and a considerable 
Figure 1.  
Scale-up model for MomConnect 
National Department of Health
Central Coordination Trainin
Provincial & District Health g 
MCH coordinators
M&E PEPFAR
Implementation Partners Partners
C Po ro to v tri
c tio
n
rd inin c
s a
a i
i
a D in
t lio Coo
rd
n
e ini
ng
s Tra
FACILITIES
Hospitals, Clinics, CHWs
50  n  MOM CONNECT 
Reporting
 and TA
ers
Tra
in
of 
i
vit
 Ac
ti
M&E
amount of coordination. The scale-up approach is shown  ing the announcement campaign by the Minister, each of the 
in Figure 1. district support partners funded by the President’s Emergen-
 The DOH provides overall leadership and coordination of cy Plan for AIDS Relief were trained to support the facilities 
MomConnect. A project manager was appointed, reporting to in the districts in which they work. This enabled wide-scale 
the senior manager in the DOH responsible for MCH. The training (2–3 hours) on how MomConnect works and how 
project manager, based in the DOH, coordinates all MomCon- to register pregnant women. 
nect activities and acts as the central point of responsibility. Between August 2014 and February 2015, over 30,000 
MomConnect was rolled out in a high-profile campaign health care workers were trained to register women on Mom-
across South Africa in 2014. This followed a visit by the Connect. Nearly all (95%) of public sector facilities have 
Minister of Health to each of South Africa’s nine provinces registered women on MomConnect. However, the numbers 
where he gave a presentation on MCH in South Africa and of registrations are still not optimal. Operational research has 
the potential impact of MomConnect. identified that lack of connectivity and timeouts as two ma-
jor constraints. Also, in some places the registration processes 
To register, pregnant women go to one of the country’s 4,000 could be streamlined. New methods have been designed to 
health facilities and receive assistance from health care work- overcome these difficulties and retraining of health workers 
ers who have been trained in the registration process. Follow- that take these factors into account has begun. 
Evaluation and Results
As of March 2016, over 34,000 health workers have been Of the respondents to this survey, over:  
trained to register pregnant women in the system. They work 
n 98% (1,962) felt that MomConnect messages had 
in 95% of all government health facilities in the country. helped them.
During the first year and a half of MomConnect they regis-
tered 663,513 women. This represents nearly half of all the n 80% (1,611) had shared the messages with friends or 
pregnant women attending antenatal care. their partners.
More than six times as many compliments (4,924) were n 80% (1,606) reported that the messages helped them to 
received compared to complaints (788) since the launch of remember their clinic visits.
MomConnect in August 2014. The compliments give positive n 75% (1,531) reported that the messages had helped 
feedback on MomConnect generally, as well as on particular them feel more prepared for childbirth and delivery.
facilities or staff. The complaints fall into three main catego-
n 70% (1,414) actually wanted more messages than the 
ries: health systems issues (e.g. lack of drugs and vaccines); 100-plus they already receive during their pregnancy and 
health services issues (e.g. long waiting times), or those related the first year of the child’s life.
to individual health workers (e.g. rude treatment). 
An overall impact assessment interviewing women before and 
In July 2015, a telephone survey was conducted with 10,000 after getting messages has been developed. It has received ethics 
registered users of MomConnect. There was a response rate approval from the University of Stellenbosch and the US Cen-
of approximately 20% (1,980 respondents). ters for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC) and is awaiting 
final approval from the Office of the U.S. Global AIDS Coordi-
nator (OGAC). This will be conducted in May and June 2016.
mHEALTH COMPENDIUM  SPECIAL EDITION 2016  n  51
Service ratings were submitted by 30% of all women regis- 2015. Client satisfaction with facility cleanliness and respect 
tered on MomConnect since March 2015 when a reminder of privacy received a satisfaction rate between 74 and 85% 
to complete the survey was introduced. The MomConnect for cleanliness and 82 and 85% for privacy. The clients were 
clients’ satisfaction with the friendliness and helpfulness of least satisfied with waiting time length which ranged between 
the staff varied between 85 and 88%, and was the highest of 71 and 76% satisfaction.
all the categories rated for the period January to December 
Lessons Learned in Program Implementation and Scaling 
The most important lesson is that to ensure scalability and sus- along the implementation chain. This requires a management 
tainability there has to be political support and leadership. Be- structure that is flexible and able to make quick decisions to 
cause MomConnect is championed by the Minister of Health, respond to the various needs of different stakeholders, in-
it is automatically given endorsement by many stakeholders, cluding donors, mobile network operators, and other interest 
who would otherwise not give their active support, including groups, such as the private sector, which want to be included 
managers in the national and provincial DOHs. Having a in MomConnect activities.
senior manager in the DOH responsible for leading the imple- MomConnect is constantly monitored, and opportunities for 
mentation also gives MomConnect the necessary authority to improvement are continually assessed. These include moni-
attract support from a range of stakeholders. toring of costs, and the project is continuing to assess more 
Another key lesson is the importance of partnerships economical ways of providing certain services. New alterna-
and harnessing capacity and skills from all stakeholders.  tives, such as instant messaging, are being explored to reduce 
MHealth is a burgeoning field and no one party has all the the costs related to messaging. Local innovations are adopted 
knowledge and experience to implement complex projects for national scale-up. For example, one province introduced 
at scale. Much of the success of MomConnect has been the a sticker which is placed on the outside of the woman’s ante-
ability to integrate and harness the skills and contributions natal folder. This bright sticker indicates that the woman is 
from a number of players.  This has been done by having an registered on MomConnect and serves a dual purpose: other 
inclusive task team, as the key advisory body for the project, women are stimulated to get a sticker, and health workers 
meet regularly to discuss implementation and augmentation immediately have another chance to motivate the women 
of MomConnect. The team has brought continuity to imple- without stickers to register on MomConnect.
mentation and ensured that the program has been oriented One of the challenges to MomConnect is paradoxically due 
around its initial plans. Also, MomConnect has had a trans- to its success. A number of stakeholders want to use this 
parent process from the outset and welcomed contributions success for their own areas of interest. For example, a number 
from all stakeholders. of researchers want to add particular messages in which they 
As MomConnect is the first mHealth project of national are interested.  
scale in South Africa it has had to break new ground all 
Future Plans
This work serves as an important foundation that can be built opportunities to both reduce costs and improve the service by 
upon to reach new audiences. Processes are in place to extend expanding the content available for women.  
MomConnect to provide additional support to HIV-positive MomConnect has a component (NurseConnect) aimed at 
mothers and partners and to lengthen the period of messag- supporting and empowering frontline nurses with mHealth 
ing until children reach age five. MomConnect is also being messaging and information so that they are better equipped 
extended to the private sector, as there is anecdotal evidence to give high--quality MCH service. NurseConnect has been 
that many women first book with private general practitioners piloted and will be rolled out nationally by August 2016. 
but then deliver in public health facilities. These efforts will 
strengthen the continuum of care between reproductive, ma- One long-term challenge is the cost of information transfer, 
ternal, newborn, child, and youth health, while facilitating the in particular SMS costs. The mobile network operators are 
development of high-quality, accountable health services. being asked to zero-rate these costs as a public good and at 
the same time alternatives to cheaper forms of data transfer 
In addition, new technology approaches, such as using instant are being explored.  n
messaging services, are being explored. This is expected to give 
52  n  MOM CONNECT 
Snapshot: MomConnect
Geographic South Africa
Coverage
Implementation August 2014 to present
Dates
Implementation National & Provincial Departments of Health
Partners Praekelt Foundation;
Health Information Systems Program/SA
MEASURE Evaluation
mHealthEnabled
Universities of Stellenbosch and Western Cape
Donor(s) USAID
Johnson & Johnson
Elma Philanthropies
Discovery foundation
Contact Dr. Yogan Pillay Deputy Director-General HIV/AIDS, 
Information TB & MCHW, pillay@health.gov.za
References & Additional Resources
SA DoH, Health Enabled, MomConnect: One Year of Operation: A Case Study August 2014 - August 2015 http://www.healthenabled.org/
resources/momconnect_case_study.pdf 
Vumi is an open source mobile messaging platform project, developed and maintained by Praekelt Foundation and individual contrib-
utors. The project is released under the BSD license. http://vumi.org/developers/
References:
1. Ngabo F, Nguimfack J, Nwaigwe F, Mugeni C, Muhoza D, Wilson DR, et al. Designing and Implementing an Innovative SMS-based alert system 
(RapidSMS-MCH) to monitor pregnancy and reduce maternal and child deaths in Rwanda. Pan Afr Med J. 2012; 13:31. 
2. Agarwal S,  LeFevre A, Lee J, L’Engle K,  Mehl G,  Sinha C, Labrique A for the WHO mHealth Technical Evidence Review Group.  Guidelines for 
reporting of health interventions using mobile phones: mobile health (mHealth) evidence reporting and assessment (mERA) checklist: BMJ 2016;352:i1174 
http://dx.doi.org/10.1136/bmj.i1174
3. Mendoza, G, Okoko L, Morgan M, Konopka S. May 2013. mHealth Compendium, Volume Two. Arlington, VA: African Strategies for Health project, 
Management Sciences for Health. http://www.jhsph.edu/departments/international-health/_documents/USAIDmHealthCompendiumVol2FINAL.
pdf (accessed 4 December, 2015)
4. United Nations Foundation. MomConnect: Launching a National Digital Health Program in South Africa. February 2016, Geneva.  Accessed 28 March 
2016. http://www.health.gov.za/index.php/mom-connect-docs
5. Peter J, Barron P, Pillay Y.  Using mobile technology to improve maternal, child, and youth health and treatment of HIV patients. S Afr Med J 
2016;106(1):3-4. DOI:10.7196/SAMJ.2016.v106i1.10209
6. National Department of Health (2011). “Towards Quality Care for Patients” National Core Standards for Health Establishments in South Africa. 
Department of Health. Pretoria, 2011.  http://www.rhap.org.za/wp-content/uploads/2014/05/National-Core-Standards-2011-1.pdf (accessed 6 
December, 2015)
7. National Committee for Confidential Enquiry into Maternal Deaths. Saving Mothers 2011-2013: Sixth report on the Confidential Enquiries into 
Maternal Deathsin South Africa. Short [Internet]. 2014. Available from: http://www.kznhealth.gov.za/mcwh/Maternal/Saving-Mothers-2011-2013-
short-report.pdf
8.  Victora CG, Requejo JH, Barros AJD, Berman P, Bhutta Z, Boerma T, et al. Countdown to 2015: a decade of tracking progress for maternal, 
newborn, and child survival. The Lancet [Internet]. 2015 Oct; Available from: http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/s0140-6736(15)00519-x
9. Dorrington RE, Bradshaw D, Laubscher R, Nannan N. Rapid mortality surveillance report 2014 [Internet]. Cape Town; 2015 Dec. Available from: 
http://www.worldcat.org/isbn/978-1-928340
10.  South African National Department of Health. Strategic Plan 2014/15 to 2018/19. Department of Health; 2014;1–53. Available from: http://
www.health-e.org.za/wp-content/uploads/2014/08/SA-DoH-Strategic-Plan-2014-to-2019.pdf
11. Mechael PN. The Case for mHealth in Developing Countries. Innovations [Internet]. :103–18. Available from: http://www.uio.no/studier/emner/
matnat/ifi/INF5761/v12/undervisningsmateriale/Mechael - 2009 - The case for mHealth in developing countries(1).pdf
12. Free C, Phillips G, Watson L, Galli L, Felix L, Edwards P, et al. The Effectiveness of Mobile-Health Technologies to Improve Health Care Service 
Delivery Processes: A Systematic Review and Meta-Analysis. PLoS Med [Internet]. Public Library of Science; 2013 Jan;10(1):e1001363+. Available 
from: http://dx.doi.org/10.1371/journal.pmed.1001363
13. Noordam AC, Kuepper BM, Stekelenburg J, Milen A. Improvement of maternal health services through the use of mobile phones. Trop 
Med Int Heal [Internet]. Blackwell Publishing Ltd; 2011 May;16(5):622–6. Available from: http://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1111/j.1365-
3156.2011.02747.x/epdf
14. Praekelt G. The Role of mHealth in South Africa. Stanford Soc Innov Rev [Internet]. 2013 Feb; Available from: http://ssir.org/articles/entry/
the_role_of_mhealth_in_south_africa
mHEALTH COMPENDIUM  SPECIAL EDITION 2016  n  53
Photo by MomConnect
