 
COMMUNITY-BASED HEALTH 
PROMOTION FOR SAFE MOTHERHOOD 
USING MHEALTH 
BRIEF OVERVIEW Health (mHealth) project among pregnant women to 
The first five years of a baby’s life are the most examine the effectiveness of using mobile phone-based 
precarious. Challenges from birth, early nutrition, text messages to influence maternal health behaviors. 
infections and other illnesses result in 6.9 million child The project was part of the PAN Asian Collaboration 
deaths every year, most of them from preventable for Evidence-based eHealth Adoption and Application 
causes. Additionally, the majority of maternal deaths (PANACeA) network which supported collaborative 
occur in developing countries. One in 110 women in research to generate evidence on eHealth and its 
Pakistan and one in 300 women in the Philippines die influence on health outcomes. 
from pregnancy related complications. The Community-based eHealth Promotion for Safe 
The Ministry of Health in Pakistan, Molave Development Motherhood using mHealth program was implemented 
Foundation Inc, Philippines, and the department of in 2009 to 2012.  
Health in Roxas, Philippines, with support from the Aga 
Khan University and Canada’s International 
Development Research Centre (IDRC), piloted a mobile ABOUT SAFE MOTHERHOOD 
USING mHEALTH 
The software application FrontlineSMS was customized 
and implemented to allow community-based healthcare 
professionals to efficiently register pregnant women for 
antenatal care and deliveries and the newborns for 
better care in the early part of life. Lady Health 
Workers (LHWs) were provided with JAVA-enabled 
cell phones and trained to use the phones for data 
entry.  
The data was transferred to the server, where it 
integrated with the free and open source community-
based medical record system, OpenMRS. The 
integration was essential in ensuring continuity of care as 
well as generating personalized SMS messages for 
women on health promotion or any investigations and 
appointments needed to better care for themselves and 
their babies. 
EVALUATION AND RESULTS 
The project conducted a community-based intervention 
study, identifying a case and a control site. Data from 
Pakistan suggests in one year, the project registered 347 
mothers, of which 97.7% received awareness messages 
on a regular basis. Message content focused on 
development of the baby, problems during pregnancy, 
and associated risks with delivery. 
Increase in the number of deliveries at the health facilities: 
The study showed that Safe Motherhood using mHealth 
24 mHEALTH COMPENDIUM   │    VOLUME 2 
 
 DATA COLLECTION 
reduced the ratio of delivery- and pregnancy-related CONCLUSION 
misconceptions in the community. It also helped Safe Motherhood using mHealth demonstrated a 
increase the rate of deliveries at health facilities from scalable and replicable low-cost solution, which can be 
35% to 55%. used for improving maternal and child health, and other 
Increase in community contact with health providers: similar applications. The integration of SMS-solution with 
Pregnant women were shown to have more contacts the community-based medical record system shows an 
with the healthcare providers in each trimester, innovation with significant impact on improving health 
compared to the baseline and the control group. The  behavior of individuals and the community.  
average number of contacts with LHWs in the case 
group increased from 4.1 per trimester to 4.7, whereas 
the same number increased from 4.1 to 4.2 in the GEOGRAPHIC COVERAGE 
control group (p=0.07).  Similarly, the average number Pakistan, Philippines  
of contacts with the doctors in the case group increased 
from 1.2 per trimester to 2.2, whereas the same number IMPLEMENTATION PARTNERS 
increased from 1.3 to 1.4 in the control group Ministry of Health in Khyber Pakhtoonkhwa, Pakistan; 
(p<0.001). Molave Development Foundation Inc, Philippines; 
Department of Health in Roxas, Philippines; Aga Khan 
Increase in antenatal visits: The frequency of antenatal 
University (AKU) Karachi, Pakistan  
visits to health facilities was significantly increased in the 
intervention group compared to the control group. The 
percentage of mothers making four or more antenatal FUNDER 
visits went up from 43% to 66%, compared to the Canada’s International Development Research Centre 
control group where antenatal visits went down from (IDRC)  
66% to 57% ( p<0.05). 
CONTACT INFORMATION 
mHealth Alliance  
LESSONS LEARNED  Shariq Khoja, Technical Advisor  
 The project improved health-seeking behaviors Email: skhoja@mhealthalliance.org  
among pregnant women, achieving the objectives of IDRC 
the Safe Motherhood program  Chaitali Sinha, Senior Program Officer  
Email: csinha@idrc.ca  
 Simple, low-cost mobile technologies can improve 
communication between patients and health 
providers 
 The mHealth technology was acceptable for health 
providers and patients 
 Partners are required to bring the cost down for 
patients and the health system 
Information was excerpted from:  
“Publications: Articles: Strengthening Health Systems.” IDRC | CRDI. 2013. Web. 
Khoja, Shariq, “Community-based Promotion for Safe Motherhood: Addressing Community Health Needs using mHealth”.  
AfriHealth, Kenya International Conference Center, Nairobi, Kenya. 30 Nov-1 Dec 2011. Presentation. 
“What We Do: Maternal and Child Health.” USAID. 2013. Web. 
“Maternal Mortality Country Profiles: Pakistan and the Philippines.” WHO. 2011. Web. 
  MHEALTH COMPENDIUM  |  VOLUME 2 25 
