Results demonstrated 
that cStock was feasible 
and acceptable across all 
users, but implementing 
cStock with teams was 
essential for achieving 
superior supply chain 
performance and 
ensuring supply reliability. 
CSTOCK  
Supply Chains for Community Case Management 
IMPLEMENTATION DATE:  2011 to Present
Using mobile technology to increase community access to 
life-saving medicines in Malawi 
In Malawi in 2010, the mortality rate among children under 5 years old was above the global average at 
112 deaths per 1000 live births.1 Despite the introduction of community case management in 2008 to 
improve children’s health in remote areas, poor infrastructure and lack of access to stock information 
resulted in regular stock outs of critical medicines.  A 2010 assessment2 showed that only 23 percent 
of health surveillance assistants (HSAs) had in stock the four key life-saving medicines needed to treat 
all three targeted childhood illnesses (malaria, pneumonia, and diarrhea). At the same time, central land 
district-level managers had little access to community logistics data, limiting their ability to respond to 
local needs.
About cStock
The Improving Supply Chains for Community Case Man- and piloted cStock, a text message (SMS)-based, web acces-agement of Pneumonia and Other Common Diseases sible logistics management information system for commu-
of Childhood (SC4CCM) project was funded by the Bill & nity-level health products. By improving communication on 
Melinda Gates Foundation and implemented by JSI Research stock levels, cStock facilitated decision-making throughout 
and Training Institute Inc. (JSI R&T) from 2009 to 2015.  the supply chain and reduced transport time and costs. cStock 
The project’s goal was to identify, demonstrate, and institu- was introduced as an integral component of two broader 
tionalize supply chain management (SCM) practices that intervention strategies – Enhanced Management (EM) and 
improve the availability and use of essential health products in Efficient Product Transport (EPT). Multilevel District Product 
community-based programs. In Malawi, SC4CCM designed Availability Teams, or DPATs, were an essential component 
72  n  LOGISTICS
cStock
of the EM intervention. Teams used cStock data to monitor Lessons Learned 
performance targets and problem solve around supply-related 
issues. The EPT intervention addressed transport barriers, and 
n Consider sustainability – scalability, institutional-
provided training and tools for bicycle maintenance. ization, and integration – from the design phase.  
HSAs sent a toll-free SMS using their personal mobile phones Engage the MOH and other partners from the outset.
reporting current stock levels and medicines received for up to 
n Understanding the local system, bottlenecks, and 
17 products. cStock automatically calculated resupply quan- resources is critical to design context-specific solutions 
tities and notified staff at health centers, who checked their that improve supply chain performance for HSAs.
stock levels and advised HSAs whether stock was available for 
pick up or alerted health facilities and district managers that n Implement mobile technologies along with other 
there was insufficient stock. District- and central-level manag- system strengthening interventions that connect the 
ers could then monitor supply chain performance, using over tool to the health system.
10 indicators displayed on a web-based dashboard, and take n Iterative learning approach: Once you implement, 
actions to address supply imbalances. put a process in place to monitor how the tool is used, 
cStock is being used for reporting and resupply by over 3000 get feedback from the users, refine the intervention, and 
HSAs providing CCM in Malawi. Master trainers in each improve results.
district facilitated roll-out training sessions in newly added 
districts – even without JSI staff presence. To encourage long- Conclusion 
term shared ownership, the Ministry of Health established 
the Medicines for Community Health Innovations Taskforce 
to guide and coordinate scale-up and sustainability among In 2013, Malawi’s MOH formally endorsed cStock as its 
partners. information system of choice for community programs, along with the establishment of District Product Availability Teams. 
By improving the visibility and use of community logistics 
Evaluation and Results data, cStock has enabled more informed decisions on supply 
levels, reduced stock-out rates, and helped make product 
Both EM and EPT interventions were tested in three allocation more efficient in Malawi. cStock and DPATs 
districts for a 12-month period and then evaluated against have played a critical role in making medicines consistently 
a feasibility, acceptability, and effectiveness framework. The available for effective child health and family planning 
2013 mixed-methods evaluation employed a facility-based services. The challenge now rests in ensuring the sustainability 
survey, focus groups, and routine monitoring data from through local ownership of the system.   n
cStock dashboard reports to compare EM and EPT.
While EM and EPT performed equally well on feasibility 
and acceptability indicators, EM performed significantly bet-
ter on measures of effectiveness. Mean stock reporting rate 
was 94 percent in EM group (n=393) and 79 percent in EPT 
group (n=253). Lead time for drug resupply was, on average, 
12.8 days in EM and 26.4 days in EPT, and mean stock out 
rates for 6 tracer products were significantly lower in EM 
(5-7 percent) compared to EPT group (10-21 percent).3
Results demonstrated that cStock was feasible and acceptable Geographic Coverage: Malawi, national scale 
across all users, but implementing cStock with teams was Implementation Partners: JSI Research & Training Institute Inc.; 
essential for achieving superior supply chain performance Ministry of Health, Malawi; Dimagi; Johns Hopkins University 
and ensuring supply reliability.  Donor: The Bill and Melinda Gates Foundation
Contact Information: Yasmin Chandani, Project Director, JSI 
Research & Training Institute, Inc., ychandani@jsi.com
mHEALTH COMPENDIUM  VOLUME 5  n  73
