SPOTlIGhT
AUGUST 2013
SAVAnA SIGnATURES
TAMALE, GHANA
BACKGROUnD
Savana Signatures is currently implementing a Technology for Maternal 
Health project in four districts (Tamale, Yendi, Savelugu and Kumbungu) and 
six health facilities (Kings Medical Center, Yendi, Savelugu, Tamale Central, 
WWW.SAVSIGN.ORG
Tamale West and Tamale Teaching hospitals) in Ghana. Prior to the proj-
ect, these facilities have been limited to communicating maternal health 
information to expectant mothers at their monthly visits. Additionally, the
effectiveness of using ICT to share information about maternal health in 
these facilities is not widely known and needs to be demonstrated.
USInG ThE MAMA MESSAGES
In adapting the MAMA messages, a three-member review committee of 
health personnel studied and approved the messages for use. These were 
later adapted and translated into the local dialect for recording as audio mes-
sages for the sake of non-literate expectant mothers. During this process, 
the program team gathered information from recipients to suggest that they 
trust information from health experts more than from academia. Additionally, 
the program team applied the fi ndings of a report published by the Grameen 
Foundation on the MOTECH project in Ghana. It suggested that women were 
quite open to receiving information from a male voice for certain topics if it 
meant their husbands might be encouraged to become equally knowledge-
able and supportive by also listening to the message.  It was also found that 
people wanted to hear an older, softer voice, akin to a trusted, experienced 
and sympathetic “auntie”. Voices that sounded too educated were not 
1. Grameen Foundation – MOTECH in widely accepted as they were perceived as being out of touch with the daily
Ghana: Early Lessons Learned, pg 25 struggles of life experienced by the end user.1 
MAMA: MOBILE ALLIANCE FOR MATERNAL ACTION | SPOTLIGHT AUGUST 2013 1
Given that user comfort was found to differ between message delivery by 
a male or female voice according to the particular message, both a mid-
wife and a male health promoter were selected to translate and record the 
messages in Dagbanli.
PROGRAM SPECIFICS
The project design included setting up maternal health corners, organizing 
knowledge sharing sessions, and delivery of SMS/ audio messages. The 
project intends to make easily understandable maternal health information 
readily accessible to expectant mothers, and also to use the efficacy of ICT 
to provide maternal health care communication to expectant mothers in the 
remotest locations. 
Special features of this program include a flashing system, whereby expectant 
mothers can flash a number (i.e. dial and hang up before the call is answered) 
in order to be registered on the system. Midwives can also use phones to 
register expectant mothers onto the system. Each week, each mother will 
automatically receive a few calls in her own language with information on the 
stage of her pregnancy, and suggestions to keep her and her baby healthy. 
This information is also intended to counteract traditional beliefs that often 
prevent women from accessing medical help, even in deadly situations.
Every voice subscriber can opt to also receive the information via SMS so 
that it is stored on her phone. If she needs to hear the message again, she 
can make a toll-free call back to the same number that will let her listen to 
previous messages. 
The project also includes setting up Maternal Health Corners in each of the 
facilities. The Maternal Health Corners are made up of a set of computers that 
have been programmed with content (audio, video and text) for the benefit 
of health workers. Video content has been developed by the Global Health 
Media Project and has been well received by health workers.2
Further, the project has instituted a monthly block knowledge sharing ses-
sion that brings together all expectant mothers registered at a facility for 
information sharing in a group. These sessions are led by local midwives or 
community health workers.
We are currently funded by STAR-Ghana http://www.starghana.org/ for 2 
years. We are also working with Voto Mobile, a bulk SMS provider that has 
worked with us to develop the system to be able to transmit audio messages 
to the expectant mothers.
A monitoring and evaluation framework is in place and data collection will 
begin shortly. The system is designed to self-monitor. For example, when a 
message is delivered, we are able to track if the call was picked up or not and 
if it was picked up, whether the expectant mother listened to the message in 
full or in part. We are currently working on feedback questions that will be re-
corded and sent out at intervals to get feedback from the expectant mothers.
 
2. http://globalhealthmedia.org/page/2/
MAMA: Mobile AlliAnce for MAternAl Action | spotlight August 2013 2
ChAllEnGES
1.  The system is dependent on midwives collecting and uploading informa-
tion on expectant mothers onto the system for delivery of messages, but 
these midwives have inadequate knowledge of ICT. Additionally, some of 
them see this as extra work and demand incentives. The team is currently 
discussing this issue and hoping to find a lasting solution. In the meantime, 
a small budget has been allocated to provide incentives to the midwives 
responsible for assisting with registering expectant mothers. Savana Sig-
natures has also planned a series of ICT training sessions for the health 
workers. One has been conducted already and the next batch of health 
workers will be trained in the month of September 2013.
2. I nformation from the health facilities indicates that most expectant moth-
ers either do not own phones or have shared phones, making it challenging 
to register them. In addressing this, we have a monthly block knowledge 
sharing session where these women can acquire some knowledge from 
their friends as well as their midwives if they do not have personal phones. 
Illiteracy is also prevalent amongst our target demographic but we have 
found that those who have access to phones have basic knowledge of 
which keys to press for the basic phone functions. 
FUTURE PlAnS
1.  To scale up this project to other districts or towns: 
 
Currently we have engaged with the Regional Health Directorate with 
plans of working on how to engage with other government bodies for 
scale up and adoption. Enrollment has only recently begun and so far 100 
expectant mothers are registered in the messaging program.  
2.  To introduce a system that would remind expectant mothers when they 
are due to attend antenatal care. 
3. T o add a special feature of this program that would use a flashing system 
to allow expectant mothers to flash a number to get connected to a 
midwife in any of the participating health facilities: 
 
The midwife could provide maternal health information in real time 
and address specific questions and concerns that might arise from the 
messages. This helpline is seen as one of the best ways to allow the ex-
pectant mothers to privately discuss issues with their midwives that they 
would never have brought up during the antenatal session. It will also 
allow prompt response or immediate help when an expectant mother is 
confronted with some irregularities at any stage of her pregnancy. It is 
our hope to secure funding one day for this. 
MAMA: Mobile AlliAnce for MAternAl Action | spotlight August 2013 3
The MAMA Community Spotlight series 
shines a light on some of the great work 
being done by organizations using MAMA’s 
adaptable mobile messages. Each month 
we feature a new organization that has 
downloaded our messages and is using 
mobile technology to improve maternal, 
newborn and child health. 
Inspired by these innovative programs? 
Download the MAMA messages for yourself 
by visiting www.mobilemamaalliance.org 
and completing our short questionnaire.
For inquires about working with our 
partnership, contact: 
MAMA Global
 tel: 202.887.9040 
email: info@mobilemamaalliance.org
Media Inquiries, contact: 
Mabinty Koroma 
tel: 202.862.6315 
email: mkoroma@mobilemamaalliance.org
