Getting Healthier Around the World:
Information and Communication Technologies  
for Child Health and Development
By Ada Kwan, mHealth Alliance, United Nations Foundation
Commissioned by Sesame Workshop and the mHealth Alliance
 for Universal Children’s Day, 20 November 2013
Acknowledgements
This paper would not have been possible without the generous support of Sesame  
Workshop. My deepest appreciation extends to both Sesame Workshop and the mHealth 
Alliance, hosted by the United Nations Foundation, for their vision and leadership  
throughout the development of this paper and for supporting its release on Universal 
Children’s Day. Their commitment to leveraging mobile technologies for early childhood 
health and development around the world is commendable. In particular, many thanks  
go to Charlotte Cole, Anita Stewart, Steven McDonald, Abigail Bucuvalas, Jennifer Rupnik, 
Shezleen Vellani, Chloe Mead, and Jorge Baxter at Sesame Workshop and Chelsea Hedquist,  
William Philbrick, and Patricia Mechael at the mHealth Alliance for making themselves 
available for discussions, feedback, advice, and comments. For the great design of this 
report, a warm thank you to Karla Henrick.
For this year’s Universal Children’s Day, it is my utmost desire that the content of this  
report will inform the strategic use and implementation of mobile and other information 
and communication technologies for children — to inspire them, to encourage them,  
and to create a new world of possibilities for them, in ways that will truly improve their 
futures because these two organizations cared about their wellbeing today.
Contents
Executive Summary . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 2
Abbreviations. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .4
Introduction . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 5
Background on Early Child Health and Development . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 6
Background on ICTs for Health: mHealth and eHealth . . . . . . . . . . . . . 7
Applying mHealth and ICTs for Child Health and Development. . . . 12
How to Develop a Global Mobile Platform for 
Child Health and Development . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 15
Conclusions: Realizing the Potential . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .20
References . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 21
Appendix A. Issues affecting child health and development:  
Vaccination; Water, sanitation, and hygiene; Emergency education;  
Nutrition; and Disease-specific Knowledge and Prevention. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .23
Getting Healthier Around the World 1
Executive Summary
Objective. To celebrate Universal Children’s Day 2013, this report was commissioned by Sesame 
Workshop to achieve two objectives: (1) to explore current and future opportunities in the use of 
mobile phones and other relevant information and communications technologies (ICTs) for  
improving the health and development of young children as investments for a better future, and  
(2) to provide guidance and recommendations for partnerships, institutions or organizations 
interested in contributing to this field.
Background. This Universal Children’s Day is a reminder that every child deserves the opportunity  
to survive, thrive and participate in society. However, nearly eight million children under the  
age of five die every year from preventable or curable conditions, with about a third of these deaths 
linked to poor or inadequate nutrition.1,2 Among those who survive, poor and inadequate nutrition,  
in addition to a lack of stimulation during early childhood, prevent nearly 200 million children  
from reaching their cognitive and socio-economic potential. With the number of mobile phone 
subscriptions expected to surpass the world population of over 7 billion in 2014,3 the near ubiquity  
of mobile technologies and other ICTs provides exciting new opportunities to deliver health and 
educational interventions to children and their caretakers around the world. 
Methods and Findings. A review of existing white and grey literature accrued from mHealth (the  
use of mobile technologies for health) and related projects, particularly in the context of child  
health and development (CHD), was conducted. Opportunities that strengthen interactions among 
children, their caregivers and health systems were identified. Additionally, two approaches for 
contributing to the field with mobile technologies are further discussed for partnerships, institutions 
or organizations: (1) a participatory approach, and (2) an advocacy approach. Creating appropriate 
and strategic partnerships will help realize the greatest impact from ICTs in CHD.
2 Getting Healthier Around the World
  Recommendations for turning mobile opportunities into  
action and improved CHD outcomes include:
 >> F ocus on high-impact, cost-effective health and educational interventions 
 >> I ntegrate a complementary mobile messaging service for families and  
other caregivers of young children on various health topics that will help  
raise awareness of ways to be healthier and encourage healthier behaviors 
 >> I nject inspiration into the daily lives of children through a packaged  
global platform that contains efforts to address a variety of conditions that,  
if improved, can result in better health and nutrition
 >> P rovide a program where mothers or other family members and caretakers 
can receive phone calls or messages informing or reminding them of the  
importance of play interaction with their children
 >> P romote education, especially for girls
 >> E ducate families and promote mHealth and eHealth (electronic health)  
services to help them increase trust in the health sector and help them  
maneuver through existing health systems
 >> D evelop mobile games and other forms of mobile learning that can  
engage children and their families and offer a conduit for disseminating  
health messages
 >> E nable discussion or other forms of interaction to enhance civic engagement 
on local and regional health policies related to mHealth
 >> C ollaborate with mobile and health sectors to make large and positive  
impacts that are scalable
 >> A ppend existing health efforts, especially those aligned with global agendas 
(e.g., the Millennium Development Goals or the United Nations’ Every Woman, 
Every Child initiative)
 >> W ork with mobile network companies and other partners to advocate for 
inclusion of premade programs loaded onto SIM cards for mobile phone use
To effectively and efficiently use appropriate ICTs, such as mobile technologies, for improving 
conditions that hinder CHD, this report describes how vision, an action plan, and monitoring and 
evaluation are critical. Additional aspects to consider for implementation are further discussed.
Conclusions. With the variety of technologies available around the world today, strategic and 
innovative efforts leveraging ICTs, particularly mobile technologies, can reap many gains in health, 
which can then lead to remarkable cognitive and socioeconomic benefits. This report captures  
how ICTs are being appropriately leveraged specifically for supporting health system efforts for child 
health, strengthening tools for health workers who interact with children and their caretakers, and 
encouraging healthier behaviors among children and others involved in their health and development.
Getting Healthier Around the World 3
Abbreviations
AIDS Acquired Immune Deficiency Syndrome
ASHA Accredited Social Health Activists
BCC Behavior Change and Communication
CBO Community Based Organization
CDC Centers for Disease Control and Prevention
CHD Child Health and Development
CHW Community Health Workers
ECD Early Childhood Development
eHealth A pplication of information and communication 
technologies to healthcare
EMR Electronic Medical Records
HIV Human Immunodeficiency Virus
ICT Information and Communication Technologies
IRD Interactive Research and Development
ITU International Telecommunications Union
IYCF Infant and Young Child Feeding
LMIC Low- and Middle-Income Countries
M&E Monitoring and Evaluation
MAMA Mobile Alliance for Maternal Action
MCH Maternal and Child Health
mHealth Application of mobile technologies in health care
MoTeCH Mobile Technology for Community Health
RFID Radio-Frequency Identification
SMS Short Message Service
TBA Traditional Birth Attendants
UNICEF United Nations Children’s Fund
USAID  United States Agency for International 
 Development
WHO World Health Organization
4 Getting Healthier Around the World
We must do more to reach all children in  
need, wherever they live, wherever they are 
excluded and left behind. Some might ask  
whether we can afford to do this, especially  
at a time of austerity in national budgets and 
reduced aid allocations. But if we overcome  
the barriers that have kept these children  
from the services that they need and that are 
theirs by right, then millions more will grow  
up healthy, attend school and live more  
productive lives.
Can we afford not to do this?
             — Anthony Lake, Executive Director, UNICEF4
Introduction
Today, there are technological options with a larger reach than ever before in world history. In 2014, 
the number of mobile phone subscriptions is expected to surpass the world population of over seven 
billion,3  and currently, 90% of the world’s people have mobile network coverage. In fact, there are 
more people with mobile phones than toilets in India, and mobile phone coverage is more accessible 
than electricity in Africa.5, 6 These technological options — information and communication technolo-
gies (ICTs), such as mobile devices, radio, tablets, and Internet — are increasingly becoming popular 
tools for complementing, accelerating, and leapfrogging current progress in health and development 
around the world. This translates into unprecedented opportunities to reach a tremendous number 
of children for health and education.
This report was commissioned to explore current and future opportunities in the use of mobile phones 
and other ICTs for improving the health of young children, since better health is an investment for  
a better future. The report also offers guidance to partnerships, institutions and organizations that are 
interested in ICTs and their impact on critical health issues related to early child health and develop-
ment (CHD), particularly in low- and middle-income countries (LMICs).
Getting Healthier Around the World 5
To achieve its objective, this report lays out the following:
>> Background on child health in the context of early childhood development (ECD)a
>> B ackground on ICTs for health: mHealth and eHealtha (where mHealth is defined as the applica-
tion of mobile technology in health, and eHealth is defined as the application of information, 
computer, or communication technology to some aspect of health or healthcare) 
>> Guidance and recommendations for implementing mHealth and other ICTs for CHD
Throughout this report, it will be evident that improving the health and development of children  
will require the collaboration of the entire community. Thus, interventions ought to target children, 
families, caregivers, and a variety of other individuals who play a role in the lives of children.  
Additionally, better advocacy is needed to actualize the ICT possibilities in fully integrated and 
proven CHD efforts and age-specific interventions that are known to be most effective in children’s 
lives. The recommendations provided in this report identify ways ICTs (e.g., mobile phones) and 
coordinated partnerships can both be leveraged to generate the most positive impacts.8 
Background on Early Child  
Health and Development
Every child deserves the opportunity to survive, thrive, and participate in society. However, poverty, 
poor health conditions, malnutrition, and inadequate stimulation at home prevent this from happen-
ing for some children. Every year, nearly eight million children under the age of five die, primarily from 
preventable or curable causesb — pneumonia, diarrhea, birth complications, and other conditions.1,2 
For the children who survive, nearly 200 million children fail to reach their cognitive, motor, and 
socio-emotional potential because of inadequate food and poor sanitation and hygiene, conditions 
that lead to increased infections and stunting among children.1, 9, 10 Again, knowledge of effective  
and low-cost ways to remedy these issues exist, but political and global commitment is needed for 
mobilizing action on a large scale.9 
In order to help improve the health of every child in every way, we must not only deliver effective 
health strategies with higher quality and better coverage, but also look towards innovative ways for 
children to be healthier while accounting for the consequences poor health can have on later 
development. Only then will we have a chance to reduce mortality related to preventable causes and 
to empower children, caregivers and family members to work together in creating conditions for 
better child development.
In CHD, a generous amount of evidence exists on how to create an effective response.11 c In fact, 30 
developing countries have policies on early child development, and UNICEF is assisting governments 
a  Other related terms include medical informatics, consumer health informatics, public health informatics, telemedicine, telehealth, and interactive health 
communication. The World Health Organization (WHO) has described eHealth as a driving force for cost-effectiveness in healthcare, as well as an 
opportunity to save patients’ time and money.7 
b  Effective packages of MCH interventions along the continuum of care can be found in the report “Packages of Interventions for Family Planning, Safe 
Abortion care, Maternal, Newborn and Child Health” at: http://www.who.int/maternal_child_adolescent/documents/fch_10_06/en/index.html
c  See Catholic Relief Services’ report titled, “Programming for Impact: A review of the literature and lessons from the field on programming for vulnerable 
children” available at: http://www.crsprogramquality.org/storage/pubs/hivaids/pgm_for_impact.pdf
6 Getting Healthier Around the World
in supporting parenting programs in 60 countries.11 The combination of family- and child-care- 
center-based interventions is not only known to be more effective, but cheaper and more efficient  
for delivery than each implemented independently.11 Delivery to communities and households  
by frontline health workers, such as community health workers (CHWs), community health volun-
teers, traditional birth attendants (TBAs), and in India, accredited social health activists (ASHAs),  
can breach the access gap between the health system and households. A helpful framework  
is CARE’s 5x5 model (Figure 1) which crosses five areas of intervention (food and nutrition, child 
development, economic strengthening, health, and child rights/protection) with five levels of 
intervention (individual child, caregiver/family, childcare settings, community, and national policy).12 
CARE’s experience while addressing ECD 
showed that intervention factors were so 
integrated that focusing on one or two areas 
of intervention was not sufficient to address 
the varied, interdependent needs of young 
children.12 
Luckily, the recent and massive uptake  
of ICTs around the world offers unprece-
dented opportunities to account for these 
complexities. For the first time, segments  
of populations that could not be reached  
by standard health services and educational 
programs can now be reached by, for 
example, mobile phones.
But how exactly can ICTs better the health of 
children so they can reach their cognitive and 
socio-emotional potential? The next section 
Figure 1. CARE’s 5x5 model (Source CARE, 2007).  goes into these strategies in more detail.
This model demonstrates contextual issues that play an 
integrated role in early child development. The model was 
originally designed for ECD programs targeting orphans  
and vulnerable children in resource-limited settings.
Background on ICTs for Health:  
mHealth and eHealth
The conditions that hinder CHD around the world differ from context to context, and thus,  
appropriate integration of ICTs in health interventions for children requires an understanding of  
the major causes of death, morbidity, and issues affecting child survival within a given context 
(Appendix A details vaccination; water, sanitation, and hygiene; emergency education; nutrition;  
and disease-specific knowledge and prevention). For example, malaria accounts for a large  
portion of deaths specifically in sub-Saharan Africa. HIV/AIDS also has a strong impact, such that  
it causes more than half of child deaths in certain countries (e.g., Botswana and Zimbabwe).1  
Taking into consideration the epidemiological profiles of different countries, child health programs
Getting Healthier Around the World 7
 can adopt a spectrum of activities that range from prevention to treatment (See Figure 2) while 
leveraging different features of technology to augment information and communication channels. 
For prevention interventions, timely delivery at specific ages can increase effectiveness. 
Along the spectrum, ICTs can be appropriately integrated for different health issues in two ways:  
(1) to expand coverage and improve the quality of existing, evidence-based CHD interventions,  
and (2) to improve education and promote healthier behaviors among children and the people who 
take care of them.
ENCOURAGING 
PROMOTING  INCREASING  
CARETAKERS  
THE PREVENTION  IMPROVING THE THE QUALITY OF 
TO SEEK 
OF ILLNESSES  RECOGNITION  HEALTH SERVICES 
APPROPRIATE 
IN HEALTHY OF A SICK CHILD PROVIDED TO  
CARE WHEN  
CHILDREN SICK CHILDREN
A CHILD IS SICK
Figure 2. Child health programs can be adopted along a spectrum of activities that range from prevention  
to appropriate responses for when a child is sick.
Then, the selection of an appropriate technology is necessary. Many nongovernmental organizations 
(NGOs) and community-based organizations (CBOs) are implementing projects that leverage 
mobile technologies, Internet, and other low-cost solutions, such as computers, printers, digital 
electrocardiographs, digital cameras, and webcams,13 to deliver effective health strategies with 
higher quality and better coverage. Additionally, several countries are even formally integrating ICTs 
into national health policies. Kenya, Rwanda, Nigeria and Ethiopia have committed to implementing 
national eHealth programs that target HIV care, primary health care and maternal and child health 
(MCH).14, 15 Kenya has an electronic medical record (EMR) standardization protocol that guides any 
eHealth and mHealth implementation in the country, addressing system security and minimum 
functional requirements of such systems. This is augmenting not only the field of health by transform-
ing nationwide information systems, point-of-care support tools for frontline health workers, and 
ways individuals receive health services, but it is also strengthening old and creating new ways of 
interacting among people every day. 
In Table 1, eHealth and mHealth strategies are categorized in three ways: supporting health system 
efforts for child health, strengthening tools for health workers who interact with children and  
their caretakers, and encouraging healthier behaviors among children and others involved in their 
health and development (e.g., the 5x5 model’s five levels of intervention). The table describes  
the strategies within each approach and refers to examples of projects that implement some of the 
strategies. Later on in the text other projects are described in more detail.
8 Getting Healthier Around the World
Table 1. ICT strategies for different health approaches:  
supporting health system efforts for child health, strengthening  
tools for health workers who interact with children and their  
caretakers, and encouraging healthier behaviors among  
children and others involved in their health and development.
APPROACH STRATEGIES (Examples, Location)
Supporting health > R eal-time or near-real-time monitoring with mobile phones linked to strong back-end 
system efforts  systems (OpenMRS, Multiple Countries)
for child health > D isease surveillance and outbreak notifications on mobile phones (TracPlus and TRACnet, 
Rwanda15)
> N ational reporting with electronic documents, USBs, and open-source health information 
technology platforms (CAMERWA, Rwanda15)
> Tracking for supply chains (SMS for Life, Kenya16)
> E lectronic health records, particularly using open-source software17 (OpenMRS, Multiple 
Countries18)
> M obile-enabled devices to deliver information and collect data19 (UNICEF Innovations 
Nutrition Surveillance, Malawi19)
Strengthening tools > P oint-of-care standards and protocols on mobile phones and tablets20 (e-IMCI, Tanzania21)
for health workers  > D ecision support tools on mobile phones and tablets (CommCare by D-Tree International 
who interact with and Dimagi, Tanzania22)
children and their > e Learning for health workers (ICT instruction for A2-level nurses to promote to A1 status, 
caretakers Rwanda15)
> Telehealth and multimedia messaging for diagnoses and remote consultations13
> E mergency response calling, such as wireless options to link community-based health 
workers to emergency services
> F inancial incentives sent as mobile money to help improve health worker motivation  
(e.g., pay-for-performance)
Encouraging  > T ext messaging/hotlines/websites for health information (VillageReach, Malawi23; Text to 
healthier behaviors Change, Multiple Countries24)
among children  > T ext messaging for quizzes on health topics (SexInfo, USA24)
and others involved  > T ext messaging or voice calls to change behaviors (WelTel, Kenya25)
in their health  > T ext messaging or voice calls to improve care-seeking behaviors (Babycenter, USA; MAMA, 
and development Multiple Countries26)
> H otlines or other modes that allow dialogue exchange27 (PSI, Democratic Republic of the 
Congo27)
> T ext messaging or voice calls for information on community-based events related to health
> V accination/treatment/appointment reminders through voice or text messages
> E mergency calls28
> D emand creation for services, such as financial incentives (e.g., conditional cash transfers)  
or vouchers
> S trengthening social networks on mobile platforms
> U se of mobile in the financial sector to pay for health services (M-Pesa services in Kenya, 
India, Tanzania, and other countries; Changamka Microhealth, Ltd, Kenya)
Getting Healthier Around the World 9
The ICT strategies presented in Table 1 are only some of many ways to categorize eHealth and 
mHealth approaches in the context of CHD.d Although eHealth and mHealth strategies overlap within 
these three categories and can often be complementary, mHealth offers more promising opportuni-
ties for behavior change and communication (BCC), raising health awareness, enhancing preventive 
care, and supporting wellbeing and overall wellness.29 Several projects currently implementing 
strategies listed in Table 1 are described in more detail below.
 >> Leveraging ICTs with celebrity engagement to promote health
  The campaign against malaria run by the NGO Malaria No More has developed NightWatch,  
a communication platform that transmits messages from local and international celebrities to 
vulnerable populations where malaria is a health issue.30 NightWatch aims to improve the  
return on investments on delivery of mosquito nets, diagnostic tests and malaria treatments  
by sending out these messages to multiple media channels every night. The project started  
on radio and TV spots in Senegal, Chad, Tanzania and Cameroon, but immediately expanded  
to reach individuals through their mobile phones using SMS messages. Subsequent evaluation of 
the SMS interventions showed a critical need for the mobile-phone-based program to be more 
interactive and more engaging. The team has received funding to explore the use of prere-
corded voice messages from celebrities to reach illiterate users, linking successful malaria 
anthems to ringtones and call tones, having a presence on social media and incorporating 
call-ins and SMS input into local radio programs.
 >> Education and awareness spread by text messaging
 I n Tanzania, the Wazazi Nipendeni (meaning “Love me, parents” in Kiswahili) Safe Motherhood 
campaign began a multimedia effort for health services related to healthy pregnancy and  
safe delivery, including early and complete antenatal care attendance, malaria prevention, 
prevention of mother-to-child transmission of HIV (PMTCT), individual birth planning and safe 
delivery.31 Individuals who wanted to opt-in to the service would text “mtoto” (the word for child 
in Kiswahili) to a short code for free. This would help them register for messages, which  
had all been developed and managed by the Ministry of Health and Social Welfare and Centers 
for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC) Foundation’s mHealth Tanzania Public Private 
Partnership. All messages are sent at specific times along the pregnancy or based on the child’s 
age. Key channels used for this campaign include radio and TV spots, clinic posters, billboards 
and other outdoor and promotional materials. However, messaging can be so successful in 
generating demand for services that the health system may not be equipped to respond 
properly to increases in demand. Such programs must ensure that there is coordination with  
the health system.
 S imilarly, in Ghana, the Grameen Foundation’s Mobile Technology for Community Health 
(MoTeCH) project aims to improve services attended by pregnant parents with a mobile-based 
application.32 Once a pregnant woman is registered into the MoTeCH system, which has regis-
tered over 7000 pregnant women and children under five, she can receive information and 
action text messages or prerecorded voice messages through the application ‘Mobile Midwife’. 
Information texts provide her information relative to her stage of pregnancy, and the action texts 
encourage her to attend appointments and receive shots. Both types of messaging can reduce 
d  For an extensive review of how mHealth findings and barriers to adoption and gaps in knowledge, see Mechael et al. (2010), accessible at: http://www.
mhealthalliance.org/images/content/publications/barriers_and_gaps.pdf.24 This report groups mHealth implementation in the following thematic areas: 
treatment compliance, data collection and disease surveillance, health information systems and point-of-care support tools for health workers, disease 
prevention and health promotion, and emergency medical response.
10 Getting Healthier Around the World
the risks surrounding labor and delivery into postnatal care.33 The messages continue into  
the baby’s first year of life, and these messages focus on good childcare practices and vaccina-
tion reminders. In 2013, the plan is to begin a new financing model where the urban areas  
will subsidize the rural areas via a fee-for-service model. This will happen as a sub-component  
of the larger MoTeCH business plan.
 A nother mHealth project related to education and awareness is the Mobile Alliance for  
Maternal Action (MAMA), with country programs in Bangladesh and South Africa, with plans for 
an India program already underway.26  A partnership among the U.S. Agency for International 
Development (USAID), Johnson & Johnson, the United Nations Foundation, the mHealth 
Alliance and BabyCenter is designing ways to strengthen maternal and child health and nutrition 
interventions by applying mobile technologies. Messages are sent at specific moments, such  
as a woman’s gestational age and certain months after an infant has been born, to correspond 
with critical health issues most relevant at specific times and ages.
 > > Hotlines and mobile-phone-based messages with maternal and child health information
 A s part of a larger health program, VillageReach in partnership with Baobab Health Trust,  
PATH, and MoTeCH, has implemented a toll-free hotline in Malawi. When calling into the hotline, 
individuals are able to receive health information on maternal and child health issues from 
specially trained health workers. Additionally, callers can enroll themselves into the program  
to receive tips and reminders as personalized voice or text messages sent to their mobile 
phones, as well as options that link them to transportation services in the case of emergencies.
 > > Vaccination text message reminders linked to conditional cash transfers
 I nteractive Research and Development (IRD)-Pakistan is implementing a scale-up of an  
mHealth vaccine registry with interactive alerts linked to radio-frequency identification (RFID) 
tags on governmentally issued vaccination cards for infants.34 Text message reminders and 
conditional cash transfers for mothers are additional facets of the program to motivate higher 
rates of immunization.
  >> Leveraging multimedia among community health workers
 C ommCare is an open-sourced platform that has been deployed to support CHW activities, 
initially for adherence to clinical protocols, in 10 countries.35 In India, a multimedia component 
was added after health workers were observed to be more comfortable and effective with media 
and video support delivered on mobile technologies in different contexts. CHWs were able to 
discuss sensitive health topics with the aid of multimedia, and households were found to take 
health messages more seriously. Benefits include improved interaction between CHWs and 
clients and increased credibility for CHWs in their responsibilities. Implementation challenges 
included finding a good illustrator and speakers, creating appropriate imagery and audio 
messages, and finding the time needed to refine content. Additionally, multimedia was inappro-
priate for crowded and noisy places or for use by multiple clients.
  >> Games and other types of mobile learning 
 I n India, mobile phone games developed by ZMQ Software Systems India Ltd contain education 
and awareness messages on HIV/AIDS and tuberculosis. An assessment found that the youth who 
played these games found them for the most part interesting and engaging, which were simultane-
ously effective at improving awareness and knowledge of serious health issues in a fun way.36
Getting Healthier Around the World 11
In the near future, further development of cheaper, more rugged, and simple smartphones will 
accelerate these opportunities and trends. The upcoming decade may witness more development 
with tablets, mobile learning,37-39 mobile money,40, 41 wireless monitoring,42, 43 context-aware  
platforms,44 applications and games on both non-smartphones and smartphones, and radio and 
television program transmission to mobile handsets.45 At the same time technological advancement 
will move quickly to enable faster wireless broadband through both new and existing technologies. 
These will have the following implications for eHealth: more portable mobile connectivity, wireless 
alternatives, more options for data and telecommunication services, additional options for Internet, 
and smarter grids.
Applying mHealth  
and ICTs for Child Health  
and Development
Currently, there is a shift in health that moves away from acute care and towards prevention and more 
holistic or integrated responses within a health system.46, 47 One of the effects of this shift is stronger 
emphasis on behavior change and communication (BCC) and health that can be enabled through 
more education, awareness, and encouraging healthier behaviors. There is an opportunity in this, as 
well, for educational entertainment, defined as “the intentional placement of educational content  
in entertainment messages”.48, 49 Even though health education and awareness is common, BCC often 
does not make it onto health agendas as a technique formally implemented by the health system. 
Although health workers require the use of specific health information, one health worker trainer 
explains, “Just making information available to health workers by no means motivates them to use it. 
They need to know why to use it, how to use it, why it’s personally relevant, and where to utilize it. 
Only then will it be of any use to them.”50 This quote is applicable, not just to health workers, but in the 
context of CHD.
In the digital age, the dynamics of learning are becoming augmented by technology, and technology 
is currently reshaping how health and educational interventions can be delivered to alter our 
everyday behaviors and activities in a way that can make individuals feel better and healthier. This 
does not mean coverage expansion and higher quality provision of existing, evidence-based child 
health interventions should be emphasized any less. Rather, health interventions that encourage 
wellbeing and the prevention of costly diseases should be increasingly considered, as rising owner-
ship rates of televisions, radios, and now mobile technologies make these opportunities achievable.49
Currently, solid evidence indicates that benefits of educational media can include improvements in 
early cognitive skills, literacy, mathematics, health and safety knowledge, social development, 
environmental awareness, and cultural awareness.8, 51 After a review of existing white and grey litera- 
ture accrued from eHealth and mHealth projects, particularly in the context of CHD, two coordinated 
approaches in applying mobile technology and other appropriate ICTs are suggested to those who 
want to make an impact: (1) a participatory approach, and (2) an advocacy approach. Creating 
appropriate and strategic partnerships will help realize the true potential for making the most impact.
12 Getting Healthier Around the World
THEORETICAL FRAMEWORK
Participatory approach. While developing a global mHealth platform for ECD, partnerships, institu-
tions and organizations should assess the following for implementation in different contexts: national 
plans, governmental health and development priorities, disease conditions, status of the health 
system, NGOs and CBOs implementing or capable of implementing eHealth and mHealth strategies, 
and implications for eHealth. Then, these stakeholders can help orient families to mHealth and  
to promote the efforts described above. Strategies that will have the most reach in LMICs — particu-
larly those using mobile phones and radio, which is becoming increasingly accessible on mobile 
phones — should be employed to inform women and children that health and educational campaigns 
exist. In the case of radio, families and caretakers of children can be encouraged to call in to radio 
broadcasts to discuss pertinent health topics further; however, mobile phones provide a platform for 
more effective one-on-one dialogues across more people, including those who are not likely to call 
in.52 Aside from call-ins, other participatory actions that utilize mobile phone features include: texting 
in comments, voting in polls, and joining a subscription list. Simultaneously, it may be worthwhile for 
these stakeholders to develop an online presence in social media, such as on Facebook, Twitter, and 
LinkedIn. More non-profits are developing their profiles on these channels (e.g., in the United States, a 
survey found 98% of non-profits are on Facebook, 72% on Twitter, and 44% on LinkedIne).
Advocacy approach. Partnerships, institutions and organizations should also advocate for more 
efforts that use ICTs for CHD to be introduced across the world. For example, appealing to interna-
tional bodies and governments will not only strategically enhance coordination for better child 
survival and health outcomes, but also may enhance the value other stakeholders, such as the private 
sector, have to offer in the future of children around the world.
APPLYING THE FRAMEWORK
For the participatory approach, recommendations include using appropriate ICTs to:
 > Raise awareness of health issues
 >  Promote and encourage healthier behaviors 
 > Enhance preventive care
 > Support wellbeing and overall wellness
 > B uild upon life skillsf, particularly those related to health, such as coping with being sick, 
building interaction skills with caretakers and health workers
 >  Address sadness and feelings of isolation, particularly among the poor and most vulnerable 
children, such as those infected or affected by HIV/AIDS
 >  Empower parents and other caregivers with hopeful messages and insights related to health, 
sadness and feelings of isolation
More specific recommendations include:
  Create a Packaged Global Platform. Design and implement a meaningful global platform 
package that contains efforts addressing a variety of conditions that, if improved, can result in 
better health and nutrition for children. The conditions addressed should depend on the local 
context and epidemiological profile, as well as take into consideration the gaps in service 
coverage. To set a framework, partnerships, institutions and organizations can use a model 
e  See http://www.impatientoptimists.org/en/Posts/2012/12/My-Top-10-Communications-Stories-in-Global-Health-and-Poverty-for-201
f  Examples include communication, household management, self-care, relationships, work and study skills, coping with loss.
Getting Healthier Around the World 13
developed by Labrique et al. (2013) that sets interventions along the maternal-newborn-child 
continuum of care.53, 54 The framework emphasizes specific health touch points, or parts along 
the continuum of care where women and children interact with the health system, as effective 
entry points for receiving effective health interventions. Additionally, segmenting the target 
population into distinct subgroups can help address different needs that can be met with 
different approaches in mHealth. Segmenting the target population is often based on age, 
gender, urban/rural location, existing knowledge and attitudes, or different needs. Other 
important elements to consider when developing a locally appropriate eHealth program 
targeting vulnerable populations are literacy ratesg (particularly when considering a text 
messaging program), sharing of mobile phones among household members, and confidentiality 
and privacy issues. A situational analysis or formative research56 can quickly provide invaluable 
insight into these matters (described later). For example, in a needs analysis on contextual 
factors related to motivation and persuasion in accessing maternal health services in rural India, 
ICTs were explored, and the study found that traditional practices and power dynamics affected 
at village and household levels were the main barriers to change.57 These are valuable insights 
that need to be considered in developing a larger intervention.
  Develop a Mobile Messaging Service. Integrate a complementary mobile messaging service for 
families on various health topics to help raise awareness of ways to be healthier. Mass communi-
cation through voice or text messages has helped stimulate conversation about stigmatized 
conditions, particularly HIV, when conversation wouldn’t have happened otherwise.h Addition-
ally, videos on mobile phones help recall concrete actions as opposed to specific details; 
whereas, text messages facilitate details when procedures can be laid out instruction-by-instruc-
tion. An assessment of the context will help determine the appropriateness of having text 
messages developed in local languages.
 F ocus on Proven Cost-effective Health Interventions for Scalable Impact. Interventions such  
as growth monitoring, oral rehydration therapy, breastfeeding counselingi to reduce the  
transmission of HIV from mother to baby, increasing vaccination rates, proper nutrition within 
the global strategy for infant and young child feeding (IYCF)j, female education, cognitive, 
socio-emotional and motor stimulation, Vitamin A and Zinc and other micronutrient supplemen-
tation and distribution, deworming, safe water, proper sanitation and hygiene behaviors such  
as hand washing, vision and hearing screening, male involvement (in caregiving), traffic and road 
safety, as well as malaria prevention with insecticide treated bed nets in relevant areas, are all 
potential domains. Health benefits can also be gained by building upon life skills related to 
health, such as coping with being sick or interaction skills with caretakers and health workers, 
and improving and encouraging education including early education, especially among girls.
  Engender Civic Engagement. Enable discussion or other forms of interaction to enhance civic 
engagement on local and regional health policies with mHealth.
g  For illiteracy, text messages or text on mobile phone screens may not be the best option for the end users of a mHealth project. However, there are 
appropriate alternatives. In an assessment of an mHealth application in India, developers adapted the application to prompt health workers with voice  
(for prompts) or pictorials (for screen navigation), rather than text.55 
h  See Project Masulileke in South Africa on p. 22 of the Vital Wave Consulting report mHealth for Development: The opportunity of mobile technology  
for healthcare in the developing world, accessible at: http://www.unfoundation.org/news-and-media/publications-and-speeches/mhealth-for- 
development-1.html
i  Exclusive breastfeeding is defined by the WHO as giving no other food or drink — not even water — except breast milk. This recommendation allows for 
babies to receive oral rehydration salts, drops and syrups for vitamin, minerals, or medicine intake. WHO advises for infants to begin receiving 
complementary foods at 6 months with breast milk, and usually this transition is a vulnerable period when infants become malnourished. For particular 
ages, the Global Strategy for Infant and Young Child Feeding, which includes the specific recommendations for breastfeeding in the HIV context, can be 
found here: http://www.who.int/nutrition/topics/exclusive_breastfeeding/en/
j  Indicators constructed by the WHO for measuring IYCF can be found at: http://whqlibdoc.who.int/publications/2010/9789241599290_eng.pdf
14 Getting Healthier Around the World
  Build Partnerships. Collaborate with mobile and health sectors to make large and  
positive impacts.
 E xtend Existing Efforts. Append an mHealth component to existing health efforts, such as 
after-school health education programs or complementary efforts being implemented by 
governments and local NGOs or CBOs. An mHealth program could also be designed to link into 
existing events unrelated to health.
  Create Effective Messaging in Mobile Applications. Provide a program where mothers or other 
family members and caretakers can receive phone calls or messages informing or reminding 
them of the importance of play interaction with their children.
 P romote Education with New Technologies. Promote eHealth and mHealth services to families 
to help increase trust towards healthk and help them maneuver through existing health systems.l
  Promote Girls’ Education. Education, especially for girls, is one of the indicators most linked to 
poor health.
 P artner with Mobile Providers. Work with mobile network companies and other partners to 
advocate for inclusion of premade programs loaded onto SIM cards to be used in mobile phones 
(e.g., in the mPesa menu).
  Develop Engaging Content. There is a need for the creation of mobile games and other forms of 
mobile learning that can engage children and their families while offering a conduit for dissemi-
nating health messages.
  Design Messaging for Vulnerable Groups. Provide messaging to meet specific needs of children 
in vulnerable groups, such as orphans, children infected or affected by HIV/AIDS, or children 
with long hospital stays (e.g., burn patients, patients with fractures, patients with chronic 
illnesses like malnutrition or cancer), to allow continuous education and reduce lost education 
time during long hospitalization periods, or children in refugee camps or emergency shelters  
(to provide education services in situations where children lack regular access to school).
How to Develop a Global  
Mobile Platform for  
Child Health and Development
This section will focus on how to build a global mobile platform for CHD. Emphasis will be placed on 
context, partnerships, sustainability, scalability, and monitoring and evaluation. A partnership 
k   IIn the context of rural communities in India not finding ASHAs helpful, Ramachandran50 developed three videos delivered on mobile phones which ASHAs 
could use during their visits to pregnant women at their households: (1) a series of testimonial videos where village personalities supported the work of 
ASHAs, (2) persuasive videos with information in health handbooks, and (3) a video with dialogue that addressed myths and barriers that hindered ASHA 
acceptance. Not only were the pregnant women more trusting of ASHAs, the videos improved the ability of ASHAs to deliver effective counseling while 
increasing engagement with women and their families.
l  See Salud Responde in Chile.58
Getting Healthier Around the World 15
between the International Telecommunications Union (ITU) and World Health Organization (WHO) 
has produced a National eHealth strategy toolkit targeted primarily for governments and other 
stakeholders. Although the original framework is meant to assist the development of a national 
eHealth plan, the toolkit offers many valuable ideas that can be used to inform a multimedia platform 
strategy for CHD. Such a plan needs to leverage ICTs and reflect country priorities, provide for 
monitoring and implementation and manage associated risks.59  Figure 3 represents the framework 
adapted for this context. The importance of aligning eHealth efforts with governmentalm or regionaln 
policies cannot be emphasized enough, since this alignment has been a driving force in sustainably 
diffusing eHealth innovations.61
Figure 3. An adapted version of ITU-WHO’s Toolkit for developing a National eHealth Strategy  
(image recreated and adapted from ITU, 2012).59
PART 1  PART 2  PART 3 
Creating a vision for integrating Designing an mHealth and eHealth mHealth and ICT 
mHealth and ICT for child health ICT action plan monitoring and evaluation
and development
• Manage the process • Manage the process •  Define indicators for 
• Engage with stakeholders • Engage with stakeholders monitoring and evaluation
•  Understand the context of CHD •  Develop action points that • D efine baseline and target 
priorities at the national level incorporate the appropriate measures
• Establish the strategic content use of mHealth and other ICT • D efine suporting governance 
• Learn from trends and experience • D evelop an integrated  and processes
• Draft an initial vision action plan
• Identify required components •  Determine high-level resource 
•  Gather information on the  requirements
eHealth environment • A pply funding constraints  
• Assess opportunities and gaps to refine plan
•  Refine vision and develop  • Define implementation phases
recommendations
To guide success when developing interventions leveraging ICTs for CHD, there are a few more 
related aspects to further emphasize:
 >>  Understand the context 
Integrated solutions are better than a single solution. Understanding how a global platform 
for improving health can fit into the context of national plans, governmental health  
and development priorities, disease conditions, existing efforts of health systems, NGOs, or 
CBOs, and cultural practices implications will prove absolutely crucial for determining 
success, especially when trying to leverage technologies. To increase understanding of 
national priorities in the field of health, a pre-implementation evaluation, which could involve 
a situational analysis, can be conducted.
   •  For example, over 40 countries have developed or received parliamentary approval for 
ECD policies, and UNICEF has supported 53 countries to prepare their own standards 
for what preschool children should know and be able to do.49
 >>  Tailor ICT strategies to the end users and their health needs  
Similar to understanding the context, understanding the children who will often be the end 
m  South Africa eHealth Strategy can be found at: http://www.doh.gov.za/docs/stratdocs/2012/eHealth_Strategy_South_Africa_2012-2016.pdf 
n  Refer to Jimenez Marroquin 60 for a systematic review and content analysis of national eHealth policies in Latin America and the Caribbean.
16 Getting Healthier Around the World
users of ECD-related mHealth programs is essential to the success of the mHealth programs. 
Formative research can yield insight and information on end users that cannot be easily 
elicited through other strategies and that can have an impact on the success of the project. 
When designing the type of information to include, very important components to consider 
are the end users, message content and the frequency of sending messages.
   •  End users — In developing an mHealth program for ECD, the most obvious end users 
and primary beneficiaries are children. Other potential end users could be those 
mentioned in CARE’s 5x5 Model: the caregiver/family, childcare setting, the commu-
nity, and national policy. For ECD, effective programs “provide direct learning experi-
ences to children and families, are targeted toward younger and disadvantaged 
children, are of longer duration, high quality, and high intensity, and are integrated with 
family support, health, nutrition, or educational systems and services”.11 Target popula-
tions for these programs include children or parents/caregivers. For children, programs 
are often focused on growth monitoring, early childcare centers, or improved hygiene 
or health services. Programs aimed at parents/caregivers focus on improving parenting 
skills and resources through home visits, group sessions, or behavior change and 
communication strategies. In the context of health, healthcare workers, both frontline 
and facility-based, can be considered.
   •  Message content and frequency — There is no algorithm that outputs the best message 
content or the perfect number of messages to send, but procedural lessons can be 
learned from existing mHealth interventions. For content, one place to start is MAMA, 
which has released a database of adaptable messages based on WHO and UNICEF 
guidelines.o Additionally, to design messages, rapid prototyping helps quickly test 
assumptions and define what works and what doesn’t with regard to message content. 
Determining an effective and appropriate number of messages to send must also 
undergo a similar process that depends on the objective of the mHealth intervention 
(e.g., to increase awareness, to reduce stigma, to increase healthier behaviors, etc.) and 
is strongly dependent on the context. One method to determine the right frequency is 
described in a study called “SMS to Test” conducted by Cell-Life in South Africa, which 
found that motivational text messages increased HIV testing rates. 52
 >> E ngage in appropriate partnerships  
Leveraging high-impact, large-scale eHealth opportunities must start with strategic and 
integrated action at national levels. Government involvement from the beginning is import-
ant, and not just with Ministries of Health, as improving ECD has implications for other 
ministries, such as the Ministry of Education and any ministry that deals with gender and 
social welfare issues. Since the challenge will be to get all the relevant stakeholders around 
the same table, the best strategy is to not start from scratch, but instead look to existing 
projects that can benefit from the value each stakeholder can contribute to discussions and 
implementation.
	 	 	 •  Examples of existing, large-scale efforts in mHealth include a recent public-private 
partnership in Nigeria related to Saving One Million Livesp and an effort in Bangladesh 
o  Request for access to MAMA content for message development at: http://www.healthunbound.org/mama/adaptable-messages
p  This public-private partnership is among the Nigerian Federal Ministry of Health, Saving One Million Lives Initiative, Intel, and the mHealth Alliance. This 
initiative is an intensive scale up of access to essential primary health services. and commodities for women and children. See the press release: http://
www.mhealthalliance.org/news/press-releases/54-new-public-private-initiative-leverages-mobile-technologies-to-save-one-million-lives-in-nigeria-
Getting Healthier Around the World 17
that aims to reach two million moms by 2015 called “Aponjon”.q, r Other examples of 
national initiatives that reach children but do not have formal ICT components are the 
National Rural Health Mission in India and Safe Motherhood in Malawi. 
 >>  Keep sustainability and scalability in mind  
Many projects disappear after receiving a few years of funding because clear business 
models and plans have not been developed. There are two types of sustainability that are 
necessary in successful projects using ICT for health — sustainability generated from the 
audience (the project’s “end users”) and financial sustainability. For both, it is important to 
involve the government from the beginning so that they are able to feel ownership for 
eHealth efforts; however, partnerships with the private sector must also be emphasized. 
Then, as Sarah Emerson of CDC Foundation mentions, it is crucial to create mutual benefit 
and have realistic expectations.s 
	 	 	 •  For sustainability generated from the audience, an eHealth initiative must truly meet 
the needs of the people it attempts to benefit. To help monitor this, assessments 
should be built into the initiative that can help gauge this. Also, translating many 
lessons learned from failures and successes of other projects will be vital so as to  
not reinvent the wheel. After Ramachandran designed audio-visual aids delivered 
through the mobile phone, six important guiding lessons for developing persuasive 
messages emerged:50
    1.  Focus the message on action items, not on broad topics  
of information
    2.  Address local myths and barriers, and provide convincing  
corrections and solutions respectively
    3. C reate opportunities for structured, persuasive dialogue  
between humans, keeping in mind that persuasion is a  
largely social phenomenon in rural communities
    4.  Include reminders about the positive rewards for changing  
behavior, paying close attention to local values
    5.  Capture the most persuasive local language and prosody  
style, even if it is counterintuitive
    6.  Do not assume reactions are honest — persuasion takes time
	 	 	 •  For financial sustainability, if considering the development of an mHealth project, it will 
be critical to engage with the business sector to develop a business case for partner-
ship. Also for the initial years of implementation, leveraging donor funding is a good 
option for both eHealth and mHealth initiativest; however, donor funding is often more 
restrictive when attempting to scale a project for many reasons, the most obvious 
reasons being the general 2-5 year funding length of awards and the tendency for 
donors to fund projects in pilot stages. Other options in the medium and long terms 
q  http://www.mhealthalliance.org/news/press-releases/56-bangladesh-launches-national-mobile-health-service-aponjon-to-reach-2-million-
moms-by-2015
r  This effort launched in Bangladesh by MAMA currently has 12,000 mothers, family members, and organizations – the majority of whom were registered 
through community health workers. More information here: http://www.mhealthalliance.org/news/press-releases/56-bangladesh-launches-national-mo-
bile-health-service-aponjon-to-reach-2-million-moms-by-2015
s  For more, see http://healthmarketinnovations.org/blog/2012/dec/5/sustainable-financing-mhealth-what-it-and-how-do-we-achieve-it 
t  One currently available opportunity can be found at: http://www.savinglivesatbirth.net/apply 
18 Getting Healthier Around the World
include governmental funding, mobile provider support,u or user-generated revenues. 
For user-generated revenues, it is important to identify the “big opportunity” in the 
market — and these may be able to support the success across a broader base of 
consumers. For programs that utilize text messaging, even the successful ones are 
difficult to fund as SMS costs increase. Negotiating with network providers is strongly 
encouraged when sending or making higher volumes of messages or calls.
 >>  Apply practical theory, incorporate a Monitoring & Evaluation (M&E)  
component and generate evidence from rigorous evaluation 
In a book on behavior change in mHealth, Mechael states that the hype surrounding mHealth 
currently ought to be “tempered with research, methodical approaches, and the sharing of 
real stories of success and failure”.29 Even though technology can catalyze efforts at a speed 
much faster than research, rigorous evaluations on the impact of mHealth and other ICTs on 
health outcomes and intervention efficiencies should be conducted, and all interventions 
integrating ICTs must move the evidence space forward. Only with rigorous studies and 
ongoing M&E is it possible to understand the actual progress an mHealth or ICT intervention 
is making, or more importantly, not making. When adding an M&E or evaluation component 
to a project, it is advised to obtain expertise from evaluation experts and keep in mind the 
objective that, in the future, evaluation findings will drive forward the ability to obtain future 
funding and campaign for stronger support from governments and the private sector.  
MAMA, for example, possesses a strong global M&E framework .v, 26
 >>  Ensure standards and interoperabilityw 
Standards and interoperability can help a wider deployment of efforts, and in time reduce the 
cost of devices through economies of scale. The development of international standards for a 
multimedia framework leveraging mobile technologies or other ICTs is currently occurring 
with major stakeholders.x  For a global platform, efforts must have a way to communicate 
with each other across countries within a campaign and also with other systems that exist in 
the environment. In other words, a space for this must exist where actors can interact with 
each other and offer transferable solutions from their own experiences. For this to work, 
standards must be set, and data across sources must be able to communicate. An example of 
an interoperable system is that of the Millennium Villages Global Network, which was able to 
support the communication of multiple project sites.62
 >>  Spread the word 
Families are the best sponsors for effective campaigns that target early child development; 
however, previous mHealth projects have not realized their full potential because those  
who could benefit most were not aware the program existed.
u  For example, the project Switchboard teams up with large telecom providers to allow doctors in various African countries to call each other for free. 
Telecom providers find value for this since the providers use the same network when making paid calls to family and friends.61
v  Available for download at: http://www.mchip.net/node/1317 
w  http://www.itu.int/en/ITU-T/techwatch/Pages/ehealth-standards.aspx
x  http://www.itu.int/ITU-T/studygroups/com16/sg16-q28.html
Getting Healthier Around the World 19
Conclusions: Realizing the Potential
  With the variety of technologies available around the world today,  
strategic and innovative efforts leveraging ICTs, particularly mobile  
technologies, can reap many gains in child health and survival,  
which can then lead to remarkable cognitive and socioeconomic  
gains for the future of children around the world. 
 T his report has captured how ICTs are being appropriately leveraged 
specifically for supporting health system efforts for child health,  
strengthening tools for health workers who interact with children and  
their caretakers, and encouraging healthier behaviors among children  
and others involved in their health and development. With the  
current shift towards encouraging behaviors that enable better health  
and wellbeing, there is a space where technologies can play an even  
larger role — in inspiring children to be healthier.
20 Getting Healthier Around the World
References
1.  UNICEF. Levels & Trends in Child Mortality. Report 2011: Estimates developed by the UN Inter-agency Group for Child Mortality 
Estimation: United Nations Children’s Fund; 2011.
2. UNFPA, UNICEF, WHO, World Bank. Trends in maternal mortality: 1990-2010. Geneva: WHO; 2012.
3.  International Telecommunications Union (ITU). ICT Facts and Figures: The World in 2013: International Communications  
Union (ITU); 2013.
4.  UNICEF. State of the World’s Children 2012: Children in an Urban World. New York, NY: UNICEF; 2012.
5.  International Telecommunications Union (ITU). Measuring the Information Society 2012; 2012.
6. Nolen S. Despite cellphone boom in India, toilet access still lags. The Globe and Mail,. 2012.
7. World Health Organization. Strategy 2004-2007: eHealth for healthcare delivery. Geneva: World Health Organization; 2004.
8.  Mares M-L, Pan Z. Effects of Sesame Street: A meta-analysis of children’s learning in 15 countries. Journal of Applied Developmental 
Psychology. 2013; 34: 140-51.
9.  Grantham-McGregor S, Cheung YB, Cueto S, Glewwe P, Richter L, Strupp B, et al. Developmental potential in the first 5 years for 
children in developing countries. The Lancet. 2007; 369: 60-70.
10.  Walker SP, Wachs TD, Grantham-McGregor S, Black MM, Nelson CA, Huffman SL, et al. Inequality in early childhood: risk and 
protective factors for early child development. The Lancet. 2011; 378: 1325-38.
11.  Engle PL, Black MM, Behrman JR, Cabral de Mello M, Gertler PJ, Kapiriri L, et al. Strategies to avoid the loss of developmental 
potential in more than 200 million children in the developing world. The Lancet. 2007; 369: 229-42.
12.  CARE, USAID, Hope for African Children Initiative. Promoting Early Childhood Development for OVC in Resource Constrained 
Settings: The 5x5 Model; 2007.
13.  Beatriz Alkmim M, Minelli Figuerira R, Soriano Marcolino M, Silva Cardoso C, Pena de Abreu M, Rodrigues Cunha L, et al. Improving 
patient access to specialized health care: the Telehealth Network of Minas Gerais, Brazil. Bulletin of the World Health Organization. 
2012; 90: 373-8.
14. Gerber T, Olazabal V, Brown K, Pablos-Mendez A. An agenda for action on global e-health. Health Affairs. 2010; 29(2): 235-8.
15. Frasier H, May MA, Wanchoo R. e-Health Rwanda Case Study; 2008.
16.  Githinji S, Kigen S, Memusi D, Nyandigisi A, Mbithi AM, Wamari A, et al. Reducing Stock-Outs of Life Saving Malaria Commodities 
Using Mobile Phone Text-Messaging: SMS for Life Study in Kenya. PLoS ONE. 2013; 8(1): e54066.
17.  Routen T. Android/OpenMRS: Integrating EMRS and decision logic functionality within mobile applications for healthcare workers. 
Med-e-Tel. Luxembourg: International Society for Telemedicine & eHealth; 2011.
18.  Kalogriopoulos NA, Baran J, Nimunkar AJ, Webster JG. Electronic medical record systems for developing countries: Review. In: 
Society EiMaB, editor. Annual International Conference in IEEE; 2009; Minneapolis, MN; 2009. p. 1730-3.
19.  Blaschke S, Bokenkamp K, Cosmaciuc R, Denby M, Hailu B, Short R. Using mobile phones to improve child nutrition surveillance in 
Malawi: UNICEF Malawi, UNICEF Innovations; 2009.
20.  van Heerden A, Tomlinson M, Swartz L. Point of care in your pocket: a research agenda for the field of m-health. Bulletin of the World 
Health Organization. 2012; 90: 393-4.
21. DeRenzi B. e-IMCI: Improving pediatric health care in low-income countries. CHI; 2008; Florence, Italy; 2008.
22.  Bogan M, van Esch J, Mhila G, DeRenzi B, Mushi C, Wakabi T, et al. Improving standards of care with mobile applications in Tanzania. 
W3C workshop on the role of mobile technologies in fostering social and economic development in Africa; 2009; Maputo, 
Mozambique; 2009.
23.  mHealth Alliance, Vital Wave Consulting. Sustainable Financing for Mobile Health (mHealth): Options and opportunities for mHealth 
financial models in low and middle-income countries: mHealth Alliance and Vital Wave Consulting; 2013.
24.  Mechael P, Batavia H, Kaonga N, Searle S, Kwan A, Goldberger A, et al. Barriers and gaps affecting mHealth in low and middle income 
countries: Policy white paper: The Earth Institute Columbia University and the mHealth Alliance; 2010.
25.  Lester RT, Ritvo P, Mills EJ, Kariri A, Karanja S, Chung MH, et al. Effects of a mobile phone short message service on antiretroviral 
treatment adherence in Kenya (WelTelKenya1): a randomised trial. Lancet. 2010; 376(9755): 1838-45.
26.  Mobile Alliance for Maternal Action. Global monitoring and evaluation framework; 2012.
27. PSI DR Congo, Toth C. Cell phone hotline spreads family planning information in DR Congo; 2008.
28.  Yang C, Yang J, Luo X, Gong P. Use of mobile phones in an emergency reporting system for infectious disease surveillance after the 
Sichuan Earthquake in China. Bulletin of the World Health Organization. 2009; 87: 619-23.
29.  Mechael P. Conclusion. In: Donner J, Mechael P, editors. mHealth in Practice: Mobile technology for health promotion in the 
developing world. London: Bloomsbury Academic; 2012.
30. Bowen H. NightWatch 2.0: The Role of Mobile Phones in Malaria BCC. JMTM. 2012; 1(4S): 11-2.
31.  The Johns Hopkins University. Wazazi Nipendeni Safe Motherhood Campaign. 2011  [cited 04/11/13]; Available from: http://www.
jhuccp.org/resource_center/media/wazazi-nipendeni-safe-motherhood-campaign
32.  Danis CM, Ellis JB, Kellogg WA, van Beijma H, Hoefman B, Daniels SD, et al. Mobile phones for health education in the developing 
world: SMS as a user interface. In: ACM, editor. ACM DEV ‘10; 2010; London, United Kingdom; 2010.
33.  Osborn J. MOTECH. In: Donner J, Mechael P, editors. mHealth in Practice: Mobile technology for health promotion in the developing 
world. London: Bloomsbury Academic; 2012.
34.  United Nations Foundation. The Innovation Working Group and the mHealth Alliance Announce Grantees to Improve Women’s and 
Children’s Health Using Mobile Technology.  2012  [cited 28 April 2012]; Available from: http://www.mhealthalliance.org/news/
innovation-working-group-and-mhealth-alliance-announce-grantees-improve-women%E2%80%99s-and-children%E2%80%99s-
35.  van Beijma H, Hoefman B. Text to Change: Pioneers in using mobile phones as persuasive technology on health in Africa. In: Donner 
J, Mechael P, editors. mHealth in Practice: Mobile technology for health promotion in the developing world. London: Bloomsbury 
Academic; 2012.
Getting Healthier Around the World 21
36.  Khanna A, Singh A, Soni J, Quraishi H, Quraishi S. Edutainment Based Mobile Phone Games for Health Communication in India.  
In: Kumar V, Svensson J, editors. Proceedings of M4D 2012; 2012; New Delhi, India; 2012.
37.  Chib AI, Lwin MO, Lee Z, Ng VW, Wong PHP. Learning AIDS in Singapore: Examining the effectiveness of HIV/AIDS efficacy 
messages for adolescents using ICTs. Knowledge Management & E-Learning: An International Journal. 2010; 2(2): 169-87.
38.  Holzinger A, Nischelwitzer A, Meisenberger M. Mobile phones as a challenge for m-Learning: Examples for mobile interactive 
learning objects (MILOs).  3rd International Conference on Pervasive Computing and Communications Workshops (PerCom 2005 
Workshops); 2005; 2005.
39.  SunStar Manilla. Text2Teach connects students to a more interactive learning environment. 2012.
40. Jack W, Suri T. Mobile Money: The Economics of M-Pesa. Cambridge, MA: National Bureau of Economic Research; 2011.
41.  Mondato LLC. Can mobile money enhance access to healthcare? 2013 [cited 1/25/2013]; Available from: http://mondato.com/en/
articles/can-mobile-money-enhance-access-to-healthcare
42.  Bielli E, Carminati F, La Capra S, Lina M, Brunelli C, Tamburini M. A wireless health outcomes monitoring system (WHOMS): 
development and field testing with cancer patients using mobile phones. BMC Medical Informatics and Decision Making. 2004; 4(7).
43.  Wang CS. Mobile and wireless technologies applying on sphygmonameter and pulsimeter for patients with pacemaker implementa-
tion and other cardiovascular complications. J Biomedical Science and Engineering. 2010; 3: 47-51.
44.  Broens T, Van Halteren A, Van Sinderen M, Wac K. Towards an application framework for context-aware m-health applications. 
International Journal of Internet Protocol Technology. 2007; 2(2): 109-16.
45. International Communications Union (ITU). World Telecommunication/ICT Development Report 2010. Geneva: ITU; 2010.
46.  Beaglehole R, Epping-Jordan J, Patel V, Chopra M, Ebrahim S, Kidd M, et al. Improving the prevention and management of chronic 
disease in low-income and middle-income countries: a priority for primary health care. The Lancet. 2008; 372(9642): 940-9.
47. Jong-wook L. Global health improvement and WHO: shaping the future. The Lancet. 2003; 362(9401): 2083-8.
48. Singhal A, Rogers EM. A Theoretical Agenda for Entertainment-Education. Communication Theory. 2002; 12(2): 117-35.
49.  Engle PL, Fernald LCH, Alderman H, Behrman J, O’Gara C, Yousafzai A, et al. Strategies for reducing inequalities and improving 
developmental outcomes for young children in low-income and middle-income countries. The Lancet. 2011; 378: 1339-53.
50.  Ramachandran D. Mobile Persuasive Messages for Rural Maternal Health. In: Donner J, Mechael P, editors. mHealth in Practice: 
Mobile technology for health promotion in the developing world. London: Bloomsbury Academic; 2012.
51.  Borzekowski DLG, Henry HK. The impact of Jalan Sesama on the educational and healthy development of Indonesian preschool 
children: An experimental study. International Journal of Behavioral Development. 2011; 35(2): 169-79.
52.  Benjamin P. mHealth Hope or Hype. In: Donner J, Mechael P, editors. mHealth in Practice: Mobile technology for health promotion in 
the developing world. London: Bloomsbury Academic; 2012.
53.  World Health Organization. Packages of interventions for family planning, safe abortion care, maternal, newborn and child health. 
Geneva, Switzerland: World Health Organization; 2010.
54.  Labrique A, Vasudevan L, Kochi E, Fabricant R, Mehl G. mHealth innovations as health system strengthening tools: 12 common 
applications and a visual framework. Global Health: Science and Practice. 2013.
55.  Bhavsar M. Sana Mobile: Connecting big-city care to patients in remote villages. 2010 [cited July 3, 2012]; Available from: http://
mobileactive.org/case-studies/sana-mobile
56.  Mechael P, The Dodowa Health Research Center, For the Grameen Technology Foundation. MoTECH: mHealth Ethnography Report; 
2009.
57.  Ramachandran D, Canny J, Dutta Das P, Cutrell E. Mobile-izing health workers in rural India. CHI 2010: Medical Data; 2010; Atlanta, 
GA; 2010.
58.  Lange I. Tele-Self-Management Support for Type 2 Diabetes Care. In: Donner J, Mechael P, editors. mHealth in Practice: Mobile 
technology for health promotion in the developing world. London: Bloomsbury Academic; 2012.
59.  International Telecommunications Union (ITU), World Health Organization. National eHealth Strategy Toolkit. Geneva: World Health 
Organization; 2012.
60.  Jimenez Marroquin MC. eHealth Policy in Latin America and the Caribbean: A Systematic Review and Content Analysis of National 
Policies: University of Toronto; 2011.
61. Iluyemi A, Briggs J. Financing sustainable eHealth projects in Africa: What can we learn from situated mHealth cases? 2011.
62.  Kanter AS, Negin J, Olayo B, Bukachi F, Johnson E, Sachs SE. Millennium Global Village-Net: Bringing together Millennium Villages 
throughout sub-Saharan Africa. International Journal of Medical Informatics. 2009; 78(2009): 802-7.
63.  Black RE, Morris SS, Bryce J. Where and why are 10 million children dying every year? The Lancet. 2003; 361: 2226-34.
64.  Blanton E, Ombeki S, Otieno Oluoch G, Mwaki A, Wannemuehler K, Quick R. Evaluation of the Role of School Children in the 
Promotion of Point-of-Use Water Treatment and Handwashing in Schools and Households—Nyanza Province, Western Kenya, 2007. 
Am J Trop Med Hyg. 2010; 82(4): Am. J. Trop. Med. Hyg., 82(4), 2010, pp. 664–671.
65.  Victora CG, Wagstaff A, Armstrong Schellenberg J, Gwatkin D, Claeson M, Habicht J-P. Applying an equity lens to child health and 
mortality: more of the same is not enough. The Lancet. 2003; 362: 233-41.
66.  Bryce J, Coitinho D, Darnton-Hill I, Pelletier D, Pinstrup-Andersen P, for the Maternal and Child Undernutrition Study Group. Maternal 
and child undernutrition: effective action at national level. The Lancet. 2008: 65-81.
67.  Walker SP, Wachs TD, Gardner JM, Lozoff B, Wasserman GA, Pollitt E, et al. Child development: risk factors for adverse outcomes in 
developing countries. The Lancet. 2007; 369: 145-57.
68.  Borzekowski DLG, Macha JE. The role of Kilimani Sesame in the healthy development of Tanzanian preschool children. Journal of 
Applied Developmental Psychology. 2010; 31(2010): 298-305.
22 Getting Healthier Around the World
Appendix A. 
  Issues affecting child health and development:  
Vaccination; Water, sanitation, and hygiene;  
Emergency education; Nutrition; and  
Disease-specific Knowledge and Prevention.
Vaccination About 20% of children in the world do not receive any type of immunization.  
Additionally, tens of thousands of children suffer from severe or disabling illnesses that can also  
be prevented by vaccines. The good news is that immunization coverage has never been higher  
as over 100 million children are immunized per year for tuberculosis, polio, measles, diphtheria, 
tetanus, pertussis, hepatitis B, Haemophilus influenzae type B vaccine, yellow fever, and more 
recently, pneumococcal disease and rotavirus, which cause pneumonia and diarrhea, respectively. 
Partners that generally work on immunization strategies include WHO, UNICEF, and the GAVI 
Alliance. Parents and caretakers of children must be informed of the benefits from vaccinating  
their children so that they bring their children according to vaccination schedules and recom-
mendations (e.g. measles immunization as soon as possible after the age of 9 months; child  
immunization even when he or she is sick).
Water, Sanitation, and Hygiene Water, sanitation, and hygiene issues (e.g. taking in unsafe  
water, inadequate water for proper hygiene, poor access to sanitation, and no access to toilet 
facilities) contribute to approximately 1.5 million child deaths and around 88% cases of diarrhea.63 
Chronic diarrhea also prevents proper absorption of essential nutrients, as well as life-saving 
vaccines, that influence child development. Often, programs can include pit latrine construction, 
Getting Healthier Around the World 23
installed water stations, water treatment, safe water storage as households will store water in the 
home making it vulnerable to contamination during transport and storage, and proper training or 
behavior change strategies towards proper hygiene (e.g. keeping animals out of the kitchen, 
handwashing, trimming nails, advice on correct disposal of human feces, digging pits to bury 
garbage). Evidence exists that supports how improvements in water, sanitation, and hygiene can 
reduce absentee rates among children.64
Emergency Education For young children, some strategies can be implemented to mitigate  
the compounding effects of natural disasters or complex emergencies to reduce suffering, disease,  
and death. Natural disasters, as well as conflicts that emerge in some contexts can leave an area 
more prone to disease outbreaks, food shortages, drought, violence, and displacement. Additionally, 
children can be left emotionally affected. Emergency preparation is a difficult task, but it can  
help recovery.
In Indonesia, which has experienced ethnic violence and large-scale natural disasters in the past 
decades, Jalan Sesama was found to improve early cognitive skills, literacy, mathematics, health and 
safety knowledge, social development, and both environmental and cultural awareness among 
children between 3-6 years of age.51 Emergency preparation can include ways to allow communica-
tion to happen better among individuals who need help and those who can help, including interna-
tional relief agencies and governments. For young children, there is a need to make sure they know 
their full name and the plan of action in the event of any emergency. Supporting children with 
helping them understand that it’s ok to feel sad or afraid during crises is also helpful.
Nutrition An individual’s nutrition early in life dramatically influences economic and educational 
prospects later on with spillover effects into future generations.65 A third of child deaths can be 
attributed to under nutrition. This makes under nutrition the largest risk factor of any age group. 
However, nutrition is often overlooked in national priorities, even in the 20 countries where 80% of 
the world’s undernourished children live.66 Stunting, which is caused by poor nutrition and infection, 
has a large influence on later child development, particularly later cognition, school progress, or 
both. Of the 559 million children under 5 years of age in developing countries, 156 million are stunted 
and 126 million live in absolute poverty. Grantham-McGregor et al. determined that the top ten 
countries with the largest number of disadvantaged children (defined as children who are stunted 
and non-stunted living in poverty with calculations to avoid double counting) in millions are: India  
65, Nigeria 16, China 15, Bangladesh 10, Ethiopia 8, Indonesia 8, Pakistan 8, DRC 6, Uganda 5, and 
Tanzania 4. With stunting and education data from 79 countries, Grantham-McGregor et al. found  
for every 10% increase in stunting, the proportion of children reaching the final grade of primary 
school dropped by 7.9%.9
The benefits of nutrition begins in utero with maternal nutrients, and continues with breastfeeding 
exclusively or at longer durations, which offers not only nutrients, but also improves motor  
development, reduces infant mortality and is an opportunity for mother-child bonding.11, 67 Food 
supplementation during the first 2-3 years of life has been shown to improve cognition at 3 years  
of age and beyond. Other effective nutrition-related interventions such as Vitamin A, iron supple-
mentation, and iodized salt provisions as routine preventive treatments are core interventions to 
improve child survival. The prevalence of anemia among children under 4 years in developing 
countries is estimated at 46-66%, where half is attributed to iron deficiency.67 Conclusive evidence 
demonstrates that iron deficiency is related to lower motor scores, social problems, long-term  
24 Getting Healthier Around the World
IQ effects, and anxiety or depression; however, iron supplementation for prevention is effective 
whereas iron therapy is inconclusive at reversing deficiency. For iodine deficiencies, salt iodization  
is the most cost-effective way to deliver iodine and improve cognition on a large scale.11  Other 
interventions include zinc in the management of diarrhea, treatment of severe acute malnutrition  
in hospitals, behavior change communications to improve complementary feeding, and interven-
tions to improve hygiene. Interventions can be directly delivered (e.g. delivery of micronutrients), 
focused on behavior change (e.g. feeding practices), or supportive (e.g. conditional cash transfers) 
and can be impacted heavily by governmental action in other sectors, such as poverty, trade,  
and agriculture.66 
There is an emphasis that interventions that do not have direct effects on reducing under nutrition  
in mothers or young children, such as stand-alone growth monitoring (unless linked to adequate 
nutrition counseling and referrals), preschool feeding programs targeting children over 24 months, 
or school feeding programs targeting children over 5, should not divert nutrition resources (though 
these may be effective for education — in this situation, these programs should be supported by 
education sectors); however, those that have proven effectiveness should be implemented rapidly at 
scale66 since the period from pregnancy to 24 months of age is a “crucial window of opportunity for 
reducing under nutrition and its adverse effects”. Nutrition recommendations include packaging 
interventions by delivery method and integrating them into existing maternal, neonatal, and child 
health programs.
Disease-specific Knowledge and Prevention 
MALARIA Malaria has been associated with poor child development and effective strategies 
include usage of insecticide-treated bed nets (ITNs) and artemisinin-based combination therapies.11 
Use of the most effective prevention strategy for ITNs is at approximately 1%. UNICEF estimates that 
if every African child slept under an ITN, approximately 500,000 child deaths could be prevented  
each year. In 2002, the government of Malawi purchased ITNs in mass for a national scale up of  
ITN distribution. Heavily subsidized nets were given to maternal and child health clinics, as well as 
distributed through communities and available for purchase from the private sector. Health educa-
tion for malaria generally includes informing pregnant women of medicine for preventing and 
treating malaria and educating and training families on proper home malaria management. 
HIV At the end of 2011, 3.4 million children were living with HIV, and more than two million are 
infected under 15. Additionally, the impact of the disease further affects children who have lost one 
or two parents from HIV. The number of children orphaned by AIDS in sub-Saharan Africa was 
approximately 18 million in 2010. These children are more vulnerable to malnutrition and disease,  
and they are likely to fall behind in school. Effective schooling, psychosocial support, and access  
to health services can help improve these conditions. After being exposed to Kilimani Sesame for six 
weeks, children in Tanzania knew more about malaria and HIV/AIDS than those who were not.68
PNEUMONIA WHO and UNICEF recommend a three-pronged approach to address child 
pneumonia that includes protection (exclusive breastfeeding and improved nutrition), prevention 
efforts (including routine use of measles, DTP3, Hepatitis B and pneumococcal vaccines), and 
treatment (appropriate antibiotics).
Getting Healthier Around the World 25

