KILKARI, MOBILE ACADEMY, 
& MOBILE KUNJI
Photo by BBC Media Action
36  n  KILKARI , MOBILE ACADEMY, AND MOBILE KUNJI   
mHEALTH FOR MOTHERS
Scaling up free mobile health education to 1 million community 
health workers and 10 million women in partnership with the 
Government of India
India’s maternal and infant mortality rates remain above the Sustainable Development Goal targets.  The Government 
of India is making considerable investments in this area and various innovative approaches and initiatives are evolving 
to bolster these efforts. Leveraging mobile phone technology (mHealth) to change people’s health-seeking behavior is 
key among them. 
In 2012, BBC Media Action, as a part of the Bill & Melinda Gates Foundation-funded Ananya program, designed, 
developed, and rolled out three mHealth services to increase the uptake of life-saving preventative maternal and child 
health behaviors by pregnant women, mothers of children up to two years old, and rural families in Bihar State.  Ananya 
is a collaboration between the Gates Foundation and the Government of Bihar to dramatically reduce maternal and 
infant mortality in the state.
n Kilkari (a baby’s gurgle) is an outbound service that n Mobile Kunji is a free audio-visual job aid that 
delivers weekly, time-appropriate audio messages brings together an interactive voice response (IVR) 
about pregnancy, childbirth, and childcare directly to mobile service with a printed deck of cards with 
families’ mobile phones from the second trimester of important health messages. It is designed to improve 
pregnancy until the child is one year old. engagement between community health workers 
 Mobile Academy is an IVR training course designed (CHWs) and families, thus leading to healthier n
to refresh CHWs’ knowledge of simple steps behavior by new and expecting mothers.
families can take to improve the health of mothers 
and babies, and to improve their ability to clearly 
communicate them.
Given the success of these services, on 15 January 2016 the Government of India launched Kilkari and Mobile 
Academy nationally to train one million health workers and help nearly 10 million new & expecting mothers make 
healthier choices.
About Kilkari, Mobile Academy, and Mobile Kunji 
K ilkari, Mobile Academy, and Mobile Kunji all use IVR At the national level, both Mobile Academy and Kilkari have technology that is already being used by the commer- been integrated with the government’s Maternal and Child 
cial mobile industry to make audio content available to any Tracking System (MCTS). Currently 1.3 million pregnant 
mobile phone across India. No new handsets, software, or women and mothers across six states who have registered 
technical skills are required for target groups to use the proj- mobile numbers on MCTS are automatically subscribed so 
ect’s services, allowing accessibility at scale from the outset. that they begin receiving weekly calls. Similarly, only CHWs, 
A robust, open source mobile health platform called Mobile who are registered in MCTS can dial into Mobile Academy 
Technology for Community Health (MOTECH) powers all and access the four-hour training course. They dial a 12-digit 
three services. for access; bookmarking technology allows them to return to 
the exact location in the course whenever they like. 
mHEALTH COMPENDIUM  SPECIAL EDITION 2016  n  37
Program Design Process
When the three services were first being designed for rollout began to conceptualize and design the services. This involved 
in Bihar, the goal was to create mHealth services that are technological design and development, checking health 
scalable across the state and eventually across the country.  content, and conducting several rounds of user-testing and 
Bihar alone has a population of 108 million people, includ- content pretesting.
ing 27 million women of childbearing age, and over 80% of A user-centric design approach was employed during devel-
the population is rural with limited access to traditional me- opment involving feedback and inputs from CHWs. Mobile 
dia (TV and radio). However, 83% of women have access to Kunji, Mobile Academy, and Kilkari (user interface and con-
mobile phones, but most of these are low-end basic phones. tent) went through four rounds of rigorous user-testing and 
The aim was to use low-end technology for high-end gains, pretesting with CHWs and families to assess comprehension, 
sustainably scale the solutions for millions of people, and usability, and perceived value. The services were modified 
create services that did not require smartphones, software, or based on the results of each round of user-testing and then 
technical skills to use. tested again until satisfactory results were achieved.
The solution was found through Kilkari, Mobile Academy, BBC Media Action collaborated with the Ministry of Health 
and Mobile Kunji. All services are handset agnostic and em- and Family Welfare (MOHFW), the National Health System 
ploy easy-to-use familiar IVR technology. Mobile Academy Resource Centre, and National Health Missions (NHMs) in 
empowers CHWs to access affordable standardized training the states and experts in the field of reproductive, maternal, 
content on their own terms; Kilkari delivers time-sensitive newborn, child, and adolescent health (RMNCH+A) to 
audio messages directly to the mobile phones of families; and compile the technical health content for all three services. 
Mobile Kunji gets around the challenge of delivering audio Before services were launched, the technical health content 
and visual content without distributing expensive hardware. went through a rigorous vetting and approval process at 
BBC Media Action began by researching its audiences: MOHFW. This ensured that health content was aligned 
CHWs, pregnant women, and mothers of young children with national guidelines. In addition, a plan for periodically 
and their families. It conducted a landscaping study to updating content was developed to ensure that it remains 
understand their mobile ownership and usage patterns and accurate and relevant to the audiences. 
Growth in Scale
The rollout and scale-up of the three services in individual in January 2016. The services will be rolled-out in three 
states has involved working with the MOHFW at the na- phases to train 1 million community health workers and help 
tional level, the NHMs at the national and state level, and  nearly 10 million new and expecting mothers make healthier 
an alliance of donors (Gates Foundation, USAID, Barr choices and lead longer, healthier lives. In phase one of the 
Foundation, and UK Department for International Develop- national scale-up, Kilkari was rolled out in six Empowered 
ment (UKAid)). Action Group states (Jhakrhand, Madhya Pradesh, Odisha, 
In May 2012, BBC Media Action launched Mobile Academy Rajasthan, Uttarakhand, Uttar Pradesh) and Mobile Acad-
and Mobile Kunji in Bihar as part of the Ananya program. emy was rolled out in Jhakrhand, Madhya Pradesh, Rajas-
In August 2013, BBC Media Action then launched Kilkari than, and Uttarakhand. In phase two, the two services will 
in Bihar under the same program. In 2014, Mobile Academy be scaled to an additional three states (planned for 2017); 
and Mobile Kunji were launched in Odisha with funding in phase three, the services will be scaled across the country 
from UKAid and the state government, and in 2015, with (planned for 2018 onwards).  In 2015, the Barr Foundation 
funding from the Gates Foundation and the state govern- and USAID joined the national scale-up effort. BBC Media 
ment, the two services (Mobile Kunji and Mobile Academy) Action has worked in partnership with the Grameen Foun-
were launched in Uttar Pradesh. dation since 2011 to scale MOTECH to power the services. 
MOTECH continues to be the engine for the national 
In 2014, the MOHFW expressed interest in rolling out deployment. BBC Media Action, in partnership with state 
Mobile Academy and Kilkari nationally. At that time, BBC governments, is also scaling Mobile Kunji in Bihar, Odisha, 
Media Action and the Gates Foundation began working with and Uttar Pradesh, and rollout is planned in Jharkhand later 
MOHFW to take the services to scale. The national launch in 2016.
of Mobile Academy and Kilkari by the MOHFW took place 
38  n  KILKARI , MOBILE ACADEMY, AND MOBILE KUNJI   
Mobile Kunji (left) and Mobile Academy (right)
Evaluation and Results
Kilkari is being rolled out in six states currently to reach content has been played to families (in what volume and 
approximately one million families, with a goal to rapidly with what frequency). Tracking these indicators over time 
scale to reach 10 million families a year. Mobile Academy provides key insights that enable on-ground project staff and 
is now being rolled out to 432,000 health workers in Bihar, government officials to make timely decisions about imple-
Jharkhand, Madhya Pradesh, Odisha, Rajasthan, Uttara- mentation and planning.
khand, and Uttar Pradesh. The MOHFW plans to scale Indicators to monitor the usage of Mobile Academy include 
Mobile Academy to reach nearly a million health workers the uptake of the service by CHWs—this includes the num-
over the next three years. Mobile Kunji is being rolled out on ber of unique users, the minutes consumed, progression and 
a state-by-state basis to more than 282,000 CHWs in Bihar, competition by CHWs in the four-hour course. This data 
Odisha, and Uttar Pradesh, with plans to scale to Jharkhand can be aggregated for each block (smallest administrative 
soon. unit in a state), district, and state. Project staff and govern-
The results of a usage and engagement study, commissioned ment officials at these levels can monitor this data and use it 
by BBC Media Action and carried out by the Indian Market to support and encourage CHWs in low-performing blocks 
Research Bureau in Bihar in 2014, indicate that exposure to to complete the course and help them if they have run into 
Mobile Kunji is positively associated with: significant increas- difficulties. 
es in the knowledge, confidence, and credibility of CHWs; The indicators to assess the uptake of Kilkari include the 
positive significant difference in the quality of CHWs’ inter- number of users called by the service, the number of success-
actions with new and expecting mothers; positive significant ful calls, minutes of content heard. The data generated can 
difference in levels of knowledge of life-saving preventative be aggregated, analyzed, and used by project and government 
health behaviors among new and expecting mothers; and staff to understand why the duration of messages listened to 
positive significant difference in adoption of life-saving in one block, district, or state is lower than another. 
preventative health behaviors by new and expecting mothers. 
A limited evaluation of Mobile Academy was also carried out Indicators for Mobile Kunji include the number of CHWs 
as part of the usage and engagement study. It showed that using the service, how many minutes heard, and specific 
Mobile Academy had a positive impact on the knowledge health information accessed. This data can be used by project 
and confidence of CHWs, improved their standing in the and government staff to understand why CHWs are not dis-
community, and resulted in recognition from their peers. cussing a particular behavior. Based on this information, field 
staff can provide additional support in the form of training 
Mobile usage data provides real-time information about or mentoring.
Kilkari usage patterns by beneficiaries as well as CHWs’ 
progress through Mobile Academy and which Mobile Kunji 
mHEALTH COMPENDIUM  SPECIAL EDITION 2016  n  39
Photo by Priyanka Dutt
Lessons Learned in Program Implementation and Scaling
n Demonstrate sustained adoption at scale, as well as Essentially, it reduced the total cost of government 
health impact. One of the biggest challenges that state ownership. However, when deciding to use open source 
and national governments face is in scaling mHealth solu- software, it is critical for the development community to 
tions beyond pilot stage. It is necessary to plan for growth acknowledge the risk in using open source technology. 
early to figure out the significant financial, technical, Firstly, open source software may be created by organiza-
operational, and legal challenges involved in scaling. tions that might not have the capacity required to support 
 Take the path of least resistance. Modify the ap- the software to industry standard service level agreements n
proach to reduce government procurement challenges. after launch at scale. In addition, although open source 
In India, as in many other countries, the government technology can be adoptable by anyone, in many cases the 
must first go through a procurement process to adopt a people who know best how to fix or further develop an 
technology, product, or service. This can be a time con- application are those who built it. 
suming process. To help avert delays, BBC Media Action n Localize content, test that it works, and keep tech-
set up a toll free centralized long code platform, where nical information relevant and up-to-date. Under-
shortcodes and integration with multiple operators’ stand who the target audience is and ensure that content 
billing systems were not required, and government only is relevant, understandable, and engaging. It’s vital that 
needed to contract one operator via a standard competi- the technical health content is reviewed periodically and 
tive process. updated as required. It’s best to set up a process that 
n To generate wider interest, demonstrate demand for ensures that key stakeholders review and update content 
services not just from users, but from state gov- periodically.
ernments. The national government’s interest in BBC n Content licensing protects quality. BBC Media 
Media Action’s services grew after it scaled beyond Bihar. Action is licensing its mobile health content, developed 
The launch in Odisha with support from UKAid and the with funding from the Gates Foundation, DFID, and 
state government in February 2014, and further program the Barr Foundation, to the government of India at 
growth in other states drew attention at the national level. no cost. However, the content is not open source—it 
 Be prepared to cope with the challenges of scaling cannot be downloadable by anyone under a Creative n
and supporting open source software. Open source Commons license. BBC Media Action licenses its health 
software is used to power Kilkari, Mobile Academy, and content—usually royalty free—on a case-by-case basis 
Mobile Kunji because by investing in  an open source to ensure that it remains factually accurate, complies 
mobile health platform, the financial hurdles that the with government policies and guidelines, is used in the 
government faces in adopting the system are limited. context it was designed for, and is being used with the 
consent of the people featured.
Future Plans 
National launch of Mobile Academy and Kilkari by the na- MOTECH) so it can handle calls to and from 35 states, 
tional government took place in January 2016. The services and to support software for a period of three years (through 
will be rolled-out in three phases, adding states in phase one December 2018). Support from USAID and the Gates 
and two during 2016 and 2017 dependent on feedback from Foundation contributes to the national scale-up effort over 
users and successful adoption of the services in the phase the next two and a half years. Further investment is required 
one states. In 2018, there are plans to begin scaling the two for developing different language versions of the two services, 
services to the rest of the country, reaching a total of 1 mil- to carry out monitoring and evaluation of the project, and 
lion CHWs and 10 million pregnant women and mothers of to document the five-year learning journey from research 
children under one year of age. BBC Media Action, in part- and development to national scale-up. BBC Media Action is 
nership with state governments, is also scaling Mobile Kunji currently working to design impact-evaluation studies and a 
in Bihar, Odisha, and Uttar Pradesh, and rollout is planned cost-benefit analysis of all three services to assess the value of 
in Jharkhand later in 2016. delivering free health education to millions of beneficiaries 
The Gates Foundation’s investment has covered the cost of and health workers.   n
scaling the software for the two services  (including 
40  n  KILKARI , MOBILE ACADEMY, AND MOBILE KUNJI   
Snapshot: Kilkari, Mobile Academy, Mobile Kunji
Geographic India
Coverage Mobile Kunji: Bihar, Odisha, Uttar Pradesh
Mobile Academy: Bihar, Odisha, Uttar Pradesh, 
Rajasthan, Madhya Pradesh, Jharkhand, and 
Uttarakhand
Kilkari: Odisha, Uttar Pradesh, Rajasthan, Madhya 
Pradesh, Jharkhad, and Uttarakhand
Implementation May 2012 to present: Mobile Kunji and Mobile 
Dates Academy
May 2013 to present: Kilkari
Implementation BBC Media Action (implementing organization)
Partners Pathfinder Intl. (Dec 2010-Mar 2016) 
(implementation partner)
Grameen Foundation; OnMobile; Onion 
Development Technologies; IMIMobile; GSMA 
(technology partners)
Government of India Ministry of Health & Family 
Welfare, State National Health Missions (partners)
Donor(s) Bill & Melinda Gates Foundation; USAID; Barr 
Foundation; UKAid
Contact Sara Chamberlain, Director, Digital, BBC Media 
Information Action, India  
sara.chamberlain@in.bbcmediaaction.org
References & Additional Resources
Yvonne MacPherson and Sara Chamberlain. “Health on the Move: Can Mobile Phone’s Save Lives?” February 2013.  
www.bbc.co.uk/mediaaction/publications-and-resources/policy/briefings/asia/india/policy_mhealth
Sara Chamberlain. “A Mobile Guide Toward Better Health.” Innovations. MIT Press. 2014.   
mitpressjournals.org/userimages/ContentEditor/1415302178306/INNOVATIONS_DIGITAL-INCLUSION.pdf
Video: Design thinking behind Mobile Kunji and Mobile Academy: youtu.be/IUIDhU_Zjcc
Video: Impact of Mobile Kunji and Mobile Academy: youtu.be/KtI-XgCuhTg
Priyanka Dutt. Six Lessons I learnt while Trying to Reach 10 Million Women in India with Life-saving Health Information. April 2016. 
blogs.worldbank.org/publicsphere/blog-post-month-six-lessons-i-learnt-while-trying-reach-10-million-women-india-life-saving-health
Bihar project website: www.rethink1000days.org
References
1. Impact of Audio-Visual Job Aid on Influencing Family Health Outcomes in Bihar: Findings from the Usage and Engagement study on Mobile 
Kunji. www.rethink1000days.org/wp-content/uploads/2016/02/Detailed-presentation_-study-on-effectiveness-of-Mobile-Kunji.pdf
2. Priyanka Dutt. “Technology saving millions of lives.” Huffington Post. January 2016. www.huffingtonpost.co.uk/priyanka-dutt/technology-
saving-millions-of-lives_b_9058016.html
mHEALTH COMPENDIUM  SPECIAL EDITION 2016  n  41
