Towards the Development of 
an mHealth Strategy: 
A Literature Review 
_____________________________________ 
 
 
 
 
 
Original Draft prepared by Patricia N. Mechael August 2007 
For the World Health Organization 
 
 
 
Update by Daniela Sloninsky for the Millennium Villages Project 
The Earth Institute at Columbia University 
August 2008 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 1 
Table of Contents 
 
Acknowledgements........................................................................................................3 
List of Acronyms ............................................................................................................5 
Introduction ....................................................................................................................7 
mHealth Review Overview.............................................................................................9 
Section 1. mHealth as a Critical Domain within eHealth ..........................................11 
eHealth trends.................................................................................................. 11 
WHO eHealth Priorities .................................................................................... 13 
mHealth trends................................................................................................. 14 
Section 2. Review of Technologies & Technological Capabilities ..........................17 
I. Mobile phones............................................................................................... 19 
II. Personal Digital Assistants (PDA) and Smart Phones................................. 22 
III. Mobile telemedicine devices and patient monitoring systems .................... 24 
IV. MP3 players and data storage devices ...................................................... 26 
V. Mobile computing and Convergence of Technologies................................. 28 
Section 3. mHealth Applications and WHO’s eHealth Mandate...............................30 
mHealth for Health Promotion.......................................................................... 31 
mHealth for Supporting Health Work Force ..................................................... 34 
mHealth for Enhanced Service Delivery .......................................................... 37 
Section 4. mHealth Partnerships ................................................................................40 
Engaging Technology Developers ................................................................... 41 
Policy Makers, Academic Institutions, and NGOs............................................ 42 
Section 5. Considerations and Approaches ..............................................................47 
Capacity Building ............................................................................................. 49 
Monitoring and Evaluation................................................................................ 49 
Alternative Approaches.................................................................................... 49 
Challenges ....................................................................................................... 50 
Legal and Ethical Issues .................................................................................. 51 
Section 6. Recommendations .....................................................................................53 
Conclusion....................................................................................................................56 
References… ................................................................................................................57 
APPENDIX: Tables 1-6 mHealth Projects...................................................................63 
 
 2 
Acknowledgements 
 
 
There are many colleagues to whom we owe a debt of gratitude. Without 
their work and guidance the original draft report prepared for WHO would 
not have been possible.  First, I would like to thank Yunkap Kwankam, the 
Coordinator of the Global Observatory for eHealth at WHO, for his strategic 
vision in the practical use of mobile technology as a tool to promote health 
throughout the world.  It is the extension of this vision to harness the 
potential of mobile communication technologies that this report has been 
commissioned. I also would like to thank Walter Curioso, Bruce Dahlman, 
Ayedee Domingo, Paul Fontelo, Richard Heeks, Adesina Iluyemi, Robert 
Istepanian, Warren Kaplan, Jose Lacal, Alvin Marcelo, Lloyd Marshall, 
Birhanu Mekuria, Lady Murrugarra, Neil Pakenham-Walsh, G.V. Ramaraju, 
Ulrike Rivette, Francisco Rubio, and Mitul Shah for reviewing drafts and 
sharing information resources, contacts, and strategic recommendations 
that have been integrated throughout this document. Much appreciation is 
owed to the organizers of the Med-e-Tel 2007 conference in Luxembourg 
for providing a platform for gathering useful recommendations as well as 
information on the state-of-the-art in mobile eHealth solutions throughout 
the world. To the many others who have contributed to this process in other 
ways, many thanks.    
 
In addition, we would like to acknowledge our colleagues at the Earth 
Institute at Columbia University for the strategic vision to facilitate our 
update of the original review and apply findings from the literature to the 
development of an mHealth Strategy. This strategy forms the foundation for 
the implementation of scalable mHealth solutions in partnership with 
Ericsson and Sony Ericsson in 10 countries in Africa, ranging from rural-
based Emergency Medical Service delivery and mobile telemedicine to the 
development of decision support and data collection tools. Using this 
strategy, the Millennium Villages Project provides a critical opportunity to 
explore how mobile technology can be leveraged to achieve the MDGs for 
health.  
 
There were a number of challenges that were encountered while 
developing this review.  The first was maintaining a focus on low and 
middle income countries in a learning environment where much of what is 
documented in mHealth is focused on applications developed and 
deployed in high income countries.  Where appropriate, lessons from high 
 3 
income countries have been integrated to illustrate the potential of such 
applications in low and middle income countries.  Another challenge faced 
in developing this review was in maintaining a balanced approach between 
identifying health-related information and communication needs and 
applying technology strategically as a tool versus the more traditional use 
of technology as a driver of change within the health sector.  To address 
this dichotomous representation within the literature, we have presented 
both perspectives based on how they have been communicated within the 
literature. Where possible, the strategic application of technology as a tool 
within broader health sector objectives has been prioritized. Despite a 
growing body of knowledge related to mHealth in low and middle income 
countries, there is a critical learning gap in the availability of evaluation data 
for strategic planning at a large scale.  
 
The study of mobile and wireless communication technology and health is 
a moving target, as the availability and accessibility to technology is 
constantly in flux. As such, this document ought to continue to be viewed 
as a living review that will be updated regularly based on newly 
documented initiatives and trends.   
 
 
 4 
List of Acronyms 
 
 
ART Antiretroviral Therapy 
AIDS Acquired Immunodeficiency Syndrome 
BCC Behavior Change Communication 
CSR Corporate Social Responsibility 
DHS Demographic and Health Survey 
DfID Department for International Development (United 
Kingdom) 
DOI Digital Opportunity Initiative 
F/OSS Free and Open Source Software 
GIS Geographical Information System 
HMIS Health Management Information System 
HIV Human Immunodeficiency Virus 
ICT Information and Communication Technology 
ITU International Telecommunications Union 
MDG Millennium Development Goal 
MARS Mobile Anti-retroviral Support 
MIT Massachusetts Institute of Technology 
MOH Ministry of Health 
NGO Non-governmental Organization 
NHS National Health Service 
NLM National Library of Medicine 
OHT Open Health Tools 
OMPT One Media Player per Teacher 
PAHO Pan-American Health Organization 
PDA Personal Digital Assistant 
PEPFAR Presidential Emergency Plan for AIDS Relief 
RESCUER Rural Extended Services and Care for Ultimate Emergency 
 5 
Relief 
SARI Sustainable Access in Rural India 
SMS Short Message Service 
TALC Teaching Aids at Low Costs 
TATRC Telemedicine and Advanced Technology Research Center 
TBA Traditional Birth Attendant 
TB Tuberculosis 
UNDP United Nations Development Program 
UNPAN United Nations Public Administration Network 
USAID United States Agency for International Development 
VGF Vodafone Group Foundation 
WHO World Health Organization 
 6 
Introduction 
 
 
Health in Low and Middle Income Countries 
 
Background 
Over the course of the past 40 years, great efforts have been made to 
highlight and address critical public health problems throughout the world, 
particularly in low and middle income countries. The Declaration of Alma 
Ata in 1978 highlighted health as a “most important world-wide social good” 
(World Health Organization, 1978). The declaration introduced the concept 
of Primary Health Care, which has since formed the basis for health service 
delivery systems throughout the world (World Health Organization, 1978). 
More recently, the Millennium Development Goals (MDG) were developed 
to provide macro level targets towards which the broad range of 
development and health stakeholders can aim interventions.  In keeping 
with the WHO definition for health as “a state of complete physical, mental, 
and social well-being and not merely the absence of disease or infirmity,” 
(World Health Organization, 1946) almost all of the MDGs have some 
association with health. This series of output and outcome targets include 
those associated with poverty reduction, education, and technology.   
 
The Millennium Development Goals 
The MDGs that specifically address health as set forth by the United 
Nations Millennium Declaration in 2000 include (United Nations, 2000): 
• Reducing child mortality 
• Improving maternal health 
• Combating HIV and AIDS, malaria, and other diseases 
• Increasing access to safe drinking water  
A progress report published in 2007 indicates that childhood immunization 
and deliveries by skilled birth attendants are on the rise, while many 
regions continue to struggle to achieve reductions in the prevalence of the 
diseases of poverty including malaria, HIV and AIDS and tuberculosis (TB) 
(United Nations, 2007).   
 
Health Workforce 
Increasing attention has also been drawn to the critical shortages in trained 
healthcare personnel throughout the world. There are now 57 countries 
 7 
with critical shortages in health work force density with a global deficit of 
2.4 million doctors, nurses, and midwives (World Health Organization, 
2006). Investing in the training and ongoing development of the healthcare 
work force is considered among the most effective means of improving 
health (World Health Organization, 2006).    
 8 
mHealth Review Overview 
 
 
The purpose of this report is to map what is known about a broad 
range of mobile and wireless technologies and the contributions that 
they are making towards achieving healthcare objectives in low and 
middle income countries. 
This report is divided into six sections: 
 
Section 1 provides an overview of mHealth as a domain within eHealth 
and key strategic learning that ought to be applied to the formal integration 
of mobile technologies within the health sector.   
 
Section 2 reviews health-related applications associated with mobile 
phones, PDAs, remote patient monitoring systems, MP3 players, and other 
mobile technologies.   
 
Section 3 explores how various technologies are being used to achieve 
health objectives, including improved access to health services, health 
service delivery, disease surveillance and control, prevention and well-
being, and human resources development.  These are presented within the 
broader framework of WHO’s eHealth priority action areas:  
1) ICT for health promotion (and prevention) 
2) ICT for human resources for health 
3) ICT for service delivery 
 
Section 4 documents key leaders and partnerships that have emerged to 
test and expand mHealth in low and middle income countries. The 
emergence of creative partnerships between governments, technology 
companies, telecommunications service providers, international donors, 
academic institutions, implementing partners, and health service providers 
is a significant feature of this movement. The need for such collaborative 
efforts cannot be overemphasized, particularly as efforts intensify to 
achieve the MDGs for health as well as to reduce the digital divide 
(Fontelo, 2007).  
 
 9 
Section 5 provides critical considerations based on early mHealth 
initiatives and research.  Such considerations include using health 
information and communication needs of various stakeholders as the 
starting point for identifying appropriate tools and technologies (Pakenham-
Walsh, 2007), the rapidly changing environment of mHealth and the nature 
of mobile technologies (Istepanian, 2004) and the need to build on existing 
access to mobile communication technologies within the general population 
and health sector as well as informal usage patterns (Mechael, 2006).   
 
Section 6 provides key recommendations for next steps in the area of 
mHealth.   
 
 
This report draws heavily on the work of many pioneers who have developed innovative 
approaches to improving health care and making the health service delivery 
environment more efficient and effective.  It is based on an intensive review of peer-
reviewed literature, program evaluation and industry reports, and grey literature, as well 
as communication with a broad range of stakeholders.  Drafts of this report have been 
shared with a committee of advisors whose feedback has been integrated and cited as 
appropriate. 
 
 10 
Section 1. 
mHealth: a critical domain within eHealth
 
 
eHealth Trends 
 
Alongside endeavors to improve health outcomes are concerted efforts to 
reduce the digital divide, or differential access to technology of low, middle, 
and high income countries and of rich and poor within the same country. 
Regarding the digital divide, the world has witnessed significant increases 
in the numbers of internet users as well as mobile and fixed-line telephone 
subscribers in the past five years (Curioso, 2006; United Nations, 2006). It 
is at the cross section of health and technological domains that eHealth 
initiatives have evolved, creating an unprecedented opportunity to improve 
access to services and efficiency within the health sector in low and middle 
income countries.   
 
eHealth 
eHealth (or electronic health) is broadly defined by the World Heath 
Organization as the “use of information and communication technology for 
health” (World Health Organization, 2005b).  The main objective of eHealth 
programs is to use Information and Communication Technology (ICT) to 
improve healthcare service delivery and health outcomes through the 
strategic use of technologies such as computers, Internet, satellite 
receivers, mobile phones, and Personal Digital Assistants (PDA). The 
increasing availability of free and open source software (F/OSS) will more 
affordably extend the benefits of a broad range of higher quality targeted 
eHealth solutions to low and middle income countries (Lacal, 2007).  In 
addition the expansion and enhancement of wireless networks throughout 
low and middle income countries will increase access and capabilities of 
these technologies to healthcare providers and the general public in more 
remote geographical locations.   
 
Uses of eHealth 
eHealth has great potential to promote healthy lifestyles, improve decisions 
by health professionals as well as patients, and enhance healthcare quality 
by improving access to medical and health information and facilitating 
instantaneous communication in places where this was not previously 
 11 
possible (Shields, Chetley, & Davis, 2005; World Health Organization, 
2005b). The increased use of technology can help reduce health care costs 
by improving efficiencies in the health care system and promoting 
prevention through behavior change communication (BCC).  It also has the 
potential to advance clinical care and public health services by facilitating 
health professional practice and communication and reducing health 
disparities by applying new approaches to improve the health of isolated 
populations.   
 
The initial focus of many eHealth initiatives has been the use of the Internet 
to promote the organization of and access to health-related information. For 
the health sector the key areas of benefit include the development of 
Health Information Systems (HIS), Knowledge Management, Electronic 
Patient Health Records, open access to electronic medical journals, and 
eLearning and training for health care professionals. As of May 2008, the 
overall penetration of Internet users within the global population was 
21.2%, ranging from 5.3% in Africa to 14.0% in Asia to 23.8% in Latin 
America and 73.4% in North America1.  The emergence of internet cafes 
and kiosks in low and middle income countries extends the benefits of e-
mail and the world wide web to a larger audience.   
  
More recently there has been a growing interest within the health sector to 
capitalize on the rapid uptake of mobile communication technologies and 
the overall improvements in telecommunications within the general 
population throughout the world. Characterized as a ‘leapfrog technology,’ 
mobile phones have allowed developing countries, even those with 
relatively poor infrastructure, to bypass fixed-line technology (Economist, 
2008).  
 
Data illustrating these trends are increasingly becoming available on ICT 
usage in Africa. The International Telecommunications Union published 
Africa ICT Indicators for 2007, detailing usage of fixed-line telephone, 
mobile, and Internet users by country.2 The number of mobile users 
worldwide by the end of 2007 was 3.3 billion with a penetration rate of 49 
percent.3 The report also indicates that between 2005 and 2007, Africa 
added over 60 million new mobile subscribers, with mobile phones 
comprising about 90 percent of all telephone subscribers and mobile 
                                                
1 http://www.internetworldstats.com/stats.htm 
2 http://www.itu.int/ITU-D/ict/statistics/at_glance/af_ictindicators_2007.html 
3 http://www.cellular-news.com/story/31352.php 
 12 
penetration is close to 30 percent.4 According to MIT’s Entrepreneurial 
Programming and Research on Mobiles Unit, Africa’s cell phone usage has 
increased 65% per year for the past five years from approximately 63 
million users in 2004 to 152 million in 2006 (Haynes, 2008).  
 
The cost of mobile technology deployment is rapidly decreasing (Domingo, 
2007). In addition, increasing functionality of newer phones enables 
SmartPhone-capability in relatively inexpensive phones (Domingo, 2007).  
The capabilities of mobile phones in low and middle income countries has 
not reached the sophistication of those in high income countries, which now 
enable web browsing, GPS navigation, and e-mail access. In spite of these 
differentials, the basic SMS text functions and real-time communication 
capacity of devices available in low and middle income countries offer a 
broad range of potential benefits to the health sector (Mechael, 2006). 
Increased availability and efficiency in both voice and data-transfer systems 
in addition to rapid deployment of wireless infrastructure will likely 
accelerate the deployment of mobile-enabled health systems and services 
throughout the world (Istepanian, 2004).   
 
WHO eHealth Priorities 
 
In 2005, at its 58th session, the World Health Assembly adopted a 
resolution that established an eHealth strategy for the World Health 
Organization (WHO).  To implement its formal program on eHealth, the 
WHO created the Global Observatory for eHealth (World Health 
Organization, 2005b). The role of the Global Observatory for eHealth is to 
provide evidence-based guidance to countries and institutions involved in 
healthcare programs about the broad range of eHealth activities that are 
being implemented throughout the world and what is working and/or not 
working (Kwankam, 2007).  The Observatory serves as a convener to 
enhance strategic thinking and guidance in various aspects of eHealth. It is 
one of several WHO initiatives developed to support the implementation of 
the World Health Assembly resolution.  
 
As a first step, the observatory has conducted a world wide survey to 
obtain a baseline on eHealth activities in member countries (World Health 
Organization, 2005a).  Key steps are being taken within this effort to 
promote the monitoring and evaluation of eHealth services for more 
                                                
4 http://www.itu.int/ITU-D/ict/publications/africa/2008/index.html 
 13 
strategic decision-making.  At the national and district levels, WHO 
promotes an approach that first looks at basic needs within the healthcare 
system and how appropriately and effectively ICTs can be used as tools to 
contribute to addressing them.  It is the intention to view the use of 
technological solutions in relation to how their application can more 
effectively impact key MDG indicators including childhood and maternal 
mortality as well as healthcare worker density (Kwankam, 2007).   
 
In an effort to better understand and document global technology trends, 
the WHO in collaboration with the European Union published Connecting 
for Health: Global Vision, Local Insight: Country Profiles 2006.  This report, 
prepared for the World Summit on the Information Society, documents 
demographic, health, and ICT diffusion indices for over 190 countries 
(World Health Organization, 2006). This resource can be used by policy 
makers, technology companies, and health administrators as a guide to 
rank on which ICT to focus to address priority healthcare concerns.  With 
the growing interest at the end of 2006 in mobile telemedicine and the use 
of mobile phones and other mobile communication technologies within the 
health sector, the WHO program has begun exploring the development of a 
mobile e-health or mHealth strategy.  As a first step towards the 
development of a strategy, WHO commissioned this mHealth Review in 
2007. It has since been updated for the Earth Institute at Columbia 
University in 2008, to further document what is being done within this field 
as it specifically relates to low and middle income countries. 
 
mHealth Trends 
What is mHealth? 
mHealth broadly encompasses the use of mobile telecommunication and 
multimedia technologies as they are integrated within increasingly mobile 
and wireless health care delivery systems (Istepanian & Lacal, 2003).  It 
can be defined as “mobile computing, medical sensor, and 
communications technologies for health care” (Istepanian, 2004).   
 
mHealth and eHealth 
The WHO’s report entitled, eHealth Tools and Services: Needs of Member 
States (2006), highlights many of the eHealth needs in low and middle 
income countries many of which also apply to mHealth.  This review by 
 14 
WHO is a direct contribution towards the proposed actions set forth in the 
report, namely: facilitating knowledge exchange and providing eHealth 
information (World Health Organization, 2005b).  Of direct relevance to 
mHealth are increasing trends towards migrating many of the pre-existing 
eHealth systems onto mobile platforms.  For example, many disease 
surveillance systems are increasingly becoming a combined system of 
computer databases, PDAs, and mobile phones networked towards 
monitoring and managing disease outbreaks (Rubio, 2007).   
 
Mobile technologies and the future 
Mobile communication technologies are tools that can be leveraged to 
support existing workflows within each of the areas specified above.  There 
is much learning from eHealth that provides a critical lens through which to 
review existing technological trends and applications. First, mobile 
technologies are not objectives, but tools, that ought to be applied in ways 
to achieve local, national, and regional health objectives (Shields, Chetley, 
& Davis, 2005) as well as contribute to improving the lives of individuals 
(SatelLife, 2005). Second, there is insufficient impact data about how 
mobile technologies are influencing health outcomes, creating challenges 
to identify and replicate best practices (Kaplan, 2007; Shields, Chetley, & 
Davis, 2005). Impact evaluation is necessary to move beyond discussions 
of the potential impact that such technological solutions might have and 
anecdotal examples of how they are already being used for health. Third, 
mobile technologies are only as good as the information and 
communication to which they provide access (Shields, Chetley, & Davis, 
2005).  Access to reliable and relevant content at the right time is a critical 
consideration within both e- and mHealth (Pakenham-Walsh, 2007).  And 
finally, there is a need to move away from pilot programs and case studies 
to more formal application and learning to set the foundation for national 
programs and policies (Shields, Chetley, & Davis, 2005).5  
 
mHealth focus areas  
Emerging trends of interest within mHealth include the use of mobile 
technologies in the following capacities: 
 
                                                
5 A comprehensive knowledge map of ICT and Health developed by the World Bank’s InfoDev Program 
includes a limited number of case studies documenting the use of mobile technologies within the health 
sector (www.asksource.info/res_library/ict.htm). As appropriate these have been incorporated into this 
review.   
 
 15 
Emergency response systems (road traffic accidents, emergency 
obstetric care, etc.) 
Disease surveillance and control (Malaria, HIV/AIDS, TB, Avian Flu, 
chronic diseases- esp. diabetes) 
Human resources coordination, management, and supervision 
Synchronous and asynchronous mobile telemedicine diagnostic and 
decision support for clinicians at point-of-care 
Remote patient monitoring and clinical care 
Health extension services, health promotion, and community mobilization 
Health services monitoring and reporting 
Health-related m-learning for the general public  
Training and continuing professional development for health care workers 
 
 16 
Section 2. 
Review of Technologies & Technological 
Capabilities  
 
 
Over the past ten years, mobile communication technologies have entered 
the mainstream in high, middle, and low income countries in 
unprecedented and unanticipated ways. Peer-reviewed journal articles, 
case studies, news articles, and reports are now beginning to provide 
insight into the health-related benefits that are being derived (Curioso, 
2006; Donner, 2004; Economist, 2005; Istepanian, 2004; Istepanian & 
Lacal, 2003; Johnson, 2008; Kaplan, 2006; Lacal, 2003; Mechael, 2006; 
Micevska, 2005; Wireless Healthcare, 2005). What remains lacking, 
however, is a systematic evaluation of such technologies and their effect on 
the overall delivery of healthcare (Fontelo, 2007).  
 
As such, key mobile communication technologies under review in this 
report include: 
 
I. Mobile phones 
II. PDAs and smart phones 
III. Patient monitoring devices 
IV. Mobile telemedicine/telecare devices 
V. MP3 players for mLearning 
VI. Mobile Computing 
 
A Technological Ecosystem 
It is critical to view such technologies within an ecosystem of interoperable 
and functional components aimed at addressing key health technology 
objectives. Strategic planning and development processes should begin by 
identifying health priorities and then exploring potential technological 
solutions that can be tailored to work flow and achieving specific needs. 
Efforts to benefit from existing open source solutions are optimal for 
 17 
achieving economies of scale, interoperability, as well as long term 
optimization and expansion support.  
 
Broad Technological Capabilities 
Before discussing the potential of these technology groups, it is important 
to highlight the main capabilities provided, namely voice and data access: 
Voice is usually personal two-way communication, although automated 
systems may provide voice-recorded information. 
   
Data access is primarily focused on visualizing static text but can also 
extend to interactive decision support algorithms, other visual image 
information, and also communication capabilities through the integration 
of e-mail and SMS features.   
 
GIS and GPS integration with mobile technologies adds a geographical 
mapping component that is able to “tag” voice and data communication to 
a particular location or series of locations.   
 
These combined capabilities have been used for emergency health 
services as well as for disease surveillance, health facilities and services 
mapping, and other health-related data collection.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 18 
I. Mobile phones  
 
Uses of Mobile Phones 
Generally studies that explore mobile phones and health have focused on 
their role in supporting a direct healthcare intervention (Kaplan, 2006) or as 
the cause of unsafe driving behaviors and emitters of potentially harmful 
radiation (Agar, 2003).  Since 2005, scattered case studies and anecdotal 
examples documented in the literature on the use of text messaging for 
health, mobile diagnostic and decision support, disease surveillance and 
control, and mobile phones to address emergencies and chronic illness 
have emerged. A comprehensive wireless industry report divides this list 
into 101 explicit health-related activities, highlighting many of the 
opportunities becoming available within the health sector to maximize 
increased access to the technology (Wireless Healthcare, 2005). Within the 
context of such documentation, there is very little evidence on the health 
outcomes related to the direct application of mobile phones to support 
health objectives (Kaplan, 2006; Vodafone, 2006).  
 
A Dearth of Mobile Phone Impact Studies 
According to a Vodafone Policy Paper, mobile phone and health studies 
have been recent and largely focused on the “potential” benefits of the 
technology within the health sector and on their use in developed, rather 
than developing countries (Vodafone, 2006).  Many of the existing studies 
look at the voice and text functions as contributing to improved access and 
efficiency within health care as well as the means by which young people 
can access confidential health-related information (Vodafone, 2006).  As 
observed in other reviews, many of the examples of applications are in the 
pilot stage and have yet to be implemented or evaluated on a significant 
scale.    
 
Mobile Phones as Direct Health Interventions 
In 2006, a review explored studies, primarily in developed countries, that 
looked at direct interventions in which mobile and fixed-line telephones 
phones were used to address health conditions such as diabetes (patient 
blood sugar level monitoring), breast cancer (telephone counseling), 
tuberculosis (adherence to medication), treatment compliance for a variety 
of conditions, attendance at health facility appointments, depression 
outcomes, immunization rates, asthma management, and smoking 
 19 
cessation (Kaplan, 2006). The review specifically explored the use of 
mobile phones for the “express purpose of supporting or altering one or 
more health outcomes” (Kaplan, 2006). Through an intensive web-based 
and library search, the author documented and compiled the results of 
evaluations of intervention studies of fixed-line and mobile telephone 
applications to address specific health care issues in developing countries.  
 
The limited studies that were found were primarily small pilot projects which 
offer mixed results in terms of demonstrating the potential that fixed-line 
and mobile phones have to serve as a support for more effective delivery of 
healthcare services (Kaplan, 2006). Functional and structural properties of 
mobile phones namely low start-up cost, text messaging, and flexible 
payment plans, make them attractive to use as a healthcare intervention 
(Kaplan 2006). With the development of standardized health-related 
software applications, mobile phones can provide real-time feedback and 
pre-programmed portable automated services that enable support to 
increasingly decentralized health systems (Lacal, 2003; Mechael 2006).   
 
Text Messaging for Health 
The primary feature of mobile phones that has been most significantly 
documented in the context of health is text messaging, although there are 
very few empirical studies that have been published or otherwise made 
publicly available on the subject.  
 
Text messaging via mobile phones has garnered increasing attention as a 
means of reminding patients of appointments in the United Kingdom, 
United States, Norway, and Sweden (The Economist, 2006).  The results 
were a lowering of non-attendance to scheduled appointments, yielding 
significant savings in health costs for facilities and practitioners.  In this 
case the benefit is cost-related rather than health outcome related.  Studies 
highlight the potential of mobile phones to disseminate public health 
information and mobilize attendance to vaccination programs particularly in 
developing countries as well as to manage the treatment of diabetes in 
Scotland (The Economist, 2006). Recently, the Patient Care Messaging 
Service for Pharmacies provided by iPLATO has been implemented in 
London pharmacies, using texts to verify patients’ smoking status and invite 
them to take part in smoking cessation services and follow-up treatment.6 
 
                                                
6 http://www.bjhcim.co.uk/news/2008/n807039.htm 
 20 
Other health-related SMS-based systems are currently being implemented 
throughout low and middle income countries. In 2007, a program of text 
message reminders was being designed with a large teaching hospital in 
Johannesburg in an effort to make more efficient use of overworked health 
care workers (Praekelt Foundation, 2007, personal communication). SMS- 
text messaging has also been highlighted as a preferred means of 
communication for mobilizing support and communicating during 
emergency and disaster situations (GSM Association, 2005). FrontlineSMS 
has developed a system using mass texting for surveys and community 
mobilization, which is free for NGOs.7 
 
Mobile Phones and Health Sector Strengthening 
Apart from the use of mobile phones within a broader technological solution 
or as a stand alone intervention is the need to examine the national 
progression of mobile phone use by the health sector as well as the 
general public’s access to health services and information.  
 
An empirical study of health-related uses of mobile phones in Egypt, a low 
middle income country, explored how the general public along with the 
health sector was benefiting from mobile phones in 2002-2003 (Mechael, 
2006). The findings of the study included that with no external stimulus, 
mobile phones are improving access to and coordination of both 
emergency and routine health services as well as contributing to overall 
family well-being (Mechael, 2006).  
 
The study also identified key considerations that must be overcome in 
order to maximize their use within the health sector, namely 1) cost, 2) risk 
perceptions, 3) reliability of telephone systems in health facilities, 4) safety, 
liability, and cost recovery for unknown contacts as well as information and 
services provided at a distance, 5) lack of understanding and use of range 
of functions available through mobile phones, and 6) poor quality of health 
services (Mechael, 2006). Two key recommendations from the study were 
that mHeatlh intiatives ought to help formalize and standardize positive 
informal mobile phone and health activities and build support systems to 
maximize their benefits. For example, the necessary creation of health 
directories and call-in centers would enable faster and more directed 
consultation support for the general public and health professionals 
(Mechael, 2006).    
                                                
7 www.frontlineSMS.com 
 21 
II. Personal Digital Assistants (PDA) and Smart Phones 
 
General Uses of PDAs 
PDAs, particularly in their hybrid combination with mobile phones, have 
become a platform for data collection, processing, and communication 
(Istepanian, 2004).  They are perceived to be portable, durable, powerful 
and relatively easy to use with a short learning period for database 
managers and healthcare providers (SatelLife, 2005). They also enable 
access to information, such as diagnostic support guidelines and treatment 
protocols as well as provide a means of rapid data transfer (SatelLife, 
2005).  
 
Use of PDAs in Low and Middle Income Countries 
Low and middle income countries are making advances in the use of PDAs 
and Geographical Information Systems (GIS) for data collection, 
consolidation, and reporting as well as disease surveillance and control 
(Shields, Chetley, & Davis, 2005). The Demographic and Health Surveys 
(DHS), as coordinated by Macro International, rely heavily on the use of 
PDAs for data collection.8 The work of SatelLife to document its 
experiences in Ghana, Kenya, and Uganda in this area provides key 
opportunities for learning and scale-up (Bridges.org, 2003; SatelLife, 2005).  
Polio and Avian Flu surveillance programs use a combination of mobile 
phones and PDAs to monitor and report cases as well as to coordinate 
public messaging campaigns to notify citizens of potential risks (Chetley, 
2006; Crampton, 2007).  
 
PDAs for Clinical and Health Worker Support 
A study of the degree to which PDA-based clinical reference information 
such as formularies, clinical databases and algorithmic diagnosis decision 
support software can assist clinicians at the point-of-care in remote parts of 
low and middle income countries is in preparation.  Comparing cost 
effectiveness over the long-term and actual use to influence decision-
making in comparison to traditional print resources is planned in Kenya 
(Dahlman, 2007).  Apart from qualitative impressions, it is difficult to 
ascertain how the use of PDAs is contributing to improved health outcomes 
especially in these low and middle income county settings where patient 
follow-up is difficult (Bridges.org, 2003; SatelLife, 2005).   
                                                
8 http://www.orcmacro.com/Information/DataColl/mobile.aspx 
 22 
 
Smart phones are also being used to provide bedside support (point-of-
contact) for clinicians in many high income countries, through access to 
web-based information resources and patient data.  One study conducted 
at Prince George Hospital in Maryland, USA showed that availability of 
reliable updated information from reliable web-based sources through 
smart phones improved evidence-based practice particularly for community 
hospitals and ambulatory clinics without wireless networks (Leon, Fontelo, 
Green, Ackerman, & Lui, 2007).  This will likely have implications for the 
use of such technologies in low and middle income countries in the future. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 23 
III. Mobile telemedicine devices and patient monitoring 
systems  
 
Uses of Mobile Telemedicine Devices and Patient Monitoring Systems 
Mobile telemedicine devices have mostly been deployed in high income 
countries.  These devices and systems have been developed as stand 
alone technologies that use wired and wireless telecommunications 
infrastructure to transmit patient information or are integrated as an add-on 
to mobile phones.  It is perceived that sensor-aided telemedicine devices 
will generate significant cost savings for the health sector by reducing the 
number of patient visits to health facilities and enhancing detection of 
causes for action. As such the “patient becomes the point of care, not the 
doctor or the hospital” (Fuscaldo, 2004). There are now devices that enable 
self-measurement and monitoring/diagnosis of blood pressure 
(hypertension), lung function through a spirometer (respiratory disease) 
and controlled treatment through an inhaler, exercise and fitness, mobile 
ECG, among others. In addition to those mentioned earlier, such systems 
have also been developed by IBM, Ericsson Mobile, and Qualcomm. Self 
monitoring for patients offers higher autonomy, security, and control over 
their own health (Lacal, 2003).  
 
Mobile Telemedicine Devices in Low and Middle Income Countries 
For low and middle income countries, many of these sorts of solutions will 
likely become available in urban centers. Additionally, given demographic 
trends of an aging global population, these devices show promise for the 
extended care of the elderly (Lacal, 2003). By contrast, rural areas, where 
infectious disease priorities persist and human resources are limited, will 
require more basic technological solutions, such as voice-based 
teleconsultation between healthcare providers and citizens (Mechael, 
2006).  
 
Implementing Mobile Telemonitoring Programs 
The question of whether there is sufficient ‘evidence’ to implement 
telehealth programs is frequently asked. An article published by Continua, 
an American telehealth and medical device consortium suggests that there 
is a critical need to move beyond the evidence question, towards devising 
successful telehealth business models and implementing programs. It cites 
results from an internal study on a home telemonitoring program for 
 24 
congestive heart failure, completed by one of the largest health plans and 
health services provider in the United States. Results show drops in 
doctors’ office visits, emergency room visits, inpatient admissions and 
inpatient length of stay, all of which imply a decreased cost burden on the 
American health system (Ayyagari, 2008).  
 
 
 25 
IV. MP3 players and data storage devices 
 
General Uses of MP3 players and data storage devices 
Within discussions of mobile technologies and health, the newest 
technology to come under review for its potential to promote health 
objectives is the MP3 player. MP3 players are able to carry and organize 
large amounts of audible content, whether in the form of music or speech to 
large groups of people through the use of speakers and/or widespread 
distribution to individuals.  So far, there are limited studies as to the 
changes in behavior that one observes when using MP3 players for mass 
communication.   
 
MP3 players and data storage devices for mLearning 
There is a growing trend in universities and schools to use iPods to deliver 
lectures and podcasts as part of the educational process (Carmichael, 
2007), an approach which could easily be used to deliver health 
information. An innovative use of iPods to teach medical cardiology 
students how to identify various types of murmurs was recently launched at 
Temple University (Carmichael, 2007).  Along with educating medical 
professionals, ipods may serve to educate patients as well. A 
cardiovascular surgeon at the Arizona Heart Institute is using iPods to 
educate his patients about diet, exercise, and basic anatomy and surgical 
procedures.9  
 
MP3 players and data storage devices in low and middle income 
countries 
Similarly to trends in high income countries, low and middle income 
countries may also begin to embrace MP3 players and iPod-like devices to 
enhance learning among health care workers in a more decentralized 
portable manner that enables both audio and video capabilities (Chetley, 
2006). The organization One Media Player per Teacher (OMPT) 
specializes in providing iPods and low cost portable media players to 
resource-poor settings.  As a means of improving access to education in 
remote and war-torn settings, their goal is to equip ten million teachers with 
portable media players in support of the MDGs. OMPT has supplied 
US$100 portable media players in Southern Sudan and Haiti.10 Such 
                                                
9 http://www.nursezone.com/Nursing-News-Events/media-library.aspx 
10 http://www.ompt.org/ 
 
 26 
targeted provision of media players in low-income countries could be 
specifically deployed to train community health workers to recognize signs 
of severe illness, educate patients about management of chronic illness 
and communicable diseases, and prevent sexually transmitted illnesses.  
 
 27 
V. Mobile computing and Convergence of Technologies 
 
Mobile Software and Hardware Development 
While eHealth symbolizes the future of health, and especially health care, 
its future lies in divergent technologies and ubiquitous technology systems. 
Increasingly, mobile communication technologies can run a rapidly 
increasing range of software applications (Lacal, 2003).  Mobile software 
development is booming, particularly in high and middle income countries 
where the Windows Mobile Platform and Open Source are enabling smart 
phones (mobile phone and PDA hybrids) to provide basic computer 
functions while in motion (Iluyemi, 2007). Software development is also on 
the rise in low income countries. A recent New York Times article illustrated 
the proliferation of mobile software development in Nairobi, citing both 
opportunities for digital innovation and challenges for local developers. 
Such challenges include slow and expensive internet connections, power 
failures, and the lack of technical educational resources. These local 
mobile software applications, however, tend to consist of more basic code, 
which is ideal for mobile and wireless platforms, particularly for use in low 
and middle income countries (Zachary, 2008).  
 
Hardware ranges from laptops to tablets to smartphones as well as 
specialized health-specific computing devices.  Such systems will likely be 
tailored to suit an individual’s needs and lifestyle through the combined 
integration of wireless technologies envisioned through third (3G) and 
fourth generation (4G) systems, making it easier to interactively acquire 
medical advice and information when and where one wants it (Istepanian, 
2004). 
The rapid growth of wide-ranging mobile health software applications is 
exemplified by the comprehensive United Nations Public Administration 
Network (UNPAN) report of Mobile Applications on Health and Learning, 
compiled in 2007 as part of UNPAN’s Compendium of ICT Applications on 
Electronic Government. The review provides a technical summary of 
mHealth software applications while addressing impact where applicable. 
The Compendium organizes applications by geographic region and 
mHealth sector; that is, Mobile Health (health administration, health care 
delivery systems, health information, patient care) as well as Mobile 
Learning (instructional process, learning products, organizational training 
and informal learning, school administration) (UNPAN, 2007).  
 28 
Ubiquitous Computing 
Rather than computers as distinct entities, ubiquitous computing will embed 
computation into the environment and everyday objects. These include 
wearable devices that can signal to both the individual as well as a 
healthcare provider that a significant change in key indicators has occurred 
(Istepanian, 2004).  In the future, ubiquitous computing will permit people to 
move around and interact with information even more easily and 
organically than they currently do. Short-range mobile transceivers 
embedded into various devices with increasing processing capability will 
permit communication between people and devices, and between devices 
(including medical devices) themselves, thus bringing the dream of health 
care for everyone, wherever they may be, a little closer. Many of the early 
examples in this area are from high income countries, but will likely transfer 
over time to low and middle income countries.  Barriers in low and middle 
income countries will likely be their cost as well as competing infectious 
disease priorities.   
 
Convergence of Technologies 
There is no one solution that is available everywhere, and health 
administrators and technology developers have started combining different 
technologies in different environments:  
Cell-Life – South Africa – A Convergence of Technologies 
In South Africa there is a serious bottleneck in treatment of HIV and AIDS due to 
shortage of qualified pharmacists. This means that rural clinics cannot distribute 
medication. Cell-Life developed a system that combines a cell-phone, the internet and 
computers at various stages to allow the pharmacist (who is usually at a better 
equipped clinic) to package drugs for a rural clinic (which doesn’t have a pharmacist) 
and then a driver takes the package to the clinic (Rivett, 2007). When the package 
leaves the pharmacy the package is equipped with a barcode that relates to the 
patient, the drugs and the clinic. The package is “signed out” and on the computer 
system of the pharmacist has an “in transit” message (Rivett, 2007). Once the 
package arrives in the clinic the nurse scans the package using a wireless scanner (in 
the scanner is a SIMcard that allows data transfer through the GSM network). Once 
the package is scanned in, an “arrived at clinic” message can be seen on the 
pharmacist system (Rivett, 2007). When the patient comes to collect it, it is signed out 
again and the status reads, “package collected by patient”. The pharmacist now knows 
that the package has gone to the patient, and can start preparing the next month's 
supply (Rivett, 2007). 
 
 29 
Section 3.  
mHealth Applications and WHO’s eHealth 
Mandate  
 
 
In order to provide coherence to how mHealth can and is already 
contributing to the mandate of WHO, the following section and 
accompanying appendices highlight various case studies of the use of 
mobile communication technologies for: 
1. Health promotion 
2. Supporting the health work force 
3. Enhancing service delivery 
 
The area of health promotion includes the prevention of disease and 
adverse health conditions in an effort to preserve individual well-being. It 
also includes an individual’s efforts to go from a state of illness to wellness.   
 
The area of supporting the health work force includes enhancing the 
capacity of health care workers to more effectively perform their duties, 
including improving their access to health information.   
 
Enhancing service delivery takes a systems perspective, which includes 
emergency response systems, health service coordination, delivery, and 
administration as well as improving access to services for individuals.    
 
 
For further case studies, please refer to Appendix Tables 1-6: 
Table 1. Treatment Compliance 
Table 2. Health Worker Support and Mobile Telemedicine 
Table 3. HIV/AIDS Prevention and Treatment 
Table 4. Disease Surveillance 
Table 5. Health and Wellbeing Promotion through Targeted Media 
Table 6. Emergency Medical Services 
 30 
1. mHealth for Health Promotion 
 
The use of mobile communication technologies for health promotion can be 
explored from two broad angles: 
 
• Increased demand for health services with improved access to 
telecommunications 
• The direct application of mobile technologies by the health sector for 
the purpose of health promotion 
 
mHealth and Increased demand for health services 
Several studies specifically exploring linkages between the general public 
and the health sector in Bangladesh, Laos, and Egypt have illustrated that 
improved telecommunications with the introduction of mobile phones is 
leading to a more direct link between clients and healthcare workers as well 
as a perceived increase in demand for health services and health-related 
information (Mechael, 2006; Micevska, 2005).   
 
Access to telecommunications extends benefits beyond individual 
households with shared uses often associated with accessing emergency-
related information and transportation (Mechael, 2006; Micevska, 2005).  
These trends will likely intensify as more individuals and households avail 
themselves of mobile and fixed-line telephone services.   
 
Mobile communications for Safety and Security 
Increasingly, mobile phones are carried and domesticated as part of an 
individual’s desire to preserve and maintain safety and security (Agar, 
2003), becoming a part of the social image of the technology (Agar, 2003; 
Ling, 2004).  Safety and security are two aspects of mobile phone use that 
are gaining increased attention in low and middle income countries with 
growing numbers of mobile phone users (Mechael, 2006).  They have 
become a lifeline for many and are carried “just in case” of emergency 
(Ling, 2004).  Special studies are currently underway regarding their use in 
natural disasters such as earthquakes and floods as well as in 
“extraordinary situations” such as terrorist attacks (Ling, 2004). With 
respect to the management of chronic health conditions, mobile phones are 
used to coordinate routine health care as well as emergency care, enabling 
increased mobility particularly among individuals with disabilities (Ling, 
 31 
2004).  As documented by a number of mobile phone researchers, the 
elderly are more able to communicate instantaneously with their children as 
well as health care professionals for guidance on their health than they 
were prior to having a mobile phone (Agar, 2003; Haddon, 2004; Ling, 
2004).    
 
Mobile Communications and Improved Livelihoods 
There are also a number of socially determined health-related benefits 
cited in the literature regarding improved access to telecommunications, 
namely mobile phones (Chetley, 2006; Donner, 2005; Mechael, 2006).  A 
key example is the work of the Village Phone Program initiated by the 
Grameen Bank in Bangladesh in 2001, which is now being replicated in 
Uganda and other countries (Chetley, 2006).  The program provides mobile 
phones to women to sell airtime to the local community. The effects are 
improved economic conditions for participating households as well as 
improved access to telecommunications for access to health care providers 
and information (Chetley, 2006).  These changes are creating economic 
opportunities that in turn have the potential to yield improved access to 
health information and services as well as improved quality of life and 
enhanced well-being.   
 
A health-related extension of this program, called the Grameen 
Healthline,11 was launched in November 2005 in Bangladesh.  The system 
provides a number to the general public, which connects them to a 
registered physician who provides advice and referrals for emergency as 
well as routine health conditions.  In 2007, the program was recognized by 
the GSM Association for its innovative use of mobile phones.  As of 
October 2007, the program was providing medical advice to approximately 
10,000 callers per day.12 
 
Disease Surveillance and Control  
Improved communication along with enforcement within epidemiological 
investigation and disease control has the potential to reduce the risk of 
exposure within the general public to outbreaks of Avian Flu and other 
infectious diseases. In such cases, health administrators are using a 
combination of fixed and mobile telephone systems within an investigation 
                                                
11 http://www.grameenphone.com/index.php?id=106 
12 http://www.grameenphone.com/index.php?id=330 
 
 32 
team to identify the source of an outbreak, develop a response plan, 
mobilize the necessary action to be taken, and ensure enforcement of 
protective measures. Also, individual physicians receiving such cases can 
more quickly detect patterns and report such occurrences to local 
administrators.   
  
Health and wellbeing promotion through targeted media 
There are a growing number of anecdotal examples of general public and 
smaller target group campaigns that are using SMS to encourage young 
people to adopt positive sexual and reproductive health practices, 
particularly as part of broader HIV prevention programs.  One such initiative 
is that of the STAR programme implemented by Hivos in collaboration with 
the Dutch telecom provider KPN, a capacity building initiative in East and 
Southern Africa that uses SMS to complement other HIV and AIDS 
outreach activities for young people.  The system aims to increase 
awareness among young people, and the pilot program is showing 
improvements in interactivity among partner organizations and their 
constituents (Hivos, 2005).   
 
There are significant opportunities for mass and targeted communication 
using SMS and pre-recorded voice messaging.  These can be delivered to 
a specific group that has registered for such a service or through general 
public mass media campaigns.  As a central part of its work, Media Lab 
Asia, an organization focusing exclusively on bringing the benefits of  ICTs 
to the disadvantaged, uses mobile devises for  “multimedia, local language 
and local content based health education and promotion”  activities 
(Ramaraju, 2007). Mass texting can serve the dual purpose of prevention 
and emergency response in promoting well-being. As part of Cell-life’s work 
in South Africa, an anti-xenophobia campaign was launched as a result of 
violence against foreigners. The aim of the texting scheme was to voice 
opposition to the violence, provide a method of reporting incidents, and to 
mobilize organizational and community responses.13  
 
 
                                                
13 http://mobileactive.org/say-no-xenophobia-cell-phones-against-south-africa-violence 
 
 33 
2. mHealth for Supporting the Health Work Force 
 
Mobile Telemedicine 
Telemedicine/telehealth, has been defined by the World Health 
Organization as the use of ICT for the support of or the direct provision of 
health care, particularly where distance and locally available expertise is a 
critical factor (World Health Organization, 2005b).  The term telehealth is 
increasingly being used as a replacement for telemedicine, since it 
suggests a broader use of telecommunications technologies and 
applications as the focus of programs moves beyond health facilities to the 
care and monitoring of the elderly at home (telecare) (Klecun-Dabrowska & 
Cornford, 2001).  In telehealth and the more widely understood 
telemedicine, health care professionals use information and 
communications technologies to exchange information for diagnosis, 
treatment and prevention of disease and injuries, research and evaluation, 
and for the continuing education of health care providers.  Much of the 
literature regarding telemedicine focuses on the use of e-mail and the 
Internet as the instrument of communication for support in diagnostic and 
treatment decision-making. The primary benefits of such programs include 
cost and time savings, mostly by reducing the number of patient to health 
facility visits for home based telecare as well as reducing transportation 
costs and medical fees associated with a physical consultation with a 
specialist.   
 
One important category of telehealth is telenursing, the use of 
telemedicine to carry out nursing care. The International Council for Nurses 
published its International Competencies for Telenursing, which integrates 
an in depth review of telenursing literature and the results of the 2004 
telenursing survey to formulate telenursing competencies. The report 
emphasizes the need for broad telenursing guidelines and education, 
particularly in the areas of professional, ethical and legal practice, care 
provision and management, and professional development (Schlachta-
Fairchild, 2007). The field of telenursing has the potential to inform 
telemedicine in low and middle income countries, where there is a 
significant shortage of physicians. 
 
Telemedicine competencies 
Such general competencies can be extended to the wider practice of 
telemedicine. A Model For Telephonic Medical Consults written by the 
Former United States Secretary of Health and Human Services outlines 
 34 
possible guidelines and benefits of implementing telemedicine programs in 
the United States. These include lowered health costs through less hospital 
visits, along with decreased work absenteeism from medical appointments, 
transparent pricing schemes and incentives for physicians, as well as 
culturally competent care through the use of multi-lingual help lines 
(Thompson, 2008) 
 
Specialized Telemedicine 
Specialized telemedicine programs like teledermatology and 
teleophtalmology are gaining prominence within mHealth. A feasibility study 
of a teledermatology wound care system reported high acceptance rates 
for patients, nurses, and wound care experts. The system included an initial 
outpatient visit with follow up care accomplished through descriptions and 
digital photos sent via the web. Though this system was web-based, it 
showed that 89% of the images were high enough quality for providers to 
feel confident in making treatment recommendations (Binder, 2007). Such 
an image-based system could be transferred to a mobile platform, 
especially with the assistance of high-resolution attachments. They might 
also be modified for use with community health workers or family members 
who are attending to the wounds of their loved ones.   In Tamil Nadu State 
in India, the Sustainable Access in Rural India (SARI) Program is providing 
wireless internet access to 8000 people in 50 villages.  A sub-initiative has 
been developed in partnership with the Aravind Eye Hospital to provide on-
line eye consultations (Chetley, 2006).  Digital images along with symptom 
descriptions are transmitted by staff at a local internet kiosk to the hospital 
and a preliminary diagnosis and either treatment or referral 
recommendations are provided (Chetley, 2006).    
 
Examples regarding telemedicine in developing countries traditionally 
focused on the use of technology to establish linkages between health 
professionals in more Westernized countries, such as England and France, 
and Africa for the treatment of a broad range of diseases. Increasingly, 
examples of telemedicine initiatives between urban and rural health care 
providers as well as facilities-based health care providers and patients at 
home are emerging from countries such as India, Pakistan, Russia, and 
Poland (Med-e-Tel, 2006).  In Latin America, MedNET aims to connect 
rural regions in the Amazon with a medial network of physicians in urban 
areas.14 As telehealth systems become more decentralized, mobile 
                                                
14 http://www.e-mednet.com/ 
 35 
communication technologies become more appropriate for the facilitation of 
decision support and referral systems. Within clinical care, mHealth has the 
potential to offer healthcare professionals interactive access to information 
such as patient history, laboratory results, diagnostic support, and 
treatment information at the point-of-care (where they are directly engaged 
with their patients) (Istepanian, 2004). There is also great anticipation 
within the health sector in low and middle income countries for mobile 
phones with high resolution cameras for mobile telemedicine.  
 
mLearning and human capacity building 
A key aspect requiring further documentation is the use of mobile 
communication technologies for mLearning and human capacity building 
within the health sector to address key shortfalls in medical education and 
training. Ongoing mLearning that promotes access to educational content 
reduces isolation of health workers and interactive post-graduate education 
experiences would be a welcome investment towards redressing many of 
the shortfalls within the healthcare work force. After two years of 
implementation by SatelLife of the Uganda Health Information Network, 
over 120 health facilities serving the needs of 100,000 people were able to 
access, send, and receive medical information through GSM configured 
PDAs (SatelLife, 2005). The application is a hybrid of mLearning as well as 
decision support for health care workers.   
Health Work Force Support and Mobile Telemedicine - Ghana 
Since January 2008, medical doctors in Ghana have enjoyed free calls while carrying 
out their duties. Courtesy of Onetouch, all registered members of the Ghana Medical 
Association receive free Onetouch starter packs, free doctor-to-doctor calls and SMS 
texting within Ghana, free physician directory assistance, and free bulk texting from 
the Ghana Medical Association and Ghana Health Service. The package aims to 
improve communication between health providers as well as improve the quality of 
healthcare by saving time, cutting communication costs, and allowing doctors to 
consult with one another more easily.  
 
Challenges include some physician reluctance to seek advice from their colleagues as 
well as lack of awareness of the service. While the results of this program have yet to 
be assessed, this collaboration between local health authorities, physicians, and 
telecommunications companies serves as an important precedent in its aim to support 
the health work force. The program has logged approximately one million calls since 
its inception and has come to connect Ghana’s 2,000 geographically isolated 
   p  h   y  s  ic  i a   n  s   w   h  o   s  e  r  v  e    a   p   o  p  u  l a  t  io  n   o  f   2  3   - m   i l l i o  n  .                                                                   
 Source: http://mobileactive.org/when-doctor-just-phone-call-away 
 36 
3. mHealth for Enhanced Service Delivery 
 
A key area where service delivery systems-level results are already being 
experienced through the application of mobile communication technologies 
for health is in the delivery of emergency healthcare and as well as remote 
patient monitoring.  In emergency services the goal is to rescue life and 
reduce damage to patients. Based on a broad range of studies conducted 
in Europe, United States, Australia, and Egypt mobile phone subscribers 
have reported the utility of the technology in emergency situations 
(Chapman & Schofield, 1998; GSM Association, 2005; Horan & Schooley, 
2002; Ling, 2004; Mechael, 2006).   
 
The three aspects of emergency support that are directly related to health 
are: 1) responding to and recovering from natural and man-made disasters, 
2) mobilizing ambulances and informal transportation to the scene of motor 
vehicle accidents and 3) addressing chronic medical conditions particularly 
among the elderly. In the case of accidents the respondents of empirical 
studies have reportedly been able to describe an emergency situation for 
which either they or someone that they knew used a mobile phone to 
mobilize support (Ling, 2004; Mechael, 2006).  In addition for low and 
middle income countries that struggle with high maternal mortality rates, 
there are potential applications of the technology to addressing maternal 
and child health issues- namely obstetric emergencies (Mechael, 2005).    
 
Apart from emergencies, there are additional case studies focused on 
specific health facilities integrating mobile technologies for service delivery 
as well as programs that focus on mobile support for the treatment of a 
particular disease.  In Ethiopia, a prototype for a mobile medical system for 
hospitals has been developed based on an in-depth analysis of existing 
work flow patterns that uses mobile phones and PDAs to support the 
information and communication needs of healthcare providers (Kefale, 
Mekuria, & Bekele, 2006).  Although this project is still in its early stages, 
the approach illustrates a positive trend towards the application of mHealth 
for enhanced health service delivery. Since 2001, Media Lab Asia has used 
mobile devices for generation of village GIS maps with health aspects to 
assist in the identification of health service gaps for better informed 
planning (Ramaraju, 2007). 
 
 
 
 37 
mHealth and Emergency Response Systems 
In December 2005, the GSM Association published The Role of Mobiles in 
Disasters and Emergencies.  The report documents the use of mobile 
phones in emergency situations such as the Indian Ocean Tsunami, 
Hurricane Katrina, and terrorist attacks.  A key lesson documented in the 
review highlights that text messaging is a more effective means of 
communication during emergency relief efforts as the messages are more 
likely to go through on overburdened cellular systems than a phone call 
(GSM Association, 2005).  Other lessons included that mobile phones 
serve as early warning systems and their role in this capacity can be further 
strengthened. A key benefit of mobile phone based systems is that cellular 
networks are relatively resilient and easy to repair as part of stage one 
recovery processes (GSM Association, 2005). Timely access to 
communication and information is a vital aspect of response to and 
recovery from disaster situations (GSM Association, 2005).  Systems 
applications for addressing emergencies are currently being implemented 
and explored.  The organization Telecoms Sans Frontieres uses the 
improved telecommunications environment to set up communication 
systems as part of emergency relief efforts15.  These include relief efforts 
for man-made, including conflict and war, situations, as well as natural 
disasters. 
 
An analysis done in the United States and a related study conducted in 
Australia, explored the benefits within the health sector that come from 
improved access to telecommunications within the general population in 
relation to enhanced medical emergency responses. The analysis 
conducted in the United States documented the estimated increase in the 
number of wireless emergency calls from 1985 to 2001 and the reduction in 
time between fatal crashes and Emergency Medical Services notification 
(Horan & Schooley, 2002).  In this analysis there was a positive correlation 
between increased access to wireless communications and time saved.  
The analysis also served to highlight an overall increased demand for 
Emergency Medical Services (Horan & Schooley, 2002). The study 
conducted in Australia explored similar improvements in the reporting of 
emergencies.  The study showed that although the main focus of 
discussion around mobile phone use and health is in its negative effects in 
causing automobile accidents, it is in fact also contributing to improvements 
in responses to automotive emergencies (Chapman & Schofield, 1998).  
                                                
15 http://www.tsfi.org/tsfispip/?lang=en 
 38 
 
The role of mobile phones in addressing road traffic accidents applies to 
high, middle, and low income countries alike; however, in countries with 
poor pre-existing telecommunications infrastructure, their benefits may be 
more dramatically experienced with the appropriate protocols for service 
coordination and delivery (Mechael, 2006).  Related outcomes in the area 
of emergency response have been expressed in terms of fewer fatalities 
and complications, more efficient management of health personnel, and 
improvements in direct consultation between lay users and physicians as 
well as between physicians (telemedicine) (Mechael, 2006).  
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 39 
Section 4.  
mHealth Partnerships 
 
 
As new technologies are developed and deployed, it is paramount that both 
the business and public health communities understand the dynamic 
relationships evolving between the development of a particular technology 
and health.  In order to ensure their value in poor countries, mobile 
communication technologies must be viewed as a production good rather 
than a consumer good (Kaul, 2001), which is often the case in rich 
countries.  This means looking for ways in which people in poor countries 
can apply the technology more fully to achieve social goals and objectives, 
including those that “produce” better health.    
 
Technology developers, predominantly in high income countries with the 
exception of India and South Africa, and users in rural communities in poor 
countries are two extremes within the ICT and global health network that 
enable a wide variety of health outcomes and efficiencies.  The table below 
illustrates some of the key stakeholders involved in this ICT and global 
health network.  For each member of the various network spheres there are 
internal and external interactions.  Decisions made within one sphere have 
potential impacts on one or more of the other spheres.  Depending on the 
technology in question the various actors may change and their roles 
fluctuate on an active-passive scale, resulting in a series of actions, 
reactions, and relationships (Michael, 2000).   An example from Peru, 
illustrates the movements towards strategic partnerships that consider the 
needs and contributions of government, civil society organizations, health 
sector, and citizens (Murrugarra, Cannales, Tanner, Salizzoni, Lopez de 
Castilla, & Gildenston, 2007).  
 
Sphere Network Members 
Industry (international, Investors, boards of directors, management, strategists, researchers, 
regional, district, local) developers, sales, marketing, trainers, distributors, installation specialists, 
insurance companies, pharmaceutical and medical device companies 
National Government Ministries of Health, Trade, Communications, Transport, Education, 
and Policymakers  Internal affairs, Foreign affairs; WHO, bi-lateral and multi-lateral donors 
Local communities Individual technology users in urban and rural communities, health care 
workers, employees of companies using ICTs, NGOs 
Hardware and software Mobile phones, accessories, computers, Internet, Global Positioning 
applications Systems, GIS, PDAs, MP3 players, Remote Monitoring Devices, etc.  
Mobile communication technology and health network [adapted from (Mechael, 2006)] 
 40 
Engaging Technology Developers 
 
In direct relation to MDG Goal 8 Target 18, which states that “in 
collaboration with the private sector, make available the benefits of 
technology- especially information and communications,” there is a call to 
explore strategic partnerships that maximize the social impact of ICT 
(United Nations, 2006).  In many instances, industry giants are eager to 
share technological solutions in poor countries for telehealth and tele-
education services as the mHealth commercial domain rapidly grows 
(Istepanian & Lacal, 2003).  However, caution is encouraged that the 
design and deployment of solutions are driven by the needs of the health 
sector and in a way that is appropriate for the local environment (Mechael, 
2007). Many mobile technology industry giants have made the strategic 
decision that adaptations and/or development of relevant software 
applications that yield health benefits would be a profitable investment, 
particularly in relation to developed country markets.  However, there are 
now several companies that are extending this vision to include low and 
middle income countries.  
 
“Corporate social responsibility” as well as Kofi Anan’s “responsible 
globality” (Beard, 2000) are the “buzz words” for companies striving to have 
a positive social impact in order to maintain and expand their markets. The 
common goals and tensions between technology companies and those 
interested in their social impact must be identified and negotiated.  An 
outgrowth of social responsibility, the social marketing of technology to the 
health sector, involves the direct marketing of ICT by service providers to 
the general public and the health sector with the proactive motivation of 
contributing to improved health outcomes.  It also extends to the creation of 
health-specific software applications within those technologies that are 
rapidly spreading within the general public, namely mobile phones and 
smart phones.   
 
In the movement towards enhanced Public and Private Partnerships, a 
mutual learning process between technology companies and the health 
sector is needed. This process would explore the potential for cost 
subsidies for health professionals along with the social marketing of 
hardware and health-specific software applications to the general public 
and health sector (Mechael, 2006).  Such programs should be designed to 
more strategically use ICT as a tool for achieving existing health objectives.  
The issue of mobile software development will determine the availability 
 41 
and development of appropriate low software for mobile devices.  Big 
software players like Microsoft should be encouraged to release source 
code for development purposes, as well as provide technical support in 
adaptation, testing, and deployment of software applications (Iluyemi, 
2007).  The Continua Alliance16, a technology and health alliance 
comprised of industry giants, should be encouraged to consciously 
incorporate developing countries agenda into their plans (Iluyemi, 2007).   
 
Developing country interests should also be explicitly included in open 
source communities such as Open Health Tools (OHT), a collaborative 
effort between national health agencies, government-funded organizations 
and agencies, major healthcare providers, international standards 
organizations and companies from Australia, Canada, the United Kingdom 
and the United States to develop common interoperable healthcare IT 
products and services.17 Another important open source community is 
OpenROSA, a consortium which aims to improve coordination among the 
many groups working on mobile data collections systems. By developing 
open source standards-based tools for mobile data collection and analysis, 
projects can become more mutable in order to facilitate the sharing of code, 
data, infrastructure, and ideas.18  
 
Policy Makers, Academic Institutions, and NGOs 
 
In order to test and scale up mHealth initiatives, working with a broad range 
of stakeholders will be critical.  These include, but are not limited to 
National and District Level health and technology managers, policy-makers 
and donors, academic institutions, and NGOs and other implementing 
partners. 
 
Some, but not all, policy makers and donors working to advance mHealth 
are the Danish International Development Agency (DANIDA), Department 
for International Development (DfID) in the UK, the International 
Telecommunications Union (ITU), Norwegian Agency for Development 
Cooperation (NORAD), Swedish International Development Agency 
(SIDA), United States Agency for International Development (USAID), 
United Nations Development Program (UNDP), United Nations Economic 
                                                
16 http://www.continuaalliance.org/home  
17 http://www.ehealthnews.eu/content/view/1072/26/ 
18 www.openrosa.org 
 
 42 
Commission for Africa (UNECA), United Nations Children’s Fund 
(UNICEF), United Nations Fund for Population Activities (UNFPA), 
International Development Research Center (IDRC), World Bank’s InfoDev 
Program, and the World Health Organization (WHO). Independent 
foundations are increasingly becoming active in supporting mHealth. These 
include the Bill and Melinda Gate Foundation, Kellogg Foundation, and 
Rockefeller Foundation. The GSM Association is an important stakeholder 
in the issues of infrastructure and devices19.  Within the European Union 
Information Society Technology initiatives, there are also numerous 
mHealth applications already developed for both patients and health 
professionals that can be extended to low and middle income countries. 
 
The Rockefeller Foundation has recently focused on eHealth, particularly 
promoting ICT use to improve the health of the poor. The foundation hosted 
a series of weeklong meetings from July 13 to August 8, 2008 at its 
Bellagio Center in Italy, “Making the eHealth Connection: Global, 
Partnerships, Local Solutions,” with a week specifically focused on mHealth 
and mobile telemedicine.1 The goal of the conference was to support 
eHealth initiatives through collaborative funding, design, and 
implementation of eHealth systems throughout the Global South. 
Background papers and presentations covered key themes such as the 
path to interoperability, public health informatics and national health 
information systems, health informatics and eHealth capacity building, 
access to health information and knowledge sharing, mHealth and mobile 
telemedicine, electronic health records, national eHealth policies, and 
unlocking eHealth markets.20 The weeklong session on mHealth and 
mobile telemedicine, coordinated by the UN Foundation and Vodafone 
Group Foundation, set forth recommendations that have the potential to 
significantly advance the field of mHealth. These include the creation of an 
mHealth alliance as well as the incubation of four scalable mHealth 
systems; Commcare (a support tool for CHWs), mDoc (a mobile 
telemedicine clinical decision support system), BreakOut (a global disease 
surveillance system), and tools for positive living and wellbeing. 
 
Academic Institutions with which collaboration could prove valuable 
include: Columbia University, University of California at Berkley, University 
of Cape Town (technology development), London School of Economics 
                                                
19 http://www.gsmworld.com/developmentfund/index.shtml 
20 These and other multimedia materials are available at http://www.ehealth-connection.org/conference-
materials. 
 43 
(evaluation frameworks), Johns Hopkins Center for Communication 
Programs (content and applications), Rutgers Center for Mobile 
Communication Studies (research), International Institute for 
Communication and Development (evaluation frameworks), University of 
Washington, Harvard University, Kingston University (mHealth applications 
development and testing), University of Manchester (m-Development), 
Universidad Peruana Cayetano Heredia (research and training in 
biomedical and health informatics), Makerere University in Uganda, among 
others. Partnerships between industry and research organisations should 
be encouraged to support appropriate design, testing, and evaluation of 
cheaper and user friendly devices for patient- and health worker-centric 
usage (Iluyemi, 2007). 
 
Some of the strongest technical organizations in mHealth in low and middle 
income countries include Cell-Life and Meraka Institute from South Africa, 
Media Lab Asia in India, SatelLife and Voxiva, Dimagi and D-tree in the 
United States, SynapseHealth in the Philippines, and Grameen Bank’s 
Technology Group in Bangladesh. There are also rapidly emerging mobile 
phone and health partnerships, including those between Nokia and Plan, 
the UN Foundation and Vodafone Group Foundation (See below), and the 
PEPFAR Initiative Phones-for-Health (See below). The Phones-for-Health 
Program, specifically targeting HIV and AIDS services, is perhaps the only 
one of its magnitude (national scale) to deploy mHealth management 
infrastructure that will enable healthcare providers and administrators to 
order medicines, download treatment guidelines, send alerts, and access 
training and other information materials (GSM Association, 2007). 
Implementation of this initiative is planned for 10 countries in Africa with 
potential expansion to address other diseases such as TB and malaria as 
well as to countries in Asia (GSM Association, 2007). 
 
UN Foundation and Vodafone Group Foundation Partnership 
The UN Foundation partnership with the Vodafone Group Foundation (VGF) began 
operations in October 2005, with a £10 million commitment from VGF matched by £5 
million from the UN Foundation to support UN causes. The Partnership leverages 
Vodafone’s core strengths – its mobile technology, global infrastructure, and capacity 
for mass consumer outreach – with the UN’s scale, mission, and human capital. The 
partnership goal is to support activities and manage initiatives that use technology tools 
to help the UN address the world’s toughest challenges more effectively and efficiently. 
 
The United Nations Foundation is working with the Vodafone Group Foundation to 
address these challenges in Africa by collaborating with WHO and national health 
 44 
ministries to build digital health data systems. These systems are powered by data 
gathered by on-the-ground health professionals equipped with personal digital 
assistants (PDAs) and flexible epidemiological surveillance software. The Partnership 
launched a major program in June 2006 to fund training, software, and mobile 
computing devices for the full complement of health data officers in Burkina Faso, 
Kenya, and Zambia to support the fight against measles, through the NGO DataDyne. 
 
The United Nations Foundation’s Rapid Response Emergency Telecommunication 
project works with UNICEF, the World Food Programme, and the UN’s Organization for 
the Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs (OCHA) to improve access to life-saving 
technology and telecommunications tools in natural disasters, conflicts, and famines. 
 
[For more information visit: http://www.unfoundation.org/vodafone/index.asp]  
 
In 2008, in preparation for the Bellagio meeting on mHealth and mobile 
telemedicine, the UN Foundation and the Vodafone Group Foundation 
commissioned a comprehensive report, mHealth in the Global South: 
Landscape Analysis. Aiming to provide a foundational report and analysis 
of current mobile health work, the report examines strategies and factors 
involved in successfully implementing sustainable mobile technology. 
Conducted by Vital Wave Consulting, the review emphasizes mHealth as a 
business model. It examines stakeholder incentives and identifies 
participants in the mHealth ‘value chain,’ that is, the organizational 
relationships and steps required to deliver a commercialized product. Along 
with a summary of mHealth projects in the global South, the report is a 
symbol of the UN Foundation and Vodafone Group Foundation partnership. 
It communicates the need to make the mHealth business case and to forge 
more partnerships for scale-up (UN Foundation/Vodafone, 2008).   
 
Many International NGOs, including AMREF, CARE, Catholic Relief 
Services, International Federation of Red Cross and Crescent, and Save 
the Children are applying mobile technologies to their health-related work,  
although there are very few who have documented their use.  This is 
rapidly changing as efforts toward more strategic use of such technologies 
are becoming more prominent, as illustrated by some of the evaluations 
conducted in this area by institutions such as the International Institute for 
Communication and Development, International Development Research 
Centers, and Bridges.org. A survey by the UN Foundation and Vodafone 
conducted between December 2007 and January 2008 of 560 NGOs 
worldwide found that NGOs use of mobile phones for work for both broad 
and health-related social change was widespread and indispensible 
(Kinkade & Verclas, 2008). With volunteer communities like 
 45 
mobileactive.org that unite people and organizations dedicated to using 
mobile technology for social change, new platforms for building 
partnerships and facilitating access to funding and technology are 
increasing.21 
 
USAID- PEPFAR Mobile Phones and HIV/AIDS Program 
 
The U.S. government along with several mobile phone industry companies have 
announced a public-private partnership known as Phones-for-Health in order to utilize 
cell phone coverage in the developing world to bolster health systems. The partners in 
the initiative are the GSM Association's Development Fund, the U.S. President's 
Emergency Plan for AIDS Relief (PEPFAR), Accenture Development Partnership; 
Motorola Inc., MTN and Voxiva. To begin with, this initiative will focus on 10 African 
countries, building on an already successful deployment in Rwanda and is also 
expected to be extended in Africa and Asia to address diseases like tuberculosis, 
malaria and other infectious diseases in future. The program already seems to have 
achieved some success in Rwanda, using the TRACNet system, which has been in 
use for the past two years to help manage Rwanda's national HIV and AIDS program 
(see Table 2 in Appendix). 
 
Source:http://www.iht.com/articles/ap/2007/02/13/business/EU-TEC-Spain-Wireless-
Conference-Health.php 
 
                                                
21 www.mobileactive.org/about 
 
 46 
Section 5.  
Considerations and Approaches 
 
 
With the broader goal of providing access to and improving the quality of 
health services, aspects of mHealth should remain a component within the 
broader framework of eHealth. However, because of its market potential, 
certain aspects may be explored strictly as business ventures with social 
benefits. The WHO Global Observatory for eHealth should be well 
positioned to work together with partners to evaluate what works and what 
does not to promote the most strategic use of mHealth technologies to 
meet the health care needs of people.  The opportunities for learning exist 
in isolated pockets.  There is a need to map what is being done, what is 
possible, and to make mHealth activities visible to one another. In this 
regard, mobile communication technologies should be explored as part of a 
list of optimal tools and systems to directly address aims within the health 
sector.  
 
Capacity Building 
 
It is critical to use technology in a way that enhances how teams work 
together and follows existing flows of work with protocols to guide its 
utilization (Iluyemi, Fitch, Parry et al., 2007). While many individual health 
professionals are using mobile communication technologies in their work, 
there are very few formal integration programs that have built protocols to 
guide their use.  In addition to protocols, training is also critical to maximize 
the full potential that technology can offer to health care administrators and 
providers. Universities ought to consider providing training in the use of e- 
and mHealth solutions as part of medical and health administration 
education curricula (Curioso, 2006).  In addition, programs should ensure 
that adequate supplies of equipment are provided and that training, 
maintenance, and technology support are included as part of the 
integration process (Iluyemi, Fitch, Parry et al., 2007; Mechael, 2006).  
Where possible, the structure of hardware and design of software should 
take into consideration the needs and work patterns of health care workers 
as well as patients (Iluyemi, Fitch, Parry et al., 2007; Mechael, 2006).   
They ought to be designed in a way that is adaptable to a variety of 
implementation environments even within the same country (Rivett, 2007).   
 47 
 
The use of mobile communication technologies should build on existing 
workflows within the health system and begin by identifying what the 
system needs to function more efficient and effectively. In addition, 
potential users should be included in the design and adaptation process to 
ensure buy-in and better chances of technology uptake. A key challenge for 
low and middle income countries is technology transfer without cultural 
considerations or locally developed content.  This is compounded by the 
limited variety of appropriate technology solutions specifically developed 
with the conditions and realities of low and middle income countries in mind 
(Lacal, 2003).  
 
The need for capacity building at the country level cannot be 
overemphasized. Ministries of Health should focus on local ownership of 
mHealth technology by building a cadre of tech savvy health administrators 
and eHealth specialists. Such local ownership includes the promotion of 
local software development and mHealth research and development in 
developing countries themselves.  One potential partner in promoting such 
capacity building is the ‘mobility project’ by kiwanja.net, a collaborative 
project between academics, technicians, and educators in the field of 
mobile IT to develop tools and resources to promote mobile applications 
development for users in the developing world. The main focus areas of the 
mobility project include developing mobile-based programming tools and 
online mobile phone programming curricula.22  
 
Monitoring and Evaluation 
 
For programs to succeed, needs assessments, monitoring systems and 
outcomes evaluations should be thoughtfully designed from the outset of 
integration. Appropriate measures of evaluation ought to be integrated into 
the implementation process to assess the impact of interventions to help 
inform future programming and policy development (Shields, Chetley, & 
Davis, 2005). There should be a relatively standardized monitoring and 
evaluation program and indicators that cut across many similar programs 
so they can be compared between countries (Scott & Saeed, 2008). This is 
one aspect of leadership to which WHO will likely be called to catalyze. 
One available monitoring and evaluation resource is HIPNet and USAID’s 
                                                
22 http://mobility.kiwanja.net/ 
 
 48 
Guide to Monitoring and Evaluation of Health Information Products and 
Services (Sullivan, 2007). The guide attempts to define, standardize, and 
categorize indicators to measure reach, usefulness, use, and impact of 
information products and services (Sullivan, 2007). While the guide 
represents a valuable attempt to standardize monitoring and evaluation for 
health information, the need for such a guide for health ICT programs is 
tantamount to measuring success in the area of mHealth. 
 
Alternative Approaches 
 
An mHealth Strategy should be divided into two major sets of initiatives: 1) 
citizen-centric and 2) health-worker centric (Iluyemi, 2007). 
 
This will determine the types of approaches to be applied as well as the 
choice of technology design and functions. The latter looks specifically at 
the communication and information needs of various health sector 
stakeholders, while the former poses questions regarding a global shift 
towards citizen-centered healthcare.   
 
Following the premise that ICTs are merely tools, not objectives in 
themselves, an alternative needs-driven approach might be considered 
whereby one begins by identifying information and communication needs 
(Pakenham-Walsh, 2007).  This approach would then strive to achieve the 
following objectives: 
 
1. Meeting the information and communication needs of 
individuals (so that they are more empowered to maintain 
and promote their own health and the health of their families) 
2. Meeting the information and communication needs of 
front-line providers of health care (including lay caregivers, 
informal and traditional providers, primary health workers, 
district health workers, tertiary providers and others) 
3. Meeting the information and communication needs of 
policymakers and managers (including, for example, 
directors of small hospitals, district medical officers, MoH 
staff, WHO regional and country staff) (Pakenham-Walsh, 
2007) 
 49 
 
These three layers of need raise a key question that might be considered 
by mHealth initiatives: "What can be done to improve communication 
among the full range of stakeholders so that all stakeholders work more 
effectively together to share expertise and experience? (Pakenham-Walsh, 
2007).  This would then be followed by the question: how can ICTs - and in 
particular the emerging mobile communication technolgies be harnessed to 
improve this communication?  
 
In light of interest and shifting focus to more citizen-focused health 
services, it might be interesting to advance the innovative idea of 
leveraging consumers’ own ICTs to improve their own, their family’s, and 
their community’s health (Lacal, 2007), instead of assuming that provider-
centric ICT is the only and best way to leverage ICT.23  As the numbers of 
mobile communication and wireless technology users grow, citizens will 
inevitably become better informed and maintain greater control over their 
own health care management (Istepanian, 2004).  A critical consideration 
for the WHO Global Observatory for eHealth will be the role that the 
institution will play to ensure effective support and information is available 
for citizens in low and middle income countries.   
 
Challenges 
There are a number of challenges and barriers that ought to be 
acknowledged within the discussion of expanding the benefits of mHealth 
in low and middle income countries.   
The first is cost, both at the macro systems level (Istepanian & Lacal, 2003) 
as well as at the level of the individual citizen and healthcare provider 
(Mechael, 2006).  A key aspect for any of these technology systems to 
work is that they are affordable at point of use. A billing structure must be 
implemented that allows for a “reverse cost” approach, i.e. the MOH or 
other responsible party will pay for it. Otherwise it is not feasible or 
sustainable (Rivett, 2007). Cell-Life has recently instituted its first reverse 
billing line, which has increased the success of its systems significantly 
(Rivett, 2007).   
                                                
23 http://medicalautomation.org/conferences/index.php?confid=1 &  http://lacal.net//files/hs/BYOHIT05.ppt 
 50 
Second, there are limitations within the data transfer and mobile Internet 
capabilities available in the types of mobile communication devices that are 
currently being used in these countries (Iluyemi, Fitch, Parry et al., 2007; 
Istepanian & Lacal, 2003).  Thirdly, access and delivery of health services 
in many low and middle income countries is complex, and the introduction 
of technological solutions may not be appropriate or a critical priority  
(Istepanian & Lacal, 2003).  This particular challenge highlights the need to 
show the contribution that technology can make towards addressing key 
health priorities.   
Fourth, there is a lack of operational compatibility and standards within 
existing mobile communication systems (Istepanian, 2004). The 
introduction of 3G wireless technology may help overcome aspects of this 
particular challenge by enabling the unification of existing standards under 
one umbrella (Istepanian, 2004).  Through the efforts in software 
development of groups like OpenROSA24 and OpenMRS,25 movements are 
being made to address this issue of interoperability. Additional 
considerations include the lack of a solid evidence base from which more 
strategic decision making can be made in the area of mHealth (Istepanian 
& Lacal, 2003).  mHealth project impact must be assessed not only by 
touting uptake and usage of a particular technology, but also by specifically 
addressing how the technology is affecting people’s health outcomes and 
lives (Manji, 2008).   
Legal and Ethical Issues 
 
Beyond the best use of technology by the health sector is a broader 
discussion of when physical contact cannot be substituted by a 
technological solution. This is particularly relevant to the discussion 
regarding telemedicine for diagnosis and decision support for treatment.  
The types of guidance that can be provided vary depending on the capacity 
to assess a case with or without images, a physical examination, or 
laboratory tests (Mechael, 2006).  Health conditions with complicated 
diagnostic measures might not benefit from remote consultations, requiring 
in-patient diagnosis and treatment (Mechael, 2006). Specialized protocols 
and training are needed to identify the situations in which phone or internet-
based and other technology-enabled consultations are appropriate. Care 
                                                
24 www.openrosa.org 
25 http://openmrs.org/wiki/OpenMRS 
 
 51 
must be taken to maximize their benefits by closely assessing the sorts of 
information to be gathered and communicated (Mechael, 2006).  As is the 
case in eHealth in general, legal frameworks and liability boundaries are 
needed to provide guidance on the appropriate use of telemedical systems 
within national as well as across borders (Istepanian & Lacal, 2003; Lacal, 
2003).  In addition, mobile phones in low and middle income countries are 
often shared among household members (Mechael, 2006). In a recent 
review of telemedicine policies in Africa, it was revealed that while most 
Ministries of Health have places to engage in telemedicine, they do not 
have policies associated with these practices. In order to protect patients’ 
and providers’ rights, national and international ethical and legal 
frameworks are needed to guide the appropriate use of telemedicine. 
Secure information within mobile communication environments is crucial to 
maintaining patients’ rights to confidentiality (Todrys & Mechael, 2008). The 
Earth Institute, through its mHealth activities within the Millennium Villages 
Project has taken a special interest in the development of ethical 
guidelines, policies, and training curricula for patient confidentiality and 
data security. This approach aligns with recommendations that 
"Safeguarding the privacy, confidentiality, and security of any public health 
informatics or e-health project is an important undertaking" (Curioso, 2006). 
 
 
 
 52 
Section 6.  
Recommendations 
 
 
Based on this review and discussions with a broad range of stakeholders, it 
is recommended that key mHealth stakeholders consider focusing their 
next steps on catalyzing the testing and scale up of interventions that show 
promise in achieving key health outcomes as laid out by the Millennium 
Development Goals for health. The WHO should also serve as a convener 
of key partners and broker of mHealth strategies, information, and 
evaluation frameworks.  A 'test case project' ought to be designed in a way 
that specifically brings together various stakeholders (technology 
companies, donors, insurance brokers, health professionals, and social 
scientists) for a focused project with a specific and measurable goal 
(Kaplan, 2007).   The project could provide a laboratory in which to identify 
keys priorities and challenges, with applications and approaches ultimately 
tailored to each individual country context. Through a process like this, 
trends and considerations that may be similar across countries (cultural, 
regulatory, and financial) will likely be revealed (Kaplan, 2007).  This would 
then lead to the creation of a model for how others might approach similar 
integration processes and be complemented with a robust framework for 
monitoring and evaluation based on learning from other eHealth initiatives 
(Heeks, 2007), particularly with the increasing documentation of health 
information systems successes and failures (Heeks, 2006).   
 
Since this Review was initially developed, several initiatives have taken a 
“test lab” approach to mHealth, including the Millennium Villages Project. In 
partnership with Ericsson along with MTN and Zain, MVP has developed a 
broad-based mHealth Strategy that examines the integration of mobile 
telephony and other technologies to achieve the MDGs, beginning with 
those for health. This initiative is being implemented in 10 countries in 
Africa and serves as an environment to test, deploy, scale up, and monitor 
and evaluate mHealth interventions within a broader eHealth program.  
 
Health Arenas to Explore 
 
The first area for consideration is Safe Motherhood in a particularly high 
prevalence environment. It is a key public health challenge that is often 
discussed in low and middle income healthcare fora as an area that will  
 53 
benefit from mobile technology applications. There is significant interest in 
this area which may yield easily formed partnerships among the groups 
listed above.  Based on this review, there are a multitude of mHealth 
technologies that can be applied to reducing maternal mortality and 
morbidity. These include the creation of emergency calling, referral, and 
decision support systems through the use of 2-way voice communication 
via mobile phones as well as SmartPhones onto which Safe Motherhood 
guidelines can be uploaded and used by healthcare workers.  It is also an 
area in which it will be possible to explore how the health sector can derive 
additional benefits from the combination of transport and mobile 
telecommunications revolutions in many low and middle income countries.    
 
A second area for consideration is improving child health and the reduction 
of childhood mortality and morbidity.  Two critical areas for which there are 
existing platforms for learning and clear benefits to be gained are routine 
immunization and integrated management of childhood illness. In the area 
of routine immunization text messaging systems can be used to send 
reminders to registered parents for when their child is due for immunization 
and/or for immunization campaign days. In addition, PDAs and increasingly 
SmartPhones can be used to collect data for immunization records as well 
as to provide health promotion reminders and messages to healthcare 
workers during immunization activities.  In relation to integrated 
management of childhood illness, decision support platforms exist, but 
have not yet been tested and deployed at a palatable scale. 
 
Other areas include global disease surveillance in addition to addressing 
the diseases of poverty, namely HIV and AIDS, malaria, and TB- where 
significant investments are being made to reduce the gap in health systems 
coverage by the Global Fund as well as broader disease surveillance and 
control efforts for which many of the existing applications are already being 
used. From such activities, MoHs will be in a position to develop 
sustainability models that take into consideration the cost of implementing 
and maintaining mHealth systems and develop models for partnering to 
develop and implement these systems in low and middle income countries 
(Ramaraju, 2007). 
 
As a convener and leader in health policy development, WHO’s role in 
developing a knowledge and evidence base for mHealth activities cannot 
be understated. Specifically, this knowledge base would be comprised of a 
clearinghouse or portal of existing documentation that is updated regularly.  
 54 
To do this, the WHO must begin by reviewing and strengthening weak 
design and evaluation frameworks within eHealth that can then be tested 
and applied to the suggested catalytic mHealth activities. The WHO ought 
to also consider the role of evolving National Observatory Groups in low 
and middle income countries in helping to identify and document promising 
applications within mHealth to create an environment of learning and 
exchange.    
  
 
 55 
Conclusion 
 
 
There is rapidly growing interest in maximizing the benefits of mobile 
communication technologies for health in low and middle income countries, 
but relatively limited and mostly pilot-stage efforts at best.  Health care 
organizations must take the lead, as they are closer to patients than 
industry, to examine how such technology solutions may generate direct 
health benefits to patients, facilitate the work of overstretched human 
resources, create systems that are informed by data collected at the point-
of-care, and yield cost savings for a more efficient healthcare delivery 
system.  
 
Mobile communication technologies have the potential to reduce 
professional isolation- especially in rural areas and to provide ongoing 
support to health care workers as well as citizens. Technological solutions 
should be designed according to local realities and to meet local needs in 
such a way that practically and measurably contributes to the Millennium 
Development Goals for health. Three key areas in which early and rapid 
gains can be achieved are in the areas of Safe Motherhood, routine 
immunization and integrated management of childhood illness, and disease 
surveillance and control especially in addressing the diseases of poverty, 
namely HIV and AIDS, malaria, and TB- where significant resources have 
been mobilized to reduce the disease burden in low and middle income 
countries. Alongside such efforts, there is a critical need within mHealth for 
mechanisms to evaluate the benefits and pitfalls of technology applications 
and their ability to promote the desired health outcomes.   
 
Healthcare policymakers and administrators must equip themselves with 
the knowledge needed to shift from small pilot programs to standardization 
and scale up. This can be achieved by providing appropriate technology 
solutions and training in e- and mHealth at a scale through which realistic 
benefits will be achieved.  This updated mHealth report, which ought to be 
updated periodically given the rapidly changing field, is one of many steps 
towards initiating a dynamic dialogue among a broad range of industry, 
academic, policymaking, government, and non-government civil society 
partners that will enable these leaders to consider their roles in forging a 
strategic direction in mHealth.  
 56 
References  
 
 
Agar, J. (2003). Constant Touch: A Global History of the Mobile Phone Cambridge: Icon 
Books Ltd. 
Ailinger (2008), R. Use of Electronic Monitoring in Clinical Nursing Research. Clinical 
Nursing Research. 17(2): 89-97.  
Ayyagari, D. (2008). Moving Beyond the "Evidence" Question in Telehealth. Continua 
Newsletter.  
(http://www.continuaalliance.org/news_events/newsletters/march_2008/#article)   
Beard, N. (2000). Global Health: Role of the Information Technology Industry: UK 
Partnership for Global Health. 
Binder, B. et. al. (2007). Teledermatological Monitoring of Leg Ulcers in Cooperation 
with Home Care Nurses. Arch Dermatol. 143(12):Dec 2007. 
Bridges.org (2003). Evaluation of the SATELLIFE PDA Project, 2002: Testing the use of 
handheld computers for heathcare in Ghana, Kenya, and Uganda. Cape Town: 
Bridges.org. 
Bridges.org (2005). Evaluation of the On Cue Compliance Service Pilot: Testing the use 
of SMS reminders in the treatment of Tuberculosis in Cape Town, South Africa. 
Cape Town: Bridges.org. 
Carmichael, M. (2007). iPods Teach Docs to Recognize Heartbeats: Medical Students 
use iPods to learn the sounds of unhealthy hearts. Rocking out to 'aortic 
regurgitation.' Newsweek (Web Exclusive). 
Chapman, S., & Schofield, W.N. (1998). Lifesavers and cellular samaritans: emergency 
use of cellular (mobile) phones in Australia. Sydney: University of Sydney: 
Department of Public Health and Community Medicine. 
Chetley, A. (2006). Improving health, connecting people: the role of ICTs in the health 
sector of developing countries. In InfoDev (Ed.). Washington, DC: World Bank. 
Crampton, T. (2007). Wireless Technology Speeds Health Services in Rwanda, New 
York Times. New York. 
Curioso, W. (2006). New Technologies and Public Health in Developing Countries: The 
Cell PREVEN Project. In M. Murero, & R. Rice (Eds.), The Internet and Health 
Care: Theory Research and Practice. Mahwah, NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum 
Associates. 
Dahlman, B. (2007). Feedback on Draft WHO mHealth Review (6). (Personal 
communication). New York. 
Domingo, A.A. (2007). Feedback on WHO mHealth Review Draft (9). (Personal 
communication). Manilla. 
Donner, J. (2004). Innovations in Mobile-based Public Health Information Systems in 
the Developing World: An Example from Rwanda, Mobile Technologies and 
Health: Benefits and Risks. Udine, Italy. 
Donner, J. (2005). The use of mobile phones by microentrepreneurs in Kigali, Rwanda: 
Changes to social and business networks: Annenberg Research Network on 
International Communication Workshop. 
 57 
Economist, T. (2005). The doctor in your pocket [Medical technology: Nearly everyone 
in the developed world carries a mobile phone- so why not use it to deliver health 
care?, The Economist. 
Economist, T. (2008). Leaders: The limits of leapfrogging; Technology and 
development. The Economist. 
Fontelo, P., Liu, F., Muin, M., Tolentino, H., & Ackerman, M. (2006). Txt2MEDLINE: 
Text-Messaging Access to MEDLINE/PubMed, AMIA Annual Symposium 
Proceedings pp. 259-263). 
Fontelo, P. (2007). Feedback on WHO mHealth Review Draft (10). (Personal 
communication). Bethesda. 
Fuscaldo, D. (2004). Soon, Cellphones Will Monitor the Vital Signs of the Chronically Ill, 
The Wall Street Journal On-line. New York. 
Fynn, R.W., Jager, D.d., Chan, H.A., Anand, S., & Rivett, U. (2006). Remote HIV/AIDS 
Patient Monitoring Tool Using 3G/GPRS Packet-Switched Mobile Technology. In 
IEEE (Ed.), The 4Th International Seminar on Appropriate Healthcare 
Technologies for Developing Countries. London: IEEE. 
Granot, Y., Ivorra, A., Rubinsky, B. (2008). A new concept for medical imaging centered 
on cellular phone technology. PLoS ONE: 3(4) April 2008. 
GSM Association (2005). The Role of Mobiles in Disasters and Emergencies pp. 1-34). 
London: GSM Association. 
GSM Association (2007). Phones for Health: Major Public-Private Partnership to Use 
Mobile Phones to Fight the HIV/AIDS Pandemic: GSM World. 
Haddon, L. (2004). Information and Communication Technologies in Everyday Life: A 
Concise Introduction and Research Guide Oxford: Berg 
Haynes, S. (2008). Cellphones Bringing a :-) to Remotest Africa. The Christian Science 
Monitor. January 15, 2008. 
Hedberg, C. (2002). Mobile Phone use for TB Diagnosis in South Africa (Personal 
communication). London. 
Heeks, R. (2006). Health information systems: Failure, success, and improvisation. 
International Journal of Medical Informatics, 75, 125-137. 
Heeks, R. (2007). Feedback on WHO mHealth Review Draft (8). In P. Mechael (Ed.). 
Manchester, UK. 
Hivos (2005). ICTs to Fight Against HIV/AIDS, i4d: information for development pp. 8-9. 
(http://www.i4donline.net/dec05/hivos.asp) 
Horan, T., & Schooley, B. (2002). Interorganizational Emergency Medical Services: 
Case Study of Rural Wireless Deployment and Management: Information 
Systems Frontiers. 
Iluyemi, A. (2007). Feedback on Draft WHO mHealth Review (3). (Personal 
communication).  London. 
Iluyemi, A., Fitch, C., Parry, D., & Briggs, J. (2007). Health Information Systems for 
Community Based Health Workers: A Case for Mobile and Wireless 
Technologies. In P. Cunningham, & M. Cunningham (Eds.), IST-Africa 2007. 
Maputo, Mozambique: International Information Management Corporation. 
Istepanian, R., & Lacal, J. (2003). Emerging Mobile Communication Technologies for 
Health: Some Imperative notes on m-Health. In IEEE (Ed.), The 25th Silver 
 58 
Anniversary International Conference of the IEEE Engineering in Medicine and 
Biology Society. Cancun Mexico: IEEE. 
Istepanian, R. (2004). Introduction to the Special Section on M-Health: Beyond 
Seamless Mobility and Global Wireless Health-care Connectivity. IEEE 
Transactions on Information Technology in Biomedicine, 8(4), 405-413. 
ITU (2003). Mobile overtakes fixed: Implications for policy and regulation. Geneva: 
International Telecommunications Union. 
Johnson, C. (2008). "The results are in…And you're going to be fine." The Boston 
Globe. 
http://www.boston.com/business/healthcare/articles/2008/05/18/the_results_are_i
n_and_youre_going_to_be_fine/?page=1 
Kaplan, W. (2007). Feedback on WHO MHealth Review (5). (Personal communication). 
Boston. 
Kaplan, W.A. (2006). Can the ubiquitous power of mobile phones be used to improve 
health outcomes in developing countries? Globalization and Health, 2(9), Open 
Access (pp.1-14). 
Kaul, I. (2001). "Public goods: Taking the concept to the twenty-first century". In D. 
Drache (Ed.), The Market of the Public Domain (pp. 255-273). London and New 
York: Routledge. 
Kefale, A., Mekuria, B., & Bekele, D. (2006). Mobile Medical System for Ethiopian 
Hospitals. Addis Ababa: United Nations Economic Commission for Africa. 
Kinkade, Ss & Verclas, K. (2008). Wireless Technology for Social Change: Trends in 
Mobile Use by NGOs. UN Foundation and Vodafone Group Partnership. 
Klecun-Dabrowska, E., & Cornford, T. (2001). Evaluation and Telehealth: An 
Interpretative Study, 34th Hawaii International Conference on System Sciences. 
Hawaii: IEEE. 
Kurth AE, C.W., Wolpin S, Segura P, Cabello R, Berry D. (2007). Personal Digital 
Assistants for ART Adherence and Safer Sex Behavior Support: A Novel 
Intervention in Peru, 2nd International Conference on HIV Treatment Adherence. 
Co-hosted by the International Association of Physicians in AIDS Care (IAPAC) 
and the National Institute of Mental Health (NIMH). 
Kwankam, Y. (2007). Making ICT work for Health:WHO Priority eHealth Programs, 
Med-e-Tel 2007. Luxembourg: www.medetel.lu. 
Lacal, J. (2003). Cell Phones and Tele-Medicine. In Healthcom (Ed.), The Fifth 
International Workshop on Enterprise Networking and Computing in Healthcare 
Industry. Santa Monica, California. 
Lacal, J. (2007). Feedback on Draft WHO mHealth Review. (Personal communication). 
New York. 
Leon, S., Fontelo, P., Green, L., Ackerman, M., & Lui, F. (2007). Evidence-based 
medicine among internal medicine residents in a community hospital program 
using smart phones. BMC: Medical Informatics and Decision Making, 7(5), 
(Accessed online: www.biomedcentral.com/1472-6947/1477/1475). 
Ling, R. (2004). The mobile connection: The cell phone's impact on society London: 
Morgan Kaufmann 
Marshall, L. (2007). Feedback on the WHO mHealth Review Draft (7). (Personal 
communication). Cape Town. 
 59 
Manji, Firoze. (2008). Mobile activism or mobile hype? Gender and Media Diversity 
Journal. Volume 4. April 2008. 
Martinez, A. et al. (2008). Simple telemedicine for developing regions: camera phones 
and paper-based microfluidic devices for real-time, off site diagnosis. Analytical 
Chemistry 80: 3699-3707. 
Mechael, P. (2005). Mobile Phones for the Promotion of Maternal and Child Health in 
Developing Countries (An Egyptian Case Study) 
http://www.i4donline.net/May05/casestudyegypt.asp. i4d, May 2005. 
Mechael, P. (2006). Exploring Health-related Uses of Mobile Phones: An Egyptian Case 
Study, Public Health & Policy (p. 264). London: London School of Hygiene and 
Tropical Medicine. 
Mechael, P. (2007). Creating an Enabling Environment for mHealth. Information and 
Communications Technology, 2007. ICICT 2007. ITI 5th International Conference, 16-
18 Dec. 2007 
Med-e-Tel (2006). Med-e-Tel 2006 Proceedings (www.medetel.lu), Med-e-Tel 2006. 
Luxembourg. 
Micevska, M. (2005). Telecommunications, Public Health, and Demand for Health-
Related Information and Infrastructure. Information Technology and International 
Development, 2(3), 57-72. 
Michael, M. (2000). Introduction: Situating technology and technolozing situations. In J. 
Urry (Ed.), Reconnecting Culture, Technology and Nature: From society to 
heterogeneity (pp. 1-17). London: Routledge. 
Morak, J, Kollmann A, Schreier G. 2007. Feasibility and Usability of a Home Monitoring  
Concept based on Mobile Phones and Near Field Communication (NFC) 
Technology, In: Kuhn K et al. (Ed). Proceedings of Medinfo2007. IOS Press, p 
112-116.  
Mossman, K. (2008). A modular microscope attachment for cell phones could improve 
the quality of telemedicine. MIT Technology Review. 
http://www.technologyreview.com/read_article.aspx?ch=specialsections&sc=tele
com&id=20433&a= 
Motorola (2004). Motorola and Partners Telemedicine Trial Mobile Solution to Monitor 
Chronically Ill Patients: Motorola 
(www.motorola.com/mediacenter/news/detail/0,,4723_4023_23,00.html). 
Motorola (2005). Motorola, the Clinic Hospital of Barcelona, the Telecommunication 
Engineering College of the Polytechnic University of Madrid and Amena 
collaborate to evaluate MOTOHEALTH Solution: Motorola 
(www.motorola.com/mediacenter/news/detail/0,,5241_5237_23,00.html). 
Murrugarra, L., Cannales, M., Tanner, E., Salizzoni, F., Lopez de Castilla, D., & 
Gildenston, S. (2007). The e-Health Initiatives and Challenges in Peru: e-Health 
is Essential in Latin America: www.eHealthonline.org. 
Musoke, V.M. (2002). Simple ICTs reduce maternal mortality in rural Uganda: A 
Telemedicine Case Study: Medicus Mundi Switzerland 
(http://www.medicusmundi.ch/mms/services/bulletin/bulletin200202/kap04/16mus
oke.html). 
 60 
Neergard, Lauran. (2008). Nagging Via Text Message to Help Teens Remember Meds. 
Associated Press: May 12, 2008. 
http://www.wsbt.com/news/health/18865824.html  
Pakenham-Walsh, N. (2007). Feedback on Draft WHO mHealth Review (2). (Personal 
communication). United Kingdom. 
Pinsker, M., Kastner, P., & Schreier, G. (2007). A telemedical therapy-management-
system with rule-based active patient feedback, Med-e-Tel 2007. Luxembourg. 
Ramaraju, G.V. (2007). Feedback on WHO mHealth Review Draft (12). (Personal 
communication). India. 
Rivett, U. (2007). Feedback on WHO mHealth Review Draft (11). (Personal 
communication). Cape Town. 
Rubio, F. (2007). Feedback on Draft WHO mHealth Review (4). (Personal 
communication). Peru. 
SatelLife (2005). Handhelds for Health: SatelLife's Experiences in Africa and Adia pp. 1-
56). Watertown, MA: SatelLife. 
Sawahel, Wagdy. (2008). Researchers devise 'mobile' medical imaging system. 
scidev.net: May 16, 2008. http://www.scidev.net/en/news/researchers-devise-
mobile-medical-imaging-system.html 
Schlachta-Fairchild, L. (2007). International Competencies for Telenursing. International 
Council of Nurses. 
Scott, R & Saeed, A. (2008). Global eHealth - Measuring Outcomes: Why, What, and 
How. A Report Commissioned by the WHO Global Observatory for eHealth. 
Shields, T., Chetley, A., & Davis, J. (2005). ICT in the health sector: Summary of the 
online consultation: infoDev. 
SimPill (2007). SimPill Adherence Management pp. 1-38). Cape Town: SimPill. 
Stecker, C. (2002). Home-based Care in Uganda: Using Mobile Phones for Referrals 
(Personal communication). London. 
Sullivan, T. (2007). Guide to Monitoring and Evaluation Health Information Products and 
Services. USAID. 
The Economist (2005). The doctor in your pocket, The Economist. 
The Economist (2006). A text a day, The Economist. 
Thompson, T & Arthur D & Boxer, R. (2008). A Model for Telephonic Medical Consults: 
Guidelines for Decision Makers.  
Todrys, K & Mechael, P. (2008). The Ethics of Telemedicine in Africa: The Millennium 
Villages Project Experience. The Earth Institute.  Pending Publication. 
UNICEF and Women's Net (2007). Rapid Assessment of Cell Phones for Development. 
Written and compiled by Sally-Jean Shackleton. 
UNICEF. (2008). New AIDS film in Georgia circulated using mobile phones. 
http://www.unicef.org/ceecis/media_8237.html  
United Nations (2000). United Nations Millennium Declaration (General Assembly 
Resolution 55/2). New York: United Nations. 
United Nations (2007). The Millennium Development Goals Report. New York: United 
Nations. 
UNPAN (2007). Compendium of ICT Applications on Electronic Government [Volume 1: 
Mobile Applications on Health and Learning]. New York: United Nations.  
 61 
UN Foundation and Vodafone (2008). mHealth in the Global South: Landscape 
Analysis. [report by Vital Wave Consulting] 
Vodafone (2006). The role of mobile phones in increasing accessibility and efficiency in 
healthcare. United Kingdom: Vodafone. 
Wireless Healthcare (2005). 101 Things To Do With A Mobile Phone in Healthcare. 
Woods, G. (2006). Providing Decision Support for Antiretroviral Therapy in a Resource 
Deprived Setting using Mobile Technology. In IEEE (Ed.), The 4th International 
Seminar on Appropriate Healthcare Technologies for Developing Countries. 
London: IEEE. 
World Health Organization (1946). The Constitution of the World Health Organization. 
Geneva. 
World Health Organization (1978). Declaration of Alma-Ata, International Conference on 
Primary Health Care. Alma-Ata, USSR. 
World Health Organization (2000). World Health Report 2000: Health Systems: 
Improving Performance. Geneva: WHO.  
World Health Organization (2005a). Global eHealth Survey. Geneva: WHO. 
World Health Organization (2005b). eHealth Tools and Services: Needs of Member 
States. Geneva: WHO. 
World Health Organization (2006). The World Health Report 2006: Working Together for 
Health. Geneva: WHO. 
World IT Report (2006). Egypt: Number of mobile subscribers hit 14 million: 
http://www.worlditreport.com/Africa/96752-
Egypt__Number_of_mobile_subscribers_hit_14_million.htm. 
Zachary, G.P. (2008). Ping: Inside Nairobi, the next Palo Alto? The New York Times. 
July 20, 2008. 
Zeroug, M., & Sari, Z. (2006). Algerian Medical Freelancing Experience: Enabling with 
Solutions to Meet Critical Needs. In I.S.f.T.a. eHealth (Ed.), 11th ISfTeH 
International Conference. Cape Town, South Africa: ISfTeH. 
 
 62 
