LOGIN		|		REGISTER	
	 	
Home About	Us Resources Members Meetings Contact	Us Sponsorships 	
>> 	Resources		>		eHealth
National	eHealth	Capacity	Roadmap eHealth	Resources
eHealth	is	the	use	of	information	and
communication	technologies	(ICT)	for
health.	Examples	include	treating	patients,
conducting	research,	educating	the	health
workforce,	tracking	diseases	and
monitoring	public	health	(WHO,	2010).
AeHIN	is	an	instrumental	node	for
facilitating	the	2013	Global	Observatory	of
eHealth	(GoE)		survey	to	countries	in	the
region.	GoE,	a	WHO	initiative	which	started
in	2005,generally	aims	to	provide	countries
with	strategic	information	and	evidence	that
will	support	policies	and	interventions	on
eHealth.
	
Online	Tutorials,	References,
Tools
Global	Observatory	for	eHealth	(GOe)
WHO	eHealth	Programme
WHO-ITU	National	eHealth	Strategy	Toolkit
Health	Ingenuity	Exchange	(HingX)
Health	Informatics	Building	Blocks
Health	Unbound	(Hub)
In	support	of	AeHIN's	Strategic	Action	Points,	we	are	pleased	to	share	an	updated	roadmap	of	action	for
eHealth	success.	This	roadmap	starts	with	the	WHO-ITU	National	eHealth	Strategy	Toolkit	and	shows	a Professional	Associations
systematic	progression	from	strategy	to	implementation	hinged	on	capacity-building.
Healthcare	Information	and	Management
Several	Asian	countries	had	been	guided	towards	their	national	eHealth	strategy	in	2013	through	the	 WHO- Systems	Society	(HIMSS)
ITU	National	eHealth	Strategy	Toolkit.	This	served	as	the	kick-off	for	a	series	of	training	activities	crafted	to
International	Medical	Informatics
equip	countries	with	the	capacity	to	convert	their	national	health	strategies	into	a	set	of	IT	programs.	Some	of
Association	(IMIA)	
these	countries	have	commenced	their	eHealth	journey	and	have	taken	the	steps	towards	building	the
necessary	knowledge	and	skills	required	to	ensure	successful	eHealth	implementation.
Clink	on	the	logos	in	the	diagram	above	for	corresponding	links.
IT	governance	is	"leadership,	organisational	structures	and	processes	to	ensure	that	the	organisation's	IT
sustains	and	extends	the	organisation's	strategies	and	objectives"	(Board	Briefing	on	IT	Governance.
ISACA).	AeHIN	is	applying	the	Control	Objectives	for	Information	and	related	Technologies	certification
program	for	IT	Governance	capacity-building.
Enterprise	architecture	is	"a	well-defined	practice	for	conducting	enterprise	analysis,	design,	planning,	and
implementation,	using	a	holistic	approach	at	all	times,	for	the	successful	development	and	execution	of
strategy.	Enterprise	Architecture	applies	architecture	principles	and	practices	to	guide	organizations	through
the	business,	information,	process,	and	technology	changes	necessary	to	execute	their	strategies.	These
practices	utilize	the	various	aspects	of	an	enterprise	to	identify,	motivate,	and	achieve	these	changes."
(Federation	of	EA	Professional	Organizations,	Common	Perspectives	on	Enterprise	Architecture,	Architecture
and	Governance	Magazine,	Issue	9-4,	November	2013	(2013).	Retrieved	on	2013-11-19.)	AeHIN	is	applying
The	Open	Group	Architecture	Framework	(TOGAF)	for	EA	capacity-building.
These	two	foundational	programs	formalize	a	capacity-building	framework	that	exposes	the	requisite
knowledge	and	skills	for	effective	eHealth	strategy	implementation.	Equipped	with	this	framework,	countries
can	better	plan	and	invest	resources	towards	successful	eHealth	implementations.
The	other	training	programs	(ISO	13606,	HL7,	IHE,	PMP,	ITIL,	PRINCE2,	etc)	may	be	directly	accessed	by
countries	that	have	already	reached	the	stage	of	routine	operations	and	innovation	of	their	national	eHealth
programs.
Terms	Of	Use	|	Privacy	Statement ©	2019	AeHIN
Home | About	Us | Resources | Members | Meetings | Contact	Us | Sponsorships
