mSPRAY 
An Indoor Residual Spray mapping, monitoring and feedback tool for malaria 
control in Zambia  
SERVICE DELIVERY 
Implementation date: October 2014 (Piloted in 2011/2012)  
Indoor residual spraying (IRS) along with long-lasting insecticide treated nets (LLINs) form the mainstay of malaria control in 
Zambia. The country now boasts IRS coverage levels in excess of 35 percent in urban / peri-urban settings. National malaria 
parasitemia has fallen from 22 percent in 2006 to 14.9 percent in 2012. However, IRS implementation is expensive and 
requires operations to be as efficient and effective as possible. 
Historically, IRS operators recorded spray activities on a paper form, which was then manually aggregated each day before entry 
into an Excel worksheet, followed by manual cut-and-paste aggregation. This system is labor intensive, error-prone, and too slow 
to provide data for managers above field level. Akros and partners developed mSpray to provide collection of electronic data in 
the field, giving spray teams and managers a real-time visual display of spray coverage overlaid on satellite images of target 
areas. mSpray improves the efficiency of operations and helps teams and managers to monitor whether they achieve desired 
spray coverage. mSpray is being used during the 2014/2015 spray season by 253 IRS staff across seven high malaria-burden 
districts in Zambia to guide their operations and monitor their progress in real-time. 
About mSpray 
mSpray is an IRS tool, primarily accessed through a web Collect which uses formhub as the data backend service. 
browser-based interface, which displays the areas targeted The spatially-integrated spray data is then visualized on the 
f or spraying and identifies the houses within the target areas, tablet by the TL showing the location and type of spray 
all overlaid on satellite maps. These target areas depict the point. The spray coverage indicators are updated 
precise number and location of houses to be sprayed.  immediately to reflect the latest form submissions. This 
 
Houses were mapped using satellite imagery, which was far immediate feedback of indicators and spray points allow TLs 
less costly, more accurate and more extensive than the to accurately understand their spray data and make near real
p revious ground-based mapping exercises. The target areas -time or in-field operational decisions on spray progress. 
encompassing houses were defined by taking malaria burden, Additionally, the tool allows for improvements in operational 
operational efficiency and local knowledge into account.   efficiencies by enabling IRS commodities to be delivered to 
 houses targeted for spray activities and by informing planning 
mSpray streamlines, simplifies and increases quantity and improvements through more granular data. 
quality of data collected. During the spray operations, Team 
L eaders (TLs) each manage three Spray Operators (SOPs). 
TLs enter data on their tablets while standing with the SOP 
at each house, which is sent to the cloud server as soon as a 
data connection is established. The forms are built in ODK 
 
36  |  mHealth Compendium Volume 4 
 
Evaluation and Results 
While mSpray is currently being implemented for the 2014/2015 spray season, initial evaluation and results from the 
2011/2012 spray season pilot are also available. The initial mSpray pilot in Chibombo involved 40 spray operators who 
visited 15,929 structures over a period of two months. During this trial, mSpray was able to provide feedback on overall 
spray performance. Initially, feedback was provided around day 30. At this stage it was clear that National Malaria Control 
Centre (NMCC)-set spray operator targets of 10 to 15 structures per day were not being met. As a result, mSpray was able 
to identify this issue and highlight the fact that teams were beginning operations late each day. Based on this data, operational 
changes were made and coverage was dramatically improved (see Figure). mSpray also identified areas missed during 
spraying that were originally targeted, again allowing spray teams to revisit these overlooked areas. The current mSpray tool 
has made significant improvements since the pilot. 
Lessons Learned 
 It is key to understand the importance of spray data feedback 
during the spray season, instead of post season, as it greatly 
improves the spray operator performance in reaching their 
targets  Geographic Coverage: Seven Districts in 
Luapula Province, Zambia  
 Operational efficiencies are gained through monitoring spray 
operator start and end times and by knowing exactly how many Implementation Partners: African Indoor 
structures need to be sprayed and where Residual Spray Program, Government of Zambia 
Ministry of Community Development Mother and 
 Providing more granular spatially-integrated spray data allows 
Child Health, and Ministry of Health & Akros  
program managers to assess whether high-burden malaria areas 
that were targeted are actually the areas being sprayed Funder: Africa Indoor Residual Spray Program 
 Minor challenges were encountered during the rollout of mSpray Contact Information: 
including unfamiliarity with digital technologies and the need for 
regular unit recharging; Most of these issues could be addressed Akros |  Derek Pollard, IRS Program Manager (+26
through additional training or selection of operators with higher -0965126200, dpollard@akros.com); Daniel 
educational background, both issues being pushed by Akros for Bridges, Director of Research (+26-0976081040, 
the upcoming 2014/2015 spray season   dbridges@akros.com)  
See References on page 89. 
Conclusion 
mSpray is the first Geographic Information System (GIS)-integrated 
smartphone data management system for IRS. It is capable of delivering precise, real-time data on spray operator activity, 
automatically aggregated throughout the reporting hierarchy in easy-to-use maps, charts and graphs. Through rapid 
reporting, in-field data validation, identification of areas requiring focal spraying, spatially referenced spraying, and data 
feedback, the application is able to provide valuable results to help improve the implementation and supervision of costly IRS 
operations, ultimately contributing to a greater reduction in the overall burden of malaria.  
 
mHealth Compendium Volume 4  |  37 
