spOtliGht
juLY 2013
heAlthy pReGNANCy, 
heAlthy BABy text 
messAGiNG seRviCe 
tanzania
Key Partners:
BACKGROUND
MATERNAL HEALTH LANDSCAPE & UNMET NEEDS THE ‘HEALTHY PREGNANCY, HEALTHY 
BABY’ – TEXT MESSAGING SERVICE AIMS TO ADDRESS:
 
Tanzania remains one of the most dangerous places in the world to give birth 
and to be born, according to the high maternal, infant and childhood death rates. 
At 947,300 square kilometers, slightly larger than twice the size of California, 
Tanzania is comprised of great diversity in environment and infrastructure. The 
vast geographic terrain poses challenges to the population of nearly 45 million 
people in accessing basic services, such as maternal and child healthcare. 
Women in Tanzania have a lifetime maternal death risk of 1 in 38, and every year 
Tanzania sees the death of 48,100 newborns, ranking it tenth highest in the 
world1. However, over the last decade, Tanzania’s government has embraced 
1. WHO Health Statistics, 2013 key initiatives to improve public health, focusing in particular on addressing the 
MAMA: Mobile AlliAnce for MAternAl Action | spotlight julY 2013 1
additional Partners: Millennium Development Goals. According to the 2010 Tanzania Demographic 
and Health Survey, the country has shown signs of progress, including improve-
ment of basic maternal and child health and nutrition. For example, almost 
all pregnant women attend at least one antenatal care visit, and they deliver 
roughly 950,000 of the nearly 1.9 million annual births in health facilities. 
Comparing national and regional indicators however, many challenges come to 
light in providing equitable high-quality of care throughout the country. For ex-
ample, while nationally, women are delivering at a health facility approximately 
50% of the time, this rate varies between remote Pemba North’s low rate of 24% 
and the highest rate in the nation’s commercial capital Dar es Salaam of 90%. 
“It is not fair for a woman to die because of giving birth or giving 
life to another human being. It’s not acceptable. Sadly, women and 
children die of causes that can be prevented,” 
President of Tanzania, Jakaya Kikwete.2 
Providing high-quality antenatal care (ANC) information during pregnancy 
is crucial to keeping mothers and babies healthy and reducing maternal and 
newborn mortality rates in Tanzania. A key component of high quality ANC 
information – that can effectively reduce chances of maternal and newborn 
mortality – is informing pregnant women of proper nutrition and care and 
of signs of complications. Encouraging women to seek care and treatment 
can save lives, in particular if they observe danger signs. Unfortunately, wom-
en living in rural areas of Tanzania are significantly less likely to have been 
informed of signs of pregnancy complications than women living in urban 
areas (47% and 73%, respectively; reaching as low as 27% and as high as 80% 
across different regions)3. 
There remains a lack of collective community knowledge for safe and 
healthy pregnancy and 75% of the Tanzanian population lives in rural areas, 
often far from well-equipped health facilities with trained personnel. This 
broad portion of the population therefore has limited access to face-to-face 
coaching on healthy pregnancy. 
Tanzania faces a challenge in bringing swifter and more significant progress 
in improving maternal and child health. As Ban Ki-moon, Secretary-General 
of the United Nations said, “Reducing maternal deaths requires innovative 
approaches to delivering care in the hardest to reach places”. The ‘Healthy 
Pregnancy, Healthy Baby’ – Text Messaging Service seeks to be part such a 
solution in Tanzania. 
DesCRiptiON OF seRviCe AND Use OF 
mAmA messAGes 
‘Healthy Pregnancy, Healthy Baby’ – Text Messaging Service offers Tan-
zanians free text messages in Swahili for pregnant women, mothers with 
newborns up to 16 weeks old, as well as supporters of pregnant women and 
new mothers (partners, friends and relatives). Subscribers register for the 
text messaging service by indicating the woman’s current week or month 
of pregnancy (or the age of the newborn baby). The service also offers 
2. VOA News, October 02, 2012 enrollment as a ‘general information seeker’, providing Tanzanians with a 
3. 2 010 Tanzania Demographic and wide-range of information concerning healthy pregnancy and early child-
Health Survey hood care. The objective of the messaging service is to promote healthy 
MAMA: Mobile AlliAnce for MAternAl Action | spotlight julY 2013 2
pregnancy and early childhood care behaviors. In addition, the service seeks 
to assist health facilities and health professionals in the dissemination of in-
formation typically shared during ANC visits. 
The messaging service is unique. It offers official Government of Tanzania 
Ministry of Health and Social Welfare (MoHSW) developed and sanctioned text 
messages, incorporating a broad range of complementary topics, including: 
• Prevention of Mother to Child Transmission of HIV/AIDS; 
• Antenatal Care; 
• Family Planning; 
• Malaria prevention; 
• Nutrition (for mother and baby); 
• Danger Signs; 
• Individual Birth Plan; 
• Postpartum Care;
• Fun Information (such as ‘fetal development’).
On average, subscribers receive three to four messages per week, across 
the different topic areas. Messages include time sensitive reminders for such 
events as antenatal clinic visits and taking of malaria prevention medication. 
The system also sends relevant health tips when the information is most 
relevant to the subscriber. Messages sent to partners, friends and family of 
pregnant women offer similar information, but addressed to a neutral ‘third 
party’. The content of all messages is in accordance with current Tanzania 
public health guidelines and Tanzanian culture.
messAGe DevelOpmeNt, ADAptAtiON, 
tRANslAtiON AND lOCAliZAtiON
The Ministry of Health and Social Welfare (MoHSW) led the development 
of the ‘Healthy Pregnancy, Healthy Baby’ text message content, in collabo-
ration with the mHealth Tanzania Partnership (led by the CDC Foundation, 
with financial support from the US Government, technical support from 
the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention), and several key technical 
partners. The content team also leveraged messages from the global Mobile 
Alliance for Maternal Action (MAMA4) messaging service. 
Prior to the content team crafting text messages, the Partnership met with 
various MoHSW and technical stakeholders to determine the key topics areas 
4. Mobile Alliance for Maternal Action 
(MAMA) is a public-private partnership to be included as part of the service. With the assistance of a PhD public 
launched in May 2011 by the United States health volunteer, Michelle Helena van Velthoven, the Partnership reviewed all 
Agency for International Development relevant Tanzanian Ministry of Health and Social Welfare (MoHSW) guidelines 
(USAID) and Johnson & Johnson with sup-
porting partners, the United Nations Foun- to identify ‘messages’ (themes and key educational points) covering catego-
dation, mHealth Alliance and BabyCenter. ries the MoHSW and partners indicated are most critical for pregnant women 
BabyCenter created adaptable messages 
for MAMA, based on the organization’s and her supporters to learn about. Following, partners crafted initial text 
vast experience in communicating healthy messages based on the exact language found in the Tanzanian public health 
pregnancy information. MAMA offered guidelines (which are largely in English).
these messages to the mHealth Tanzania 
Partnership at no charge, based on the 
Partnership’s commitment to delivering In October 2011, the MoHSW hosted the first official Wazazi Nipendeni Cam-
health information via mobile phones to paign material review, including review of the ‘Healthy Pregnancy, Healthy Baby’ 
expectant and new mothers in Tanzania. 
An Adaptable Message Advisory Board, text messages that would launch with and support the campaign. Here numer-
made up of midwives, nurses, and physi- ous members of the MoHSW, as well as supporting partners, reviewed the draft 
cians who work in low resource settings, 
has approved the message content for messages and provided technical feedback. They also cross-referenced the 
BabyCenter and MAMA. messages and the timing of their delivery with international guidelines, such as 
MAMA: Mobile AlliAnce for MAternAl Action | spotlight julY 2013 3
those published by the World Health Organization (WHO). Subject matter and 
behavior change communication experts provided technical feedback, indicat-
ing that the draft messages were too dense with information. With this feedback, 
the Partnership worked to simplify the messages to maximize readers’ compre-
hension, while maintaining the technical integrity of the content provided.
The Partnership also reviewed all text message content developed by MAMA 
and available at the time. The team determined that many message cate-
gories and content overlapped with those already developed based on the 
Tanzanian guidelines. However, the team reviewed all MAMA messages 
carefully in order to pick up subtle differences in tone and content, to supple-
ment those messages already developed. In addition, the MAMA messages 
provided additional content primarily in the areas of ‘post-partum care’, ‘fetal 
Photo by the mHealth Tanzania PPP
development’ and ‘parent tips’. The Partnership proposed incorporation of 
these three MAMA message categories into the Tanzanian service.
The Ministry of Health and Social Welfare-led content team adopted many 
MAMA messages from these categories, which allowed the expansion of ‘post- 
partum care’ content, as well as the addition of a new category of messages 
titled, “Edutainment”, which combines the ‘fun’ yet ‘informative’ messages 
from MAMA’s ‘fetal development’ and ‘parent tips’ messages. The team 
then spent extensive time localizing the MAMA messages for the Tanzanian 
context. (The Partnership also determined that the Tanzanian messages in-
cluded additional content that was not previously available as part of MAMA 
messages, such as messages relating to ‘family planning’, and ‘prevention of 
mother-to-child transmission of HIV/AIDS’ [PMTCT].) 
After completing the technical review with the MoHSW and stakeholders, the 
Partnership completed a pre-test with a group of 22 participants in Dar es 
Salaam. The objective of the first pre-test was to identify any major service 
weaknesses and confirm the general direction and tone of the messages. 
The Partnership noted high demand for this type of text message service and 
great enthusiasm from the participants (who were men and women from age 
15-60, with low levels of education). The Partnership noted no major change 
in direction or content was required.
The team conducted a second pre-test with 28 participants in July 2012, in 
Kilombero (a rural district in south-western Tanzania) with men and women, 
aged 15-65. Following the analysis of both pre-testing activities, the Part-
nership worked with technical partners to make final modifications to the 
existing messages. The primary changes to the messages following pre-test-
ing focused on ensuring the tone in Swahili is pleasant, supportive and easily 
understood, especially by registrants with low levels of education. 
Over several months, the Partnership completed a final review of all text mes-
sages with key sections of the MOHSW as well as with technical non-govern-
mental health sector partners. The team developed the messages in Swahili 
with the cooperation of Tanzanian and international partners, with each or-
ganization working in their respective area of expertise. 
The Partnership initially drafted the messages in English (based on the 
Tanzanian guidelines and MAMA messages both being available in English) 
and translated them to Swahili. The team changed their approach during 
the final two months of message review. The team transitioned to focus 
MAMA: Mobile AlliAnce for MAternAl Action | spotlight julY 2013 4
on developing precise Swahili messages with the tone and intention well-
understood (as the service is available in Swahili only). This approach was 
different from the previous one of referring back to English messages or 
translating additional content directly from English. 
lessONs leARNeD AND ChAlleNGes 
iN messAGe DevelOpmeNt 
The mHealth Tanzania Partnership learned several key lessons in the develop-
ment of message content and localization of the MAMA messages through its 
participation in the development of the ‘Healthy Pregnancy, Healthy Baby’ – 
Text Messaging Service. Key lessons are summarized below for consideration 
Photo by the mHealth Tanzania PPP in future service expansion and new service development.
 
‘LOCALIzING’ MESSAGE CONTENT 
Localizing the content of messages requires input from indigenous people 
who know the culture, language and education levels of the target audience.
LANGUAGE AND TRANSLATION
The development of ‘Healthy Pregnancy, Healthy Baby’ text messages demon-
strated to the Partnership that translation is literally ‘easier said than done’. Not 
only are there dramatic differences in the Swahili spoken in Tanzania and Kenya 
(neighboring countries), but there exist subtleties in Swahili that the English 
language does not reflect. For example, during the translation of messages 
encouraging women to drink clean water, the team discovered (as part of a 
Photo by the mHealth Tanzania PPP
lengthy discussion) that there exist at least four ways to phrase the idea of ‘clean’ 
water in Swahili, and each has a slightly different meaning (safe, treated, clean, 
fresh and more). With limited space and characters to communicate important 
information to end-users, every word needs to have impact. Agreeing across 
stakeholder groups as to the precise words in the local language takes a signifi-
cant amount of time; more than stakeholders initially anticipated or planned for. 
COMPREHENSION
‘Walk a mile in their shoes’: stakeholders repeated this expression to themselves 
and others throughout the development of the ‘Healthy Pregnancy, Healthy 
Baby’ text messages and localization of MAMA messages. Message content 
developers needed to consider the point of view of the pregnant woman, the 
mother with a newborn, or her partner, who likely live in rural Tanzania. Often 
subject matter experts and different demographic groups can assume another 
target audience understands specific terms, that in reality are unfamiliar to that 
group. This required the team to find simple and clear ways to communicate 
technical information to end-users in understandable terms. 
ASKING ‘WHY THIS MESSAGE?’ 
A key lesson the Partnership learned is that starting with messages in English 
(or any non-native language) and working to translate the messages directly 
to the local language can prove difficult. There were numerous instances 
where native Swahili speakers unanimously reached the same conclusion 
that the actual intention of the message was lost in Swahili when it was trans-
lated from English. The team had to change its approach. It started looking 
at the actual ‘intention’ of each message and how to convey this correctly in 
Swahili. The Partnership learned that starting with the ‘purpose’ discussion 
first, and then crafting the messages in the local language can save time 
MAMA: Mobile AlliAnce for MAternAl Action | spotlight julY 2013 5
and is an effective way to ensure the objective of the message is preserved 
through the translation and localization process. 
CONTENT WITHIN THE CULTURE
The Partnership experienced the importance of reflecting local cultural 
norms in the messages during the adaptation of MAMA messages on ‘fetal 
development’. A portion of the MAMA fetal development messages relate the 
developing baby’s size to the size of a fruit, in order for a woman to visualize 
the size of the baby inside her womb. Initially, stakeholders appreciated these 
Photo by the mHealth Tanzania PPP messages, as Tanzania has an abundance of fruit. However, after initiating the 
‘localization’ process, the stakeholder group realized that in the respectful 
culture in Tanzania there are cultural sensitivities when relating a person to 
an inanimate object. The team learned that if a message approach is not 
culturally relevant in the local context, then the message should be omitted. 
In cases where the purpose of a message is important, the team can seek an 
alternative approach for communicating it. 
Another example is that it is not generally acceptable to grieve publicly for the 
loss of a newborn baby in many parts of rural Tanzania. There it remains a belief 
that public grieving can bring ‘bewitchment’, such as future infertility and even 
death of future children. Knowledge of these cultural aspects assisted the team 
Photo by the mHealth Tanzania PPP in omitting messages that would make the end-user feel uncomfortable. 
PRE-TESTING
The mHealth Tanzania Partnership found significant value in pre-testing the 
messages at different stages of the content development process. For ex-
ample, the team learned that sending prevention-of-mother-to child-trans-
mission of HIV/AIDS (PMTCT) messages to all subscribers is acceptable, 
irrespective of his or her HIV/AIDS status. Service stakeholders initially had 
concerns of stigma surrounding the distribution of these messages; however, 
the process of pre-testing cleared up this question. Specifically, participants 
in the pre-test groups indicated that although they may not be HIV/AIDS 
positive and pregnant, they may know someone who is and the information 
about prevention of transmission is valuable for them to receive and share.
 
Pre-testing revealed important subtleties in language, in particular around 
how text messages ‘greet’ the end-user. The team also learned to focus on 
communicating the positive outcomes associated with the suggested action, 
rather than simply offering instructions.
‘EDUTAINMENT’
The addition of the MAMA fetal development messages lifted and lightened 
the overall tone of the messaging service. Prior to incorporating these mes-
sages about the development of the baby and interesting facts about the 
senses the baby was developing, the messages focused on medicine, nutri-
tion, traveling to the clinic, danger signs and other precautions and advice. 
While all the information contained in the messages is critical to convey to 
pregnant women and their partners, the team discovered that the end users 
enjoyed the service more when there was a mix of fetal development and 
‘fun’ information. (This discovery was also made during pre-testing.)
MAMA: Mobile AlliAnce for MAternAl Action | spotlight julY 2013 6
pROGRAm speCiFiCs
PROGRAM DESIGN AND IMPLEMENTATION
‘Wazazi Nipendeni‘ (Parents Love Me) is a national Healthy Pregnancy 
multi-media campaign which directly supports the Government of Tanzania 
(GoT) and the United Nations (UN) Campaign on Accelerated Reduction of 
Maternal Mortality in Tanzania (CARMMA Tz). President Kikwete officially 
launched the CARMMA Tz campaign in 2011. The Wazazi Nipendeni cam-
paign takes steps to operationalize this campaign as well as directly support 
the achievement of the Millennium Development Goals (MDGs). 
The Tanzania Ministry of Health and Social Welfare (MoHSW) Reproduc-
tive and Child Health Services (RCHS) section leads the Wazazi Nipendeni 
campaign under its Safe Motherhood Initiative. Also under the leadership of 
RCHS, is the ‘Healthy Pregnancy, Healthy Baby’ – Text Messaging Service. 
This service launched with the Wazazi Nipendeni campaign and supports 
and strengthens it by providing a free nation-wide text messaging service, 
leveraging content and expertise from the campaign and its stakeholders. 
Photo by the mHealth Tanzania PPP The MoHSW plans to continue utilizing the messaging service after the close 
of the Wazazi Nipendeni campaign; however, the two are complementary. 
The Wazazi Nipendeni multi-media campaign includes promotion of the 
free (reverse-billed) text messaging service by listing the short-code (15001) 
and the registration keyword ‘mtoto‘ (‘baby‘) on all campaign materials and 
instructs anyone interested in more information on healthy pregnancy to 
register at no charge. In the first six months of the service, the text messaging 
service registered more than 150,000 active subscribers and sent more than 
7.5 million text messages to subscribers. 
MESSAGES AND SCHEDULING
The Partnership scheduled the timing of the text message delivery based 
Photo by the mHealth Tanzania PPP
on local and international expert advice and in consultation with the MAMA 
message schedule. Stakeholders designing the service agreed that there is 
critical information that all subscribers should receive, irrespective of when in 
their pregnancy they register for the service. For example, all subscribers will 
receive messages about testing for HIV with their partner and about PMTCT, 
regardless of when they register. 
The team wanted to avoid situations where subscribers who register late in 
their pregnancy miss key information that is distributed to those who register 
at an earlier stage. The team also wanted to avoid the cost (of excessive text 
messages) and fatigue (of early subscribers) in frequently resending the same 
messages, in an effort to ensure late subscribers receive the key information. 
Based on these considerations, the Partnership designed the service to place 
subscribers into groups based on the woman’s current week or month of 
pregnancy. Each group has a slightly different message schedule. For ex-
ample, if a woman indicates she is five months pregnant when she registers, 
she is automatically enrolled in the “month five, pregnant woman group” and 
receives messages according to a tailored schedule, delivering appointment 
reminders and information at the most relevant times. 
Across registration groups, the service conveys specific appointment remind-
ers and health tips at the correct time in her pregnancy; however, by having 
MAMA: Mobile AlliAnce for MAternAl Action | spotlight julY 2013 7
separate registration groups, unnecessary repetition is avoided. For example, in 
the fifth month of pregnancy all registered women receive timely nutrition in-
formation for a fifth-month pregnant woman; however, those who just joined 
the service will also receive a message encouraging them to test for HIV (the 
latter of which is not sent to those who registered earlier in their pregnancy.)
SELF-ENROLLMENT REGISTRATION PROCESS
During the registration process, participants indicate the group they belong 
to: pregnant women, new mothers, supporters of pregnant women or new 
Photo by the mHealth Tanzania PPP mothers, or general information seekers. The system asks the pregnant 
women, new mothers and their supporters to indicate the current month of 
pregnancy or age of the baby. Those who register as an ‘information seekers’ 
are automatically enrolled in the service and receive a standard set of mes-
sages over a four month period covering all message categories. 
As the messaging service relies solely on (SMS) text messaging technolo-
gy, the Partnership anticipated errors in the entry of ‘keywords’. Keywords 
are critical as they tell the system which action to take in the enrollment, 
updating and un-enrollment processes. To minimize challenges for sub-
scribers in using the service, the Partnership developed lists of ‘aliases’ for 
each keyword, anticipating the common mistakes, misspellings, typos and 
abbreviations that users might enter. For several months following the service 
launch, the team monitored the entries into the system and updated the list 
of ‘aliases’ based on commonly made errors.
ERROR MESSAGES AND REMINDERS
To maximize access to the service, the registration process sends three remind-
er messages to participants who send the initial keyword ‘mtoto’ to self-enroll, 
but fail to successfully register in a specific recipient group. Participants who 
successfully register in a recipient group, but fail to indicate the current status 
of the pregnancy (or age of newborn) are sent three reminder messages before 
they are automatically placed into the ‘3 month pregnant’ group (or ‘week 1 
baby’ for new mothers). When this placement occurs, the end-user is notified 
of the registration status and then receives periodic messages (explained be-
low) allowing her to update her current pregnancy status (or age of the baby). 
UPDATING PREGNANCY STAGE
Subscribers receive periodic messages indicating the week or month the 
woman ‘should be’ in her pregnancy (based on the information indicated 
during the registration). The messages ask subscribers if they want to update 
the month or week of pregnancy. The service indicates that if the current 
information is correct, the subscriber can ignore the message and she will 
continue receiving messages. If a subscriber wishes to update her pregnancy 
status (or age of baby), she replies as instructed and the system updates her 
status and message schedule automatically.
OPTING IN AND OUT
At any point in time if an enrolled person wishes to stop receiving text mes-
sages from the service, he can send the word “simama” (meaning, “stop” in 
Swahili) to the campaign short-code. Several reminder messages with this 
information are included in each message schedule in case participants wish 
to un-enroll and forget the keyword that will achieve this.
MAMA: Mobile AlliAnce for MAternAl Action | spotlight julY 2013 8
REGISTRATION AT HEALTH FACILITIES
Healthcare professionals in trained health facilities offer registration assis-
tance to pregnant women as part of the women’s routine antenatal clinic 
visits. To distinguish registrations made through the assistance of healthcare 
professionals from those of self-enrollment, health care professionals use a 
different keyword to register women in the service. The Partnership designed 
a worksheet to help them compose the necessary information sent, which 
ensures an easy workflow for the healthcare professional. 
The registration process at health facilities differs from the self-enroll-
ment process in order to provide the Ministry of Health and Social Welfare 
(MoHSW) and partners working with health facilities, increased tracking and 
follow-up capabilities at the facility level. 
Photo by the mHealth Tanzania PPP WHAT PARTNERSHIPS HAVE BEEN FORGED AND FOR WHAT PURPOSES?
Partnerships are a primary component of the Healthy Pregnancy, Healthy 
Baby – Text Messaging Service and are a key factor for its success to date. 
The service was developed and continues to operate and expand in a collec-
tive manner under the leadership of the Ministry of Health and Social Welfare 
(MoHSW), Reproductive Child Health Services (RCHS) section. The sharing 
of expertise and pooling of resources enables the service to provide a com-
prehensive range of information. Partnerships also allows for continuously 
increasing subscription rates on a national scale. 
No single partner had to bear the full cost for undertaking the service de-
velopment, advertising, roll out and delivery. The service was developed 
and launched in relatively short period of time and with relatively moderate 
resource requirements from each partner (compared with a single partner 
responsible for all components). This was achieved thanks to the integrated 
partner model; where each partner had clearly defined roles and responsibil-
ities, and contributed based on their relative strengths. 
COUNTRY LEADERSHIP
The Ministry of Health and Social Welfare (MoHSW) Reproductive Child 
Health Services (RCHS) section is the overall leader of the Healthy Pregnancy, 
Healthy Baby – Text Messaging Service. The RCHS team provided key input 
to the development of the messaging service and content. It maintains an 
on-going leadership role by convening the ‘Wazazi Nipendeni Task Force’, 
which includes a working group that focuses on the ‘continuous improve-
ment’ of the on-going mobile phone service. 
TECHNICAL SUPPORT
Text to Change (TTC) is the key technical partner of the Healthy Pregnancy, 
Healthy Baby – Text Messaging Service. TTC is a not-for-profit organization 
with a vision to support change by increasing awareness and enabling cit-
izens to take their health and well-being into their own hands. During the 
development of the service, TTC provided critical input for the team on 
how users can most easily interact with the ‘ping pong’ style of registration 
utilized by the service. In addition, TTC configured the platform to meet the 
requirements set-forth by having several registration groups and numerous 
message schedules. The organization continues to provide ‘software-as-a-
service’, including platform hosting, maintenance and operation as well as 
configures changes in support of the messaging service. 
MAMA: Mobile AlliAnce for MAternAl Action | spotlight julY 2013 9
ADMINISTRATION & MANAGEMENT SUPPORT
The mHealth Tanzania Partnership, led by the CDC Foundation, provides the 
Ministry of Health and Social Welfare (MoHSW) with primary technical assis-
tance for the messaging service, including administrative and management 
support. As an independent not-for-profit organization, the CDC Foundation 
assists the Partnership in attracting and maintaining partners to support the 
messaging service. The US Government Centers for Disease Control and 
Prevention (CDC) funded the development of the service and provides finan-
cial support for its current operation. 
SUBJECT MATTER EXPERTS 
Over a several month period, the Partnership completed a review of all text mes-
sages with key sections of the Ministry of Health and Social Welfare (MoHSW) 
Photo by the mHealth Tanzania PPP as well as with technical non-governmental health sector partners. MoHSW 
message review participants included members from the following sections 
and departments: Communications Unit, National Malaria Control Programme, 
Reproductive Child Health Services, Health Promotion and Education Section, 
PMTCT Unit, National AIDS Control Programme, Tanzania Commission on 
AIDS, Muhimbili University of Health and Allied Sciences, Tanzania Food and 
Nutrition Centre, and more. Health sector message review partners included: 
Johns Hopkins Bloomberg School of Public Health (Communication and 
Malaria Initiative in Tanzania –COMMIT and Tanzania Capacity and Communi-
cation Project - TCCP), Elizabeth Glaser Pediatric AIDS Foundation (EGPAF), FHI 
360, Mwanzo Bora Nutrition Program, Piga Debe and Jhpiego.
BEHAVIOR CHANGE COMMUNICATION – MEDIA
Johns Hopkins Bloomberg School of Public Health Center for Communica-
tion Programs (JHU – CCP) led the development of the extensive multi-me-
dia campaign for the Wazazi Nipendeni campaign with the Ministry of Health 
and Social Welfare (MoHSW). The Healthy Pregnancy, Healthy Baby – Text 
Messaging Service was launched with the Wazazi Nipendeni multi- media 
campaign. The Wazazi Nipendeni radio jingles, television spots, billboards 
and posters all feature the text messaging service short-code for people to 
self-enroll. This campaign has proven to be critical in building awareness of 
the messaging service, with registration rates reaching four times their aver-
age when there is a full media presence, versus without. 
TEXT MESSAGE SUPPORT
Airtel Tanzania, is committed to supporting the Healthy Pregnancy, Healthy 
Baby – Text Messaging Service during the lifespan of the Wazazi Nipendeni 
campaign by zero-rating the short-code utilized by Tanzanians to register for 
the service and receive messages (at no charge to the end-user). This support 
has greatly assisted the Partnership by reducing the costs incurred during the 
initial year of the service. 
‘ON THE GROUND’ HEALTH FACILITY ORIENTATION
Tanzanians going for their routine ante-natal care (ANC) visit may also receive 
assistance in registering for the service. This facility based registration assistance 
is made possible by Elizabeth Glaser Pediatric AIDS Foundation (EGPAF) and Aga 
Khan Health Services Tanzania – Joining Hands Initiative (AKHST– JHI), part-
ners of the messaging service and Wazazi Nipendeni campaign. These partners 
leverage their existing networks ‘on the ground’ and existing activities with 
health facilities and staff, to provide technical assistance to health professionals 
MAMA: Mobile AlliAnce for MAternAl Action | spotlight julY 2013 10
at facilities. Subsequently, the oriented health professionals assist pregnant 
women in registering for the text messaging service as part of their ANC visit. 
To date, more than 1,000 healthcare professionals have been oriented in the 
messaging service registration process (across 11 regions in Tanzania). They 
have successfully registered more than 5,000 pregnant women. The registra-
tions at the health facility level will continue to grow as EPGAF and AKHST-JHI 
collectively cover more than 1,600 facilities across the country. With more than 
7,000 health facilities in Tanzania however, additional ‘on the ground’ partners 
and financial support is needed to continue providing the Ministry of Health 
and Social Welfare the support required to make facility-based registration 
assistance available nation-wide.
BUSINESS MODEL/PLAN
The Healthy Pregnancy, Healthy Baby – Text Messaging Service is already 
operating nationally with more than 180,000 active subscribers. However, the 
service is only in its infant state, according to leaders in the Government of Tan-
zania and service partner organizations. Stakeholders are currently reviewing 
strategies to ensure a sustainable existence of the service. The services should 
remain available, but also expand to increase in breadth, depth and accessibility.
For the lifespan of the year-long Wazazi Nipendeni campaign, the messaging 
service is a fully-donor funded program, covering the development, set-up, 
operation and maintenance costs, as well as the cost of the text messages 
(with the exception of Airtel messages, based on Airtel’s in-kind contribution as 
noted above). This set-up allowed the Partnership to launch the service at no 
initial charge to subscribers. 
The high and sustained levels of registration in the messaging service have 
demonstrated to stakeholders across the public and private sectors that there is 
a significant demand for healthy pregnancy information in Tanzania. Moreover, 
it shows that end-users believe the mobile phone is an appropriate means 
of accessing and disseminating the information. Stakeholders feel confident 
in finding additional private sector partners, even after the Wazazi Nipendeni 
multi-media campaign closing date, based on demonstrated business cases. 
These partnerships will be based on ‘mutual benefit’ (or ‘win-win’ outcomes). 
They can unlock sustainability, reveal innovative financing and cost-sharing 
models and guarantee the availability of services for Tanzanians in the long-run. 
The private sector can support the service through corporate social respon-
sibility or through a blended ‘shared-value’ approach. For example, organi-
zations can benefit from marketing or sales as well as community and public 
relations opportunities. Companies may also support the expansion of the 
service (such as introducing a new technology feature or channel). 
PROGRAM MONITORING MECHANISMS
The mHealth Tanzania Partnership, in collaboration with Wazazi Nipendeni 
campaign partners, will leverage existing mechanisms to complete routine 
monitoring related to the messaging service, during the lifespan of the 
multi-media campaign, including: 
•  Baseline data developed from Tanzania’s Health Management 
Information System (HMIS) (based on aggregate facility-level reporting)
MAMA: Mobile AlliAnce for MAternAl Action | spotlight julY 2013 11
•  Quarterly data collection at health facilities (MoHSW, Jhpiego, 
EGPAF, AKHS)
• Omnibus surveys (media monitoring)
• T anzania Communication Chance Program mid-line house-hold survey
• H ealth facility exit interviews conducted by Jhpiego (planned)
Indicators routinely monitored include: 
•  # of self-enrolled subscribers in Text Messaging Service (by type of 
registrant, e.g. pregnant woman, new mother, etc.) 
•  # of women registering for Text Messaging Service through facility-
assisted enrollment
Photo by the mHealth Tanzania PPP • %  of pregnant women who attended ANC within 16 weeks of pregnancy 
•  % of recently pregnant women who attended ANC at least 4 times 
during pregnancy 
•  % of ANC clients that know they need 2 doses of malaria prevention 
medication (SP)
•  % of recently/currently pregnant women who received 2 doses of SP 
during their pregnancy
•  % or recently/currently pregnant women who test for HIV together 
with their partner
• %  of population exposed to ‘Healthy Pregnancy, Healthy Baby’ 
text messages 
•  % of health facilities recording no malaria prevention medication 
(SP) stock-outs
•  % of pregnant women who have a birth plan
Data sources: Jhpiego exit interviews, COMMIT (JHU) and TCCP (JHU) house-
hold surveys, Omnibus surveys, JSI drug monitoring report, SMS Technology 
Platform usage statistics and information submitted by registrants and health 
facility records from EGPAF and Aga Khan Health Services supported facilities. 
The program stakeholders have a strong interest in conducting an extensive field 
study on a) the health impacts of the text messaging service and attributable 
behavior changes and b) the technical intervention, perceptions and ways to im-
prove the service (technology, content and accessibility). This would require ad-
ditional funding support, following necessary stakeholder evaluation approvals.
ChAlleNGes
SERVICE ACCESSIBILITY
There are inherent risks and challenges in utilizing a mobile health service, 
such as the Healthy Pregnancy, Healthy Baby – Text Messaging Service, in 
Tanzania. In order for end-users to access the service, they must own or 
have access to a mobile device and a mobile subscription (usually accessed 
through a pre-paid ‘SIM’ card). Further, end-users must live in an area, or have 
the ability to travel to an area, with network coverage. In the case of text mes-
sage-based services, they must also be literate. Each of these requirements 
poses a unique challenge in accessing mobile health solutions in Tanzania. 
Studies estimate that there are more than 25 million mobile phone subscrib-
ers in Tanzania5, with 61% of households owning a mobile phone6. However, 
there is a gap in the ownership rates between men and women. It varies by 
an estimated 40% (fewer women than men). The Partnership designed the 
MAMA: Mobile AlliAnce for MAternAl Action | spotlight julY 2013 12
text messaging service, with this gap in mind. A registration option exists for 
partners, friends and relatives of the pregnant woman, in order to encourage 
male involvement and family support (especially in cases when the woman 
does not have access to the service otherwise).
To date, ‘supporters’ constitute more than one-fifth of the subscribers (com-
pared with more than half of the subscribers registering as pregnant women 
or new mothers). Although the supporter group is included to reach women 
without phones, the pregnant women remain the primary target audience of 
the current service. Thus, a challenge remains of inadequate mobile phone 
ownership among women. 
Photo by the mHealth Tanzania PPP
Phone owners and those who have access to a device must contend with 
partial and often intermittent national network coverage. The mobile-c ellular 
network covers 85% of the Tanzanian population, according to recent 
studies7. Coverage is disproportionately missing or weak in rural areas; thus, 
accessing the service remains a challenge for remote populations.
Literacy remains the final hurdle for those interested in the messaging service. 
Nationally, the literacy rate in Tanzania is 77%. However, gaps exist between 
urban and rural populations as well as between men and women. According 
to the latest Tanzania Demographic and Health Survey (2010), literacy rates for 
women and men in urban areas are 88% and 94%, respectively; compared with 
66% and 78% in rural areas. The low literacy rates of women, particularly in rural 
areas, create ‘access’ challenges for subscribers. Additional technical options, 
such as voice-based technology, can help to address this challenge. In addi-
tion, as the Partnership observed during the pre-testing and launch phases, 
‘supporters’ can assist illiterate and semi-literate women in their registration 
and participation in the service by reading the messages allowed to them.
MEETING ‘SUCCESS’ HEAD ON
SYSTEM LOAD
More than 100,000 Tanzanians registered for the Healthy Pregnancy, Healthy 
Baby – Text Messaging Service, within the first 15 weeks of launch (as part of 
the Wazazi Nipendeni campaign launch). Such a high demand in such a short 
period posed technical challenges, despite the robust technology platform 
and extensive testing of all systems and components involved in operating 
the service. The Partnership configured the initial system set-up to send mes-
sages to subscribers at approximately the same time each day. As subscription 
rates quickly climbed past the ‘stress test’ point for concurrent messages in 
and out, large message queues developed, slowing the sending of messages. 
The queues posed the risk of message delivery at off-peak hours (such as 
the middle of the night) or risk of message delivery failure. Partners assisted 
in addressing this challenge by updating the outbound message schedule to 
stagger based on the registration group type and other variables.
5. 2011, World Factbok, cia.gov MEETING THE DEMAND AT FACILITIES
6. 2 011-12 Tanzania HIV/AIDS and Malaria Challenges in managing the ‘success’ of the message service was also felt 
Indicator Survey at health facilities. Health professionals provided anecdotal feedback of 
7.  Economic and social context: IMF, UIS, message service subscribers attending ante-natal clinic (ANC) requesting 
UN, WHO and World Bank; Sector for services promoted in the messages, such as receiving malaria prevention 
structure: ictDATA.org; Sector 
performance: ictDATA.org, ITU; medication or testing for HIV/AIDS. During the first several months following 
Wireless Intelligence, and World Bank the service launch, the Tanzania Medical Stores Department experienced 
MAMA: Mobile AlliAnce for MAternAl Action | spotlight julY 2013 13
limited stock of certain medications and test kits. These shortages, combined 
with the increased demand at health facilities created challenges in meeting 
subscribers’ service expectations. 
In addition to increasing demand on physical supplies, anecdotal evidence 
indicates that the messaging service inspires patients to request additional 
information from health professionals during their visit. For example, preg-
nant women attending ANC requested more information related to specific 
messages on danger signs and nutrition advice. Therefore, health facility 
professionals can more adequately address the questions if they are familiar 
with the Wazazi Nipendeni campaign in general, and the content of the mes-
saging service in particular.
ADDRESSING INCOMING QUESTIONS
There is high demand for healthy pregnancy and safe motherhood infor-
mation in Tanzania. The Healthy Pregnancy, Healthy Baby – Text Messaging 
Service demonstrates this demand with its rapid national scale and extraordi-
nary registration rates. The Ministry of Health and Social Welfare and service 
partners remain with the on-going challenge of adequately addressing the 
Photo by the mHealth Tanzania PPP full extent of subscribers’ information requirements. The Partnership is con-
sequently seeking out innovative opportunities to address the thousands of 
incoming messages with questions from subscribers. The Partnership initially 
launched the service as a one-way communication tool. However, based on 
the significant demand for additional healthy pregnancy information from 
subscribers, the Partnership is looking to expand the service with ‘look-up’ 
and question and answer mechanisms. 
SUSTAINABILITY
To date, the Healthy Pregnancy, Healthy Baby – Text Messaging Service has 
delivered more than 10 million text messages on healthy pregnancy and early 
childhood care to its subscribers. It counts over 180,000 current subscribers 
and the Partnership estimates to reach 300,000 subscribers within the first 
of service. This number will continue to grow as more Tanzanians register for 
the service based on mass-media advertisements, and as the health facili-
ty-based registration grows. 
The service is currently available at no charge to the end-users, through 
donor support. The Partnership is seeking assistance in establishing a sus-
tainable financial model, to continue with a basic level of service available to 
all Tanzanians. Senior members of the Government of Tanzania support the 
service and its continuation beyond the Wazazi Nipendeni campaign period. 
However, domestic budgets in Tanzania remain insufficient for immediately 
meeting the full cost of the service. 
RESOURCES, SUPPORT AND ACCESS THAT WILL ENABLE GREATER SUCCESS
The mHealth Tanzania Partnership is actively seeking new partners and fi-
nancial contributors, on behalf of the Ministry of Health and Social Welfare as 
well as the Healthy Pregnancy, Healthy Baby – Text Messaging Service stake-
holders. Additional financial support is required in order to solidify the early 
success of the messaging service. Moreover, it will help facilitate expansions 
necessary to offer increased accessibility and utility. 
MAMA: Mobile AlliAnce for MAternAl Action | spotlight julY 2013 14
Financial support will assist the Partnership in maintaining the current pro-
gram in the short-term, as well as in developing financially and operation-
ally sustainable technical expansions. Technical enhancements can include 
voice-based messaging, user ‘look-up’ functions as well as question and 
answer services. Other funds will also facilitate the growth of service content. 
For example, it can assist with the development of specific ‘male messaging’, 
increase the duration of post-partum care messages (which currently end 
16 weeks after delivery) and enhance the content for ‘general information 
seekers’ in order to more fully engage with adolescents and young adults. 
Both technical assistance as well as financial support can help the program 
to carry-out a more comprehensive evaluation of the service impacts. It 
could also offer opportunities for improvement and replication in other 
countries. The Wazazi Nipendeni multi-media campaign plays a crucial role 
in the registration process. However, by its very nature as a ‘campaign’, it will 
come to an eventual close. As such, service stakeholders view the facility 
and community registration routes as crucial in maintaining and expanding 
Tanzanians’ long-term participation. This requires further funding support to 
facilitate expansion of health facility and community-based service registra-
tion programs. 
ADVICE FOR PROGRAMS INTERESTED IN PROVIDING A SIMILAR SERVICE
LEARN FROM OTHERS AND CREATE AN APPROPRIATE LOCAL SERVICE
The mobile health space is lighting up with examples of behavior change 
communication programs that leverage the mobile phone. The Healthy 
Pregnancy, Healthy Baby – Text Messaging Service is one of them. Successes 
and challenges of other programs can be useful for those interested in de-
veloping similar services in a new environment. For example, programs can 
fast-track message development and local buy-in of the service, by following 
advice offered by the Mobile Alliance for Maternal Action (MAMA). It can help 
them in formulating content that focuses on the positive outcomes end-us-
ers can look forward to by following the advice offered. MAMA offers helpful 
learning tools that will provide new programs with a strong foundation: 
http://mobilemamaalliance.org/tools-and-resources. However, ensuring a 
service is locally appropriate, relevant and accessible remains a key task in 
order for the program to maximize its impact.
EARLY AND CONSTANT STAKEHOLDER ENGAGEMENT
A key success factor for launching a mobile service at scale, such as the Healthy 
Pregnancy, Healthy Baby – Text Messaging Service, is to involve all relevant 
government program leaders and service stakeholders. They should be part 
of the process as early as possible. Their ‘Ownership’ or ‘project sponsorship’ 
can promote sustainability and assist in attracting a diverse partnership base. 
Programs can formalize project management communications and orga-
nizational structures to foster regular and interactive communication. It 
helps keeping the key stakeholders involved throughout the development, 
operation and review processes. ‘Slight’ changes in service direction or text 
message content can appear ‘minor’ or insignificant to one group, but can 
be of great importance to another. Keeping all stakeholders engaged and 
informed can promote collaboration, transparency and efficiency. 
MAMA: Mobile AlliAnce for MAternAl Action | spotlight julY 2013 15
MEDIA
The Healthy Pregnancy, Healthy Baby – Text Messaging Service registers an 
average of 6,500 subscribers per week, during the Wazazi Nipendeni cam-
paign’s national mass media promotion (which publicizes the registration 
short-code.) The service launched as part of this campaign, through collab-
oration with the Johns Hopkins Bloomberg School of Public Health –Com-
munication Change Program and the Ministry of Health and Social Welfare. 
The campaign includes thousands of radio and television spots as well as 
billboards and posters across the country, each listing the free text messag-
ing service short-code. During a two month interruption of the campaign’s 
multi-media promotions, the service registration rate dropped to one-fourth 
of the preceding rate. Upon recommencement of the mass media ads, the 
registration rates returned to the previous rates. Anecdotal evidence suggests 
that promoting a mobile phone based service, as part of a mass media cam-
paign, can be an effective way to raise awareness for it.
FACILITY AND COMMUNITY ENGAGEMENT 
Pregnant women - interested in receiving healthy pregnancy and safe moth-
erhood information from the messaging service - can self-enroll or receive 
assistance at health facilities where professionals have been oriented on the 
mass media campaign and message content. It is clear to the Partnership that 
orientation is vital for health professionals to take ownership of the service, 
which familiarizes them with the importance of the service. Furthermore, 
they see it as a job aid that helps in the communication of critical information 
to their patients. The Ministry of Health and Social Welfare advocates the 
scaling of orientation activities to facilities nation-wide, based on very posi-
tive feedback from previously oriented health professionals.
PARTNERSHIP
It can be overwhelming for a single organization to take on an mHealth 
program at national scale. The Healthy Pregnancy, Healthy Baby – Text 
Messaging Service development and operation involves numerous partners. 
Each partner is valuable with its unique skills and resources to develop, oper-
ate, promote and maintain the service. Thanks to the integrated partnership 
approach, each stakeholder that supports the messaging service and the 
broader Wazazi Nipendeni campaign makes a specific contribution. Collec-
tively, the individual efforts support the broad programmatic achievements. 
Broad partnerships can leverage the relative strengths of each stakeholder. 
They can maximize their success through shared risk and shared reward 
opportunities. Programs can create partnerships at the national level though 
the design and coordination of an intervention. Partnerships can also work 
in the implementation, delivery and monitoring of services ‘on the ground’, 
where groups focus on complementary activities in the same geography. 
Establishing joint key performance indicators (KPIs) and program plans assist 
to unify the work of many partners.
FUtURe plANs
IS SCALE AND SUSTAINABILITY AN OBJECTIVE OR ON THE HORIzON?
The Healthy Pregnancy, Healthy Baby – Text Messaging Service achieved 
national scale as well as a subscriber base of more than 180,000 Tanzanians 
MAMA: Mobile AlliAnce for MAternAl Action | spotlight julY 2013 16
in the first eight months of its existence. The immediate priority of the Ministry 
of Health and Social Welfare and service stakeholders is ensuring the sustain-
ability of the program. The mHealth Tanzania Partnership is actively leading 
the review of potential new partners, focused on articulating the shared-value 
to private sector and other partners in order to create mutually beneficial, or 
‘win-win’, sustainable relationships. 
After securing the sustainability of the existing program, the stakeholders 
are interested in expanding the technical services as well as the content 
available. Additional technology strategies will focus on increasing access 
to the service and information provided. Platforms providing ‘voice delivery’ 
and Unstructured Supplementary Services Data (USSD) look-up can make 
the service more accessible to populations with lower levels of education. 
These technologies can also support ‘interactive’ services with added ques-
tion, answer or ‘search’ features. The content enhancements can deepen the 
engagement with key audiences such as men, new mothers and adolescents. 
Increasing the level of engagement at the community and health facility lev-
els will also be a future focus. Collaborations with community health workers 
and local civil service organizations can improve awareness of the service 
and drive increased registration rates. These key stakeholder groups can 
act as an advocacy platform for the development of future mobile services, 
based on actual needs observed at the village level.
WHAT ARE NEXT STEPS?
The Partnership will continue to review and create value opportunities for 
potential funding and collaboration partners, within the mobile service and 
its broader program framework. The immediate focus will be on ensuring 
sustainability of the current services, then on increasing access and content. 
The Partnership will also seek opportunities to enhance the program evalua-
tion to include a comprehensive analysis of the public health impact. 
WHAT OUTCOMES AND RESULTS CAN BE EXPECTED AND WHEN?
The primary objective of the Healthy Pregnancy, Healthy Baby – Text Messag-
ing Service is to support Tanzania’s achievement of Millennium Development 
Goals 4, 5 and 6. The Ministry of Health and Social Welfare and the messaging 
service stakeholders hope it will assist in supporting the following public 
health objectives:
• Increase rates of ANC visits throughout pregnancy; 
• Increase rates of HIV/AIDS testing of pregnant women and partners; 
• Increase utilization rates of PMTCT services throughout pregnancy; 
•  Increase utilization rates of PMTCT medication throughout pregnancy; 
• I ncrease delivery rates of babies at health facilities [especially HIV/AIDS 
positive women];
•  Increased rate of use of ARV for newborn babies born of HIV/AIDS 
positive women);
• D ecrease rates of transmission of HIV/AIDS from positive moms to babies;
• Decrease rates of maternal mortality;
• Decrease rates of newborn and early childhood mortality. 
The Partnership has compelling anecdotal evidence that suggests that the 
service assists in achieving these important public health goals. For example, 
hair stylist Khadija Said never exclusively breastfed her first two children, but 
MAMA: Mobile AlliAnce for MAternAl Action | spotlight julY 2013 17
is doing so with her third and lastborn baby. She told her health professional 
that she made this decision as a Text Messaging Service subscriber, receiving 
messages explaining the importance of exclusive breastfeeding for the first 
six months of the child’s life. Other health professionals indicate that more 
women and their partners are coming to their clinics requesting for HIV/AIDS 
testing and malaria prevention medication. They come encouraged by the 
messages and timed reminders, included in the text messaging service. 
Pending additional funding, the Partnership wishes to explore anecdotal and 
empirical data in order to capture the health impacts of the service.
HOW DOES THE ORGANIzATION WANT TO ENGAGE FURTHER?
The mHealth Tanzania Partnership, on behalf of the Ministry of Health and 
Social Welfare and service stakeholders, wishes to continue engaging in 
healthy pregnancy and safe motherhood mobile health activities. Through 
administrative and management support of the CDC Foundation, the Part-
nership will continue to connect with stakeholders and new partners in order 
to sustain and expand the existing service.
For more information on joining the Partnership, 
please contact: info@mhealthtzppp.net
MAMA: Mobile AlliAnce for MAternAl Action | spotlight julY 2013 18
The MAMA Community Spotlight series 
shines a light on some of the great work 
being done by organizations using MAMA’s 
adaptable mobile messages. Each month 
we feature a new organization that has 
downloaded our messages and is using 
mobile technology to improve maternal, 
newborn and child health.  
Inspired by these innovative programs? 
Download the MAMA messages for yourself 
by visiting www.mobilemamaalliance.org 
and completing our short questionnaire.
For inquires about working with our 
partnership, contact: 
MAMA Global
 tel: 202.887.9040 
email: info@mobilemamaalliance.org
Media Inquiries, contact: 
Mabinty Koroma 
tel: 202.862.6315 
email: mkoroma@mobilemamaalliance.org
