Home About	Us Subscribe	Now Find	Funding Our	Topics Follow	us:	Facebook,	Twitter,	RSS	Feed
The	Global	List	of	All	ICT4D	Meetings	and	Meetups Type	search	text	and	press	enter...
By	Matt	Haikin	on	February	16,	2017
Get	ICTworks	3x	a	Week!
email	address Subscribe
Like	Us	on	Facebook
ICTworks
Follow	Us	on	Twitter
Tweets	by	@ICT_Works
Hot	Right	Now
Recently,	I	took	a	sabbatical	and	traveled	around	the	globe	to	see	what	ICT4D	looks	like	in	East	Africa,
Southeast	Asia,	and	South	America.
What	Impact	Will	Facebook	Libra 1
Every	place	I	went,	I	would	try	to	meet	the	local	social-tech	players	and	attend	technology	for Blockchain	Have	on	International
development	gatherings	and	events.	I	was	surprised	at	how	few	there	were.	Or	perhaps	just	at	how Development?
difficult	they	are	to	find.
Help	Build	a	List	of	ICT4D	Meetings
It	should	not	be	that	hard	to	find	ICT4D	meetings.	You	probably	know	of	a	few	in	your	area	–	we’re	just
missing	a	central	list.	So	let’s	build	one!
Please	Do	Not	Create	Yet	Another
Here	are	the	meetings	I	know	of.	Please	add	more	in	the	comments	and	we’ll	update	this	page	as	we Development	Knowledge	Portal
find	more.
ICT4D	Meetings	and	Networking	Opportunities
United	Kingdom
London	ICT4D	Meetup
Vibrant	and	well-attended	monthly	meetup	–	alternates	between	facilitated	sessions	with Want	DFID	Grant	Funding?	Then 5
speakers,	and	general	networking	in	a	central	London	bar. Use	Digital	Principles	in	Your
Brighton	Technology	for	Social	Change	Meetup Proposals
Broader	than	just	ICT4D,	focusing	on	domestic	and	international	tech.
BOND	NGOs	group	on	Technology	for	Development
Bond	is	the	UK’s	network	for	NGOs	–	this	group	meets	quarterly	and	brings	together	NGO Recent	Comments
staff	with	an	interested	in	technology.
Citizen	Beta	(London)
Monthly	civic	tech	get	together	in	East	London. Grace	on	Help	Bridge	the	Language	TranslationTechnology	Digital	Divide
Digital	Charities
Group	of	people	working	in	UK	charities	with	digital	technologies	–	not	just	International Marga	Eichleay	on	Help	Bridge	the	Language
Development	charities	but	lots	of	overlap.		Monthly	meets. Translation	Technology	Digital	Divide
Communication	4	Development	Network	meet-ups. Cavin	Mugarura	on	Help	Bridge	the	Language
Translation	Technology	Digital	Divide
United	States	of	America Bashir	Quadri	on	Please	Register	Now:	2019
ICT4Drinks CGIAR	Big	Data	in	Agriculture	Convention
The	largest	happy	hour	for	ICT4D	professionals,	with	regular	events	in	Washington	DC, William	Otto	Okumu	on	How	Engineers	Can
and	occasional	drinks	in	New	York,	San	Francisco,	Seattle. Leverage	Internet	of	Things	for	Better
Tech4Dem	Happy	Hour Development	Interventions
Informal	happy	hour	focused	on	using	technology	to	improve	the	quality	of	democracy.
Quarterly	meetings	in	Washington,	DC. Current	Themes
ICT4D	Boston
Regular	meetup	for	ICT4D	practitioners	in	Boston. Africa	Digital	Development	Digital	Financial
Services	Digital	Health	Digital	Principles	Donor
Kenya Funding	Drones	Facebook	Failure	FHI	360
Funding	Gender	Ghana	Grant	Funding
Nairobi	ICT4D	Group GSMA	How	To	Guide	ICT4Ag
Relatively	new	group	seeking	to	bring	together	the	vibrant	tech	and	NGO	communities	in
Nairobi. ICT4D	ICT4Edu	ICTforAg	India
Internet	Access	inveneo	Kenya
Zambia Lessons	Learned	M&E	M4D	MERL	Tech
mHealth	Mobile	Data	Collection	Mobile	Money
Zambia	ICT4D	Meetup Mobile	Phones	Monitoring	and
Join	the	Facebook	group	to	find	out	more. Evaluation	Nigeria	Open	Data	Open	Source
Project	Funding	Research	Report
Global	Meetings Smallholder	Farmers	SMS	Tanzania
Technology	Salon	UAV	Uganda
Technology	Salon
Intimate	events	with	extremely	interesting	attendees	–	take	place	regularly	in	Accra, USAID
Amman,	Bangkok,	Denver,	Helsinki,	London,	Lusaka,	Nairobi,	New	York,	San
Francisco,	Toronto	and	Washington	DC.
ICT4D-related	Conferences
ICTD	Conference
Primarily	academic	ICTD	conference	(some	practitioners)	held	every	18	months	or	so.		The
2017	conference	will	be	in	Pakistan	in	November.
ICT4D	Conference
The	other	big	annual	conference	for	the	sector	–	typically	more	practitioner,	NGO	and
private-sector	focused	(with	some	academia).		In	2017	it	will	be	held	in	India	in	May.
International	Conference	on	Social	Implications	of	Computers	in	Developing
Countries
More	formally	academic	annual	conference,	for	2017	the	venue	is	in	Indonesia	in	May
Participatory	Design	Conference
Broader	than	just	development	but	of	significant	interest	to	anyone	developing	technology
for	or	with	local	communities.		Bi-annual,	next	is	2018	in	Belgium.
TICTeC
Annual	conference	from	mySociety	exploring	the	impacts	of	civic	technology	–	2017	sees	it
in	Italy	in	April.
WSIS	Forum
World	Summit	on	the	Information	Society	forum	organised	by	the	major	multi-lateral	donors.	
In	2017	it	will	focus	on	the	SDGs,	in	Switzerland	in	June.
(More	conferences	here)
Do	you	know	of	other	digital	development	groups,	meets	or	networking	opportunities?	Please	add	them
in	the	comments	so	we	can	add	them	to	this	list.
Now	Read	These	Related
Posts
Filed	Under:	Featured,	Thought	Leadership	
More	About:	Digital	Development,	Happy	Hour,	ICT4D,	ICT4D	Meetup,	ICT4Drinks,	Kenya,	London,
Meetups,	Nairoib,	New	York,	Seattle,	Social	Change,	social	networking,	Tech4Dem,	Technology
Salon,	Washington	DC,	Zambia
Written	by	Matt	Haikin
Matt	Haikin	is	an	ICT4D	practitioner,	researcher,	evaluator	and	consultant
specialising	in	participatory	approaches	to	technology.	He	has	managed	software
development	for	NGOs	and	governments	in	the	global	South,	conducted	primary
research	into	the	role	of	technology	in	participatory	budgeting	in	Brazil,	and	the
impact	of	digital	technologies	on	the	role	of	international	NGOs	in	Africa.
Stay	Current	with	ICTworks email	address Subscribe
Get	Regular	Updates	via	Email
4	Comments	to	“The	Global	List	of	All	ICT4D	Meetings	and	Meetups”
Ellen	Ward	says: February	16,	2017	at	3:21
am
This	is	a	great	list,	very	useful.	I	am	co-founding	a	new	Tech	for	Good	group	starts	in	March
in	Dublin,	Ireland.	Monthly	meetings	with	interesting	speakers	planned	for	2017.	Find	out
more	here:	Check	out	TechForGood	Dublin
http://meetu.ps/c/33lDY/jN3xb/a
Yared	says: February	16,	2017	at	9:57
pm
These	meetings	are	very	much	interesting	and	the	list	is	useful.	Is	there	any	meeting
sponsoring	participants	and	ICT4D	practitioners	from	developing	countries?
Wayan	Vota	says: February	16,	2017	at	10:15	pm
Last	night	I	did	my	part	–	I	launched	ICT4Drinks	at	IRRI	here	in	Los	Baños.	We	had	trivia
bingo,	karaoke,	and	a	fun	time	for	all:	https://goo.gl/Mps3Xc
Izaac	says: February	19,	2017	at	11:31	pm
Hello,	we	organize	the	“ICT	for	Transport	and	Insurance	EXPO”	every	year	here	in	Uganda.
Please,	email	me	how	we	can	add	our	event	to	the	list.
About	Us Latest	Tweets Subscribe	to	our	Newsletter
Tweets	by	@ICT_Works
Enter	your	e-mail	to	get	ICTworks	3x	a	week!:
email	address 	 Subscribe
Become	an	ICTworks	Writer
Our	team	gladly	accepts	outside	contributors	for
ICTworks	articles.	If	you	would	like	to	publish	an
article	on	our	website,	please	see	our	Guest	Post
Guidelines
	This	work	is	licensed	under	a	Creative	Commons	Attribution-NonCommercial-ShareAlike	4.0	International
License.
