 
MAMA SOUTH AFRICA 
BRIEF OVERVIEW MAMA provides support and information to South 
MAMA South Africa provides information to mothers African pregnant women and new mothers through 
that promotes earlier antenatal care, supports HIV- three current mobile channels and two future channels: 
positive mothers and helps them understand how to 1. SMS text messaging twice a week from a mother’s 
prevent transmission to their babies, and encourages fifth week of pregnancy until her baby is one year 
exclusive breastfeeding for all mothers.  old. Women can choose to receive messages in one 
Through the use of mobile phones, the program is able of five local languages and can opt in to receive 
to inform and empower mothers to adopt healthy additional information specifically designed for HIV+ 
behaviors and to access maternal and child health mothers. 
services. It currently consists of a free SMS program 2. Mobile web-based community portal 
offered through two inner-city clinics in Hillbrow, (askmama.mobi) that includes stories from real 
Johannesburg, a dynamic community portal at mothers, polls, articles and life guides. By registering 
www.askmama.mobi, and a USSD-based interactive quiz with her due date or her baby’s birth date, a mother 
service. MAMA South Africa aims to expand to include receives personalized information relevant to her 
voice services for mothers with low literacy, and a and her child. 
portal on MXit - a popular mobile social network.  
3. Unstructured Supplementary 
Service Data (USSD) interactive 
quizzes twice a week. 
4. An educational portal through 
the MXit social networking 
platform that will provide young 
men and women access to vital 
health information regarding 
pregnancy and parenting. 
5. Pre-recorded weekly 
voicemail messages pushed to the 
registered user’s phone. 
EVALUATION AND 
RESULTS 
The MAMA South Africa program 
has conducted detailed user 
testing over a period of two 
months with a test group of 22 
pregnant women and new 
mothers to investigate message 
comprehension and acceptability as well as service 
MAMA South Africa was officially launched in May 2013.  design and usability.   
 
Eighty percent of these mothers reported that the 
ABOUT MAMA SOUTH AFRICA service gave them new knowledge on how to care for 
16 mHEALTH COMPENDIUM   │    VOLUME 2 
 
 BEHAVIOR CHANGE COMMUNICATION 
their child such as when to introduce solid foods, how CONCLUSION 
to monitor developmental milestones, never to leave The MAMA South Africa service has been well accepted 
the child unattended on a bed or couch, and when to by users and early data suggests that the convenient and 
vaccinate. Pregnant mothers reported learning about the discreet mobile medium works very well for educating 
signs of labor, the importance of a facility-based delivery mothers on the value of healthy behaviors and the 
to reduce the risk of HIV transmission, warning signs of uptake of health services. Mothers report feeling 
illness, improved nutrition, and the relief of common informed, validated and empowered and have changed 
complaints such as swollen feet.   their behavior as a result of mobile messaging. 
All mothers reported sharing the information with 
others in the community while some used the messages GEOGRAPHIC COVERAGE 
to correct those who were giving poor advice or to help South Africa 
them negotiate with a partner around issues such as the 
use of condoms while pregnant. 
IMPLEMENTATION PARTNERS 
As of April 2013, over 17,500 women have used the Praekelt Foundation, Cell-Life, Wits Reproductive Health & 
service. A forthcoming formal evaluation of more than HIV Institute (WRHI)  
2,000 women will assess the health impact of the 
messaging regarding the adoption of healthy behaviors FUNDER 
and uptake of health services, particularly around drug USAID, Johnson & Johnson, BabyCenter, the United 
regimens for the prevention of mother-to-child Nations Foundation, and the mHealth Alliance  
transmission of HIV. This evaluation includes a review of 
medical records to compare user-reported data with 
actual uptake of health services.  CONTACT INFORMATION 
MAMA 
 Brooke Cutler, Senior Program Manager  
LESSONS LEARNED Tel: +1-202-650-5353, Email: 
bcutler@mobilemamaalliance.org  
 Targeting health information to the user’s 
Praekelt Foundation  
gestational age or the age of her child markedly 
 Marcha Neethling, Business Development 
increases acceptability of the service and user 
Manager  
retention 
Tel: +27-83-413-2002, Email: 
 Mothers appreciate the opportunity to connect with marcha@praekeltconsulting.com  
other mothers and feel empowered by the feeling of Cell-Life  
belonging to a community  Katherine de Tolly, mHealth Project 
Manager, Senior Researcher  
 Project implementation is best done through a Tel: +27-21-469-1111, Email: Katherine@cell-
consortium of partners including those with life.org  
technical and content expertise, access to clinical USAID / Southern Africa  
services, and experience in monitoring and  Patricia Mengech, Health Program/ Public-
evaluation Private Partnership Advisor  
Tel: +27-12-,452-2245, Email: 
 Mobile network operator negotiations require 
pmengech@usaid.gov  
focused attention and significant time 
 Integration with an operator platform is essential to 
avoid the need for ongoing marketing  
  MHEALTH COMPENDIUM  |  VOLUME 2 17 
