 
ZIDI 
Solution design, testing and national scale-up of an enterprise health  
management system  
Gathering reliable, retrievable and timely information management teams. Through tracking the productivity of 
on service delivery and other key indicators is an health workers, it enables the MOH, in collaboration 
important step in improving health outcomes. Mobile with the county governments, to correlate resource 
Health Management Information Systems (HMIS) can allocation with productivity in a health facility. 
help with this process. Additionally, the private sector 
can play a key role in the design, development and ZiDi™ is also interoperable with multiple existing 
testing of such systems, especially when it is not held information systems. Service utilization data are 
to the scope and scale-related constraints that come exportable into a District Health Information System 
with grant-funded projects.  (DHIS2).  Consumption data on all essential medicines 
and medical supplies are exportable into the Kenya 
ZiDi™ is an innovative cloud-based enterprise health Medical Supplies Authority’s (KEMSA) logistic 
management system developed by MicroClinic management information systems. Lastly, data from the 
Technology, Ltd., a Nairobi HMIS company.  ZiDi™’s master facility list can be uploaded into ZiDi™ to 
robust, easy-to-use and integrated design has primed it update facility profiles.  
for large scale use in the public and private sectors. To 
test the system, a pilot of the ZiDi™ was undertaken in 
Kisumu County in September 2012. The successful 12- Evaluation and Results 
month pilot led to ZiDi™’s approval for use in public ZiDi™ has been successfully piloted in dispensaries and 
health facilities by the Government of Kenya.  health centers in Kisumu County. Frequent and 
consistent feedback from health workers and district 
Implementation date: September 2012 
health management teams has been incorporated into 
ZiDi™ to improve the system. More than 95% of 
reports generated in ZiDi™ matched those housed in 
About  ZiDi 
the facility. Fifteen health workers are currently using 
ZiDi™ is a cloud-based software service that is ZiDi™ and have fully adopted the system within their 
currently optimized for use in dispensaries, health practice. Patients also report enhanced service delivery 
centers and out-patient departments. It allows health and quality of care at the pilot sites. ZiDi™ has also 
workers to record and access patient data at any time eliminated the need for health workers in the pilot sites 
with web-enabled devices, preferably tablets. Regardless to manually quantify and forecast their 90-day supplies.  
of connectivity, a health worker can enter a patient’s Instead, this information is readily available from ZiDi™. 
demographic information, health parameters, symptoms, The system also allows the Kenya Medical Supplies 
tests, diagnosis and prescribed drugs when offline. Authority (KEMSA) to monitor consumption, rational 
ZiDi™ automatically uploads the data to the cloud once use and stock levels in real-time. Benefits such as 
connectivity is reestablished. ZiDi™ also assists health improved health worker efficiency, enhanced 
workers to adhere to clinical protocols, tracks decentralized decision-making, and improved clinical 
procedures and services performed, lab tests ordered decision-making are invaluable attributes of ZiDi™. It is 
and results in a manner that facilitates supportive also easy to adopt and use. 
supervision, monitoring  and evaluation of the quality of 
care offered. Drug inventory and facility revenues and 
expenses are also tracked. Patients who default on visits Lessons Learned 
can be easily identified and contacted via outbound 
 It is important to incorporate end user feedback 
targeted or generic text messages. Data archived in 
into the design of mHealth technology. 
ZiDi™ can be easily retrieved and exported as an Excel 
file for offline analytics. Auto-generated service  Government entities should be active partners 
utilization, financial and inventory reports facilitate throughout the entire development and piloting 
decision-making by the health workers and district process. 
30 mHEALTH COMPENDIUM   |   VOLUME 3 
 
ZIDI 
Solution design, testing and national scale-up of an enterprise health  
management system   DATA COLLECTION 
 Plan ahead for various scenarios to better anticipate Geographic Coverage: Kenya 
adverse situations that may impact scale up of the 
product and program. Implementation Partners: Government of Kenya | 
Kenya Medical Supplies Authority | MicroClinic 
 When thinking about sustainability, keep in mind the Technologies | OGRA Foundation | Microsoft 4 Africa | 
role of different stakeholders, including those in Yahclick – SimbaNet, Kenya | Samsung/Safaricom 
headquarters and those in the field.  
Funder: Public-private partnership between private equity 
 While open source systems are often preferred, it is partners and Government of Kenya 
important to note any limitations they may have 
regarding integrated needs of the health systems.  Contact Information:  
MicroClinic Technology: H. Moka Lantum, MD. PhD, 
SM, Managing Partner (+1585 820 6403, +254715459584, 
Conclusion moka.lantum@microclinictech.coml) 
ZiDi™’s offers an integrated approach to data collection Kenya Medical Supplies Authority:  Dr. John Munyu, 
that ensures health workers have constant access to MBS, Chief Executive Officer (+254(20)3922000, +254 
patient data even in remote rural health settings, and 719033000, john.munyu@kemsa.co.ke) 
provides access to real-time monitoring of disease 
References: 
trends and inventory, thereby, preventing drug stock-
1. Com World Series. Find out more about ZiDi™, the mHealth 
outs. Designed to streamline reporting, it accords the 
application winner of the Top App award at East Africa Com 
MOH and other health officials access to up-to-date, 
2013. 11 July 2013. Web. 
web-based reports in real time, serving as a valuable 
2. ZiDi™ -- An Enterprise Management System for Rural Health 
resource for future decision-making and supportive 
Centers by MicroClinic Technologies. 3 October 2012. Video.  
supervision. By incorporating accountability into rural 
healthcare, it provides the necessary foundation to 
improve health outcomes in Kenya. 
-------------------------------------------------------- 
  mHEALTH COMPENDIUM   |   VOLUME 3 31 
