Donors of nets can now 
click on any point and 
see exactly to whom 
their net was given and 
where, providing a new 
level of transparency and 
accountability never seen 
before in net distributions.
HANG-UP AND TRACK 
IMPLEMENTATION DATE:  October 2014 to December 2014
Increase bednet distribution accountability 
and usage in households through mobile data collection 
Malaria is one of the deadliest diseases in the Democratic Republic of Congo (DRC), where an 
estimated 500 children under the age of five die each day from this disease. Research has shown that 
the use of long-lasting insecticidal nets (LLINs) is effective in preventing malaria.1  
To address malaria prevention through LLIN distribution, IMA World Health, with approval from the 
Programme National de Lutte contre de Paludisme (PNLP) of the Ministry of Public Health and funding 
from the Against Malaria Foundation (AMF) and UK Aid, kicked off a mass LLIN distribution campaign 
in eight health zones in Kasai-Occidental province. IMA World Health devised a Hang-up and Track 
(HUT) campaign in which community health workers (CHWs) not only distributed the LLINs, but they 
also installed and hung them up in each household and recorded household registration data using 
smart phones to ensure accountability and accuracy.
About Hang-Up and Track
The LLIN distribution campaign is one cornerstone of First, instead of distributing LLINs to beneficiaries, LLINs PNLP’s national strategy to decrease the burden of malar- were hung up and installed in the beneficiaries’ households. 
ia through prevention by ensuring that all households in the Second, smart phones were used to track distribution data for 
DRC receive and use LLINs.2 In this campaign, IMA World each household that received LLINs.
Health, with net funding from AMF and non-net costs fund- When the LLINs were being installed, one of the CHWs 
ed by UK Aid, was tasked to distribute LLINs in eight health within the team was tasked to track the progress by entering 
zones in the western Kasai-Occidental province. In order to household registration data into a smart phone. Open Data 
increase accountability and household utilization, the strategy Kit (ODK) software was installed on each smart phone with 
devised was to “hang-up and track.” The strategy is two-fold: a form specifically designed for the hang-up. The ODK form 
36  n  DATA COLLECTION
Crystal Stafford, IMA World Health
Table 1.
Sleeping Quality LLINs 
Health Zones Households places LLINs installed
Kitangwa 22,188 54,465 3,796 50,643
Mutena 27,509 67,369 1,265 66,104
Kamonia 39,869 85,491 1,492 83,999 Lessons Learned 
Kamuesha 42,140 99,766 2,242 97,524
n Infrastructure deficiencies, especially electricity, need 
Banga Lubaka 16,001 42,229 1,039 41,190 to be assessed before distribution.
Kanzala 26,966 70,449 1,216 69,233
n CHWs need to be thoroughly assessed due to litera-
Tshikapa 37,643 105,474 1,594 103,880 cy and lack of technology training.
Kalonda 44,317 113,824 1,865 111,959
n Data analysis needs to be incorporated into the 
Total 256,633 639,067 14,509 624,532 distribution campaign schedule better due to amount of 
incoming data.
collected distribution data on the number of sleeping places n Although originally translated the ODK form to local 
and the amount of LLINs given and installed. But to in- languages and dialects for CHWs, French was still 
crease further accountability, the form also asks for the global preferred because local dialects were often not written 
positioning system (GPS) coordinates, signature of consenting languages.
household, and a picture of the LLINs installed. Socioeco- n Rugged mobile phones and hardware are recommended.
nomic, malaria perception, and malaria treatment data for 
each household was also collected. All the data were then 
uploaded to a supervisor’s laptop using ODK Aggregate VM Conclusion
server software, and later aggregated at a central level.
IMA is the first organization in the DRC to leverage 
Once the distribution was completed, a table was created that mHealth technology like ODK for mass LLIN distribution  
included the name of the head of household, the GPS coor- campaigns. By using the HUT strategy, not only was  
dinates of that household, how many nets were distributed to each household pinpointed through GPS, but the entire  
that household, and a photo of the recipient and their newly distribution was aggregated visually through GIS. This,  
hung net. All recipients photographed signed a release within along with the signature file and photo of LLIN installation  
the ODK allowing us to use their photo. If they did not wish within the household, increased accountability that the  
to be photographed only the net was pictured. The table was LLINs reached the beneficiaries and decreased fraudulent  
then uploaded to Google Fusion Tables and an interactive map activities. The utilization rate of LLINs by the beneficiaries  
was created. Donors of nets can now click on any point and will be measured every six months to assess user adoption.  
see exactly to whom their net was given and where, provid- In the next phase, the malaria perception and treatment  
ing a new level of transparency and accountability never seen data collected will be used to formulate better behavior 
before in net distributions. change communication and messaging, and incorporate  
that into a more holistic approach in the next LLIN distribu-
Evaluation and Results  tion campaign. n
The LLINs distribution in western Kasai-Occidental lasted 
from October 2014 to December 2014. In the chart sub-
mitted here, the HUT campaign captured data for each of Geographic Coverage: Eight health zones in western Kasai-Oc-
the visited households. For each household, the ODK form cidental province, Democratic Republic of Congo: Kitangwa, 
asked the number of sleeping places in the household, which Mutena, Kamonia, Kamuesha, Banga Lubaka, Kanzala, Tshikapa, 
coincided with the number of nets given and installed in that and Kalonda
household. However, if there were already good quality LLINs Implementation Partner: IMA World Health
assessed in that household, ODK will automatically calculate Donor: Against Malaria Foundation, UKAID 
and subtract the number of good quality LLINs from number Contact Information: Crystal Stafford, Project Coordinator, Ma-
of LLINs installed to avoid giving more LLINs than necessary. laria Program, IMA World Health, crystalstafford@imaworld-
ODK will also disallow the CHW to give more LLINs than health.org; Charlotte Ndolerire, Project Coordinator, Malaria 
the number of sleeping places reported. It was estimated that Program, IMA World Health,CharlotteNdolerire@imawor-ldhealth.org; Andrew Chou, Consultant–Mobile Technology, 
by using the HUT strategy, 93 to 99 percent of households in the Malaria Program, IMA World Health, yuheng.andrew.chou@
eight health zones where LLINs were distributed were reached. gmail.com
mHEALTH COMPENDIUM  VOLUME 5  n  37
