Me Se
nu ar
HHome	>I	BrPiefs	>	sDigital	Health	for	Systems ch
Select	section...
HIP	ENHANCEMENT
Digital	Health	for	Systems:	Strengthening	Family	Planning
Systems	Through	Time	and	Resource	Ef ciencies
Use	digital	technologies	to	support	health	systems	and	service	delivery	for	family	planning.
A	community	health	worker	uses	D-tree	International’s	mobile	application	to	provide	comprehensive	family	planning	services	to	a
client	in	Shinyanga,	Tanzania.	©2015	Ueli	Litscher,	Courtesy	of	Photoshare
References
Download:
EN ES FR PT
Background
Countries	are	turning	to	digital	health	applications	through	technologies	such	as	mobile	phones,
tablets,	and	computers	to	improve	health	care	delivery,	strengthen	health	systems,	and	support
clients.	Experts	believe	such	approaches	can	contribute	toward	time	and	resource	efficiencies	by
Privacy	-	Terms
improving	our	ability	to	bridge	physical	distance	and	by	increasing	accuracy	and	speed	of	data
collection	and	reporting.	With	the	rapid	expansion	of	mobile	and	electronic	platforms	across	the	globe,
including	in	low-and	middle-income	countries,1	there	is	potential	for	even	greater	use	of	digital	health
technologies	to	strengthen	health	systems	and	family	planning	service	delivery.
This	brief	summarizes	the	experience	and	evidence	for	the	most	commonly	used	digital	health
technologies	aimed	at	supporting	health	systems	and	providers.	A	companion	brief	will	address
applications	aimed	at	supporting	consumers.
	
FIGURE	01.
cStock	Data	and	Product	Flow
Source:	Matthew	Baek	and	Sarah	Andersson,	sc4ccm	website,	JSI.	Accessed	September	13,	2017
Key	Messages
Family	planning	indicators	should	be	incorporated	into	new	and	existing	digital	health	and
logistics	management	information	systems.
More	research	is	needed	about	when	and	how	digital	applications	for	provider	support	are
most	effective,	efficient,	and	scalable.
Mobile	money	and	electronic	financial	transactions	have	the	potential	to	provide	efficiency	and
transparency	of	health	care	financing	and	transactions.
Digital	health	applications	for	health	systems	and	providers	can	support	implementation	of	High
Impact	Practices	in	Family	Planning	(HIPs)	by	offering:
Better	data	for	decision	making	with	virtually	real-time	reporting	of	services	and	commodities
through	a	health	management	information	system	(HMIS)	and	logistics	management	information
system	(LMIS)
Improved	provider	capacity	through	continuous	learning,	digital	provider	tools,	and	mobile
supervision
Increased	transparency,	efficiency,	and	accountability	through	digital	financial	services
Table	1	provides	some	illustrative	examples	of	how	digital	technologies	can	be	used	to	support
implementation	of	HIPs.
Evidence	demonstrating	the	value	of	digital	health	approaches	has	increased	over	the	past	decade.
Systematic	reviews	of	digital	applications	in	HIV	care	and	treatment,	maternal	and	child	health	service
delivery,	and	noncommunicable	disease	treatment	have	documented	evidence	that	digital	health	tools
increase	efficiency	of	data	collection,	improve	quality	of	care,	and	increase	communication	between
health	workers	and	their	managers	and	supervisors.2-4	It	is	likely	that	these	results	are	generalizable
to	family	planning	programming	as	well.
TABLE	01.
Illustrative	Examples	of	How	Digital	Technologies	Can	Enhance	HIPs
HIGH-IMPACT	PRACTICE
COMMUNITY	HEALTH	WORKERS
Combined	With	Digital	Technology Refresher	training	messages,	communication
Enhancement with	supervisor,	and	reporting,	typically	via	SMS
Improved	provider	capacity	and	quality	of	care	
Effect 	Time	and	energy	savings	when	training	service
providers
GALVANIZING	COMMITMENT
Combined	With	Digital	Technology
Enhancement Mobile	money	(electronic	transfer	of	funds)
Effect Efficient,	accountable,	transparent	financialtransactions
SUPPLY	CHAIN	MANAGEMENT
Combined	With	Digital	Technology Reporting	via	SMS	to	logistics	management
Enhancement information	system	(LMIS)	on	stock	and	stock-outs
Reduced	stock-outs	of	commodities	
	
Effect Better	data	for	decision	making	with	virtuallyreal-time	reporting	of	services	and	commodities
through	the	health	management	information
system	(HMIS)	and	LMIS
LEADERSHIP	AND	MANAGEMENT
Combined	With	Digital	Technology
Enhancement Data	collection	through	use	of	digital	technology
Allows	for	virtually	real-time	monitoring	for
Effect better	decision	making
Digital	health	has	been	identified	as	a	HIP	enhancement	by	the	HIP	technical	advisory	group. 5	When
scaled	up	and	institutionalized,	HIPs	will	maximize	investments	in	a	comprehensive	family	planning
strategy.	A	HIP	enhancement	is	a	practice	that	can	be	implemented	in	conjunction	with	HIPs	to	further
intensify	the	impact	of	the	HIPs.	While	there	are	some	initial	experiences	implementing	digital	health
technologies,	more	research	and	documentation	is	needed	to	better	understand	the	potential	and
limitations	of	this	approach.	For	more	information	about	HIPs,
https://www.fphighimpactpractices.org/overview.
How	can	digital	technologies	enhance	HIPs?
Better	Data	for	Decision	Making
Digital	applications	can	be	used	to	manage	logistics	and	reduce	contraceptive	stock-outs.	 A	common
aim	of	digital	technologies	for	family	planning	is	to	reduce	contraceptive	stock-outs.	(See	related	HIP
brief	on	Supply	Chain	Management.)	For	example,	in	Malawi,	community	health	workers	(CHWs)	use
their	personal	phones	to	submit	stock	information	via	SMS	to	the	LMIS.	The	system	automatically
calculates	the	resupply	needs	for	a	CHW	based	on	reported	stock	levels,	calculates	how	much	stock
was	consumed	and	how	much	is	needed	for	resupply,	and	transmits	this	need	via	SMS	to	the
corresponding	health	center,	enabling	staff	to	prepackage	orders	in	advance	of	the	CHW	pickup.	This
digital	technology	improved	rates	of	reporting	on	stock	levels	and	reduced	the	time	required	for	drug
resupply	by	half.6,7
Similar	gains	were	reported	in	Bangladesh	where	an	electronic	LMIS	collects	data	on	consumption	and
availability	of	family	planning	commodities,	sends	SMS	and	email	alerts	for	reporting	reminders,	tracks
reports	against	set	timelines,	and	sends	warnings	of	potential	stock	imbalances	for	contraceptive
commodities.	Participant	districts	nearly	eliminated	stock-outs;	for	instance,	facilities	reporting	stock-
out	rates	for	Implanon	implants	dropped	from	69%	to	1%	among	facilities	using	the	digital	system.8
Senegal	is	expanding	use	of	the	Informed	Push	Model,	which	allows	logistics	professionals	to	enter
commodity	stock	information	on	tablets	at	the	time	of	delivery.	The	program	automatically	calculates
quantities	based	on	previous	consumption.7
Digital	national	health	management	information	systems	allow	for	timely	analysis,	data	visualization,
and	reporting.	Many	countries	are	investing	in	large	digital	HMISs,	such	as	the	District	Health
Information	Systems	2	(DHIS	2),	and	in	digital	human	resource	information	systems	such	as	Health
Workforce	Information	Solutions	(iHRIS)	(see	Table	2).	These	digital	health	information	systems,	often
complemented	by	interactive	data	dashboards	with	GIS	mapping,	enable	timely	access	to	nationwide
data	that	can	be	used	to	inform	more	granular	decisions	about	how	to	allocate	resources,	where	to
target	interventions,	and	whether	to	adjust	performance	objectives.	Although	DHIS	2	and	iHRIS	can
and	should	include	family	planning	indicators	and	data,	not	all	countries	are	currently	fully	leveraging
these	platforms	to	capture	this	information.
TABLE	02.
Illustrative	Examples	of	Digital	Health	Information	Systems
HEALTH	INFORMATION	SYSTEMS
DISTRICT	HEALTH	INFORMATION	SYSTEMS	2	(DHIS	2)	HTTPS://WWW.DHIS2.ORG/
Free,	open-source	national	or	sub-national
Description health	information	system	for	program
monitoring	and	evaluation
Data	management,	aggregation,	visualization,
Content and	indicator	reporting
Current	Implementation Available	in	47	countries
HEALTH	WORKFORCE	INFORMATION	SOLUTIONS	(IHRIS)	HTTPS://WWW.IHRIS.ORG/
Description Free,	open-source	software	for	managing	healthworkforce	information
Training	and	certification
Content Personnel	deployment
Performance	measures
Current	Implementation Available	in	19	countries	and	supports	more	than900,000	health	worker	records
OPEN	MEDICAL	RECORD	SYSTEM	(OPENMRS)	HTTP://OPENMRS.ORG/
Description Free,	open-source	medical	record	systemplatform
Content Patient	tracking	and	management
Current	Implementation Available	in	80	countries	and	has	more	than	6.3million	patient	records
Improved	Provider	Capacity
As	a	complement	to	in-person	trainings,	digital	applications	can	improve	clinical	knowledge 	through
refresher	trainings	and	continuous	learning	opportunities	for	remote	service	providers.	 In	Senegal,
family	planning	service	providers	received	refresher	trainings	on	basic	mobile	phones	through
interactive	voice	response	(IVR).	Participants	demonstrated	significant	gains	in	knowledge	up	to	10
months	after	trainings	ended.9	In	Nigeria,	a	program	used	Android-based	smartphones	or	tablets	to
provide	entertaining	and	instructional	videos	using	footage	of	midwives	providing	family	planning
services.	Qualitative	interviews	revealed	that	the	video	content	raised	awareness	among	midwives	of
how	provider	bias	negatively	affects	clients.8	While	the	evidence	base	suggests	that	digital
technologies	can	contribute	to	improved	knowledge	retention	among	providers,	experts	believe	that
these	approaches	can	also	provide	time	and	resource	efficiencies	by	reducing	the	need	to	travel	for
trainings,	thereby	additionally	reducing	disruptions	to	service	delivery.
Digital	applications	may	improve	client-provider	interactions	by	offering	on-demand,	comprehensive,
and	accurate	information	and	referrals.	Digital	health	is	commonly	used	to	enhance	client-provider
interactions	and	adherence	to	recommended	protocols,	particularly	among	CHWs.	For	example,	in
Benin,	a	mobile	application	enables	CHWs	to	register	women	as	family	planning	clients,	provide	family
planning	counseling	and	advice	using	a	combination	of	images	and	audio	messages	in	the	local
language,	register	clients’	chosen	contraceptive	method,	share	information	on	possible	side	effects	of
the	method	chosen,	and	record	any	family	planning	products	distributed.10	CHWs	in	India	reported
that	similar	tools	increased	their	confidence	in	performing	their	job.11	In	Tanzania,	CHWs	reported
that	a	mobile	job	aid	with	forms	for	client	and	service	data	and	text-message	reporting	and	reminders
allowed	them	to	provide	timelier	and	more	convenient	care;	offer	better	quality	of	information	on	a
range	of	contraceptive	methods;	and	improve	privacy,	confidentiality,	and	trust	with	clients.12	Over
time,	the	Tanzania	pilot	evolved	and	scaled	to	include	additional	functionalities	to	support	a	pay-for-
performance	initiative	and	allow	clients	to	rate	service	quality.	The	expanded	program	demonstrated	a
522%	increase	in	the	number	of	monthly	registrations	of	users	who	had	received	family	planning
counseling,	and	a	15-fold	increase	in	the	number	of	follow-up	visits	when	comparing	mobile	to	paper-
based	systems.8
In	addition	to	supporting	CHWs’	interactions	with	their	clients,	mobile	phones	are	also	used	to	link
clients	to	clinical	services,	including	provision	of	methods	not	offered	by	CHWs.	Mobile-phone
referrals,	often	made	via	SMS,	have	the	potential	to	provide	efficient	links	to	clinical	services	and	to
support	provider	tracking.13
Digital	applications	may	provide	a	cost-effective	option	for	remote	supportive	supervision.	 In	Malawi,
CHWs	used	SMS	to	request	specific	technical	information	from	district	managers	on	topics	such	as
adverse	drug	effects,	management	of	contraceptive	side	effects,	and	dosage	amounts.	SMS
participants	reported	and	received	feedback	from	their	supervisor	at	least	5	times	per	month	at	an
average	of	US$0.61	per	communication.	In	comparison,	those	with	cell	phones	but	no	access	to	SMS
received	feedback	from	their	supervisors	4	times	per	month	at	US$2.70	per	contact	and	those	in	the
control	group	without	any	cell	phone	access	received	supervisor	feedback	6	times	per	month	at
US$4.56	per	in-person	contact.6	In	Kenya,	CHWs	used	a	popular	instant	messaging	technology	to	enact
virtual	one-to-one,	group,	and	peer-to-peer	forms	of	supervision	and	support.14
Using	digital	technologies	to	track	provider	activities	may	improve	performance.	In	Tanzania,	SMS
feedback	from	supervisors	informed	by	data	collected	via	a	digital	reporting	system	improved
timeliness	of	CHW	visits	compared	with	CHWs	who	did	not	use	the	digital	tracking	system.16	Providers
in	India	who	used	a	digital	self-tracking	tool	made	20%	more	visits	than	providers	who	did	not	use	the
tool.11
Improved	Efficiency,	Accountability,	and	Transparency	of	Financial	Transactions
Mobile	money	can	be	leveraged	to	increase	efficiency	and	transparency	of	financial	transactions.
Digital	financial	services	use	mobile	technology	to	store,	send,	or	receive	funds	and	are	increasingly
being	applied	across	the	health	sector	to	replace	cash-based	transactions.	Applications	include	bulk
payments,	such	as	salaries	and	per	diems,	as	well	as	delivery	of	timely	incentive	payments	for	service
referrals	through	results-based	financing	schemes.	In	Madagascar,	a	mobile	money	program	used	to
facilitate	payments	to	family	planning	service	providers	significantly	reduced	the	time	delay	for
reimbursement.16	The	rapid	claims	reimbursements	also	increased	service	provider	motivation	to
offer	quality	services	and	expand	their	client	base.17	In	Bangladesh,	a	program	uses	mobile	money	to
reimburse	providers	for	delivering	maternal	and	child	health	services.	The	switch	from	cash	to	digital
transfers	resulted	in	an	annual	cost	savings	of	approximately	US$60,000	and	an	annual	time	savings	of
roughly	41,333	work	hours.17
Resource-tracking	heat	maps	are	an	innovation	that	allows	stakeholders	to	visually	follow	the	flow	of
money	through	the	health	system.	The	system	can	be	designed	to	identify	funding	bottlenecks,	assess
the	timeliness	of	disbursements,	and	expose	leakage	in	the	system.18
How	to	do	it:	Tips	from	implementation	experience
Gather	information	about	and	from	the	intended	users	of	the	digital	interventions.	 This	includes
questions	related	to	how	stakeholders	currently	understand	and	use	technology	(including	the	types
of	technology	they	use	and	prefer	and	how	they	pay	for	technology	use),	as	well	as	the	barriers	they
face	that	a	digital	solution	might	address.	Segmenting	users	into	sub-categories	(e.g.,	men/women,
educated/non-educated)	can	provide	insight	into	important	differences	that	could	influence	the	design
of	the	digital	health	intervention.19	Once	it	has	been	established	that	a	digital	solution	is	appropriate
for	solving	a	given	problem,	engage	users,	as	well	as	other	key	stakeholders,	in	the	design	and	testing
of	the	tool.20	Doing	so	can	help	create	more	appropriate	and	user-friendly	interventions	that	are	more
likely	to	be	adopted,	while	failing	to	do	so	can	mean	costly	and	timely	revisions	later	down	the	line.21
In	Bangladesh,	implementers	learned	that	even	a	visually	engaging	dashboard	with	actionable	data—
but	one	created	without	input	from	end-users—did	not	sufficiently	guarantee	effective	data	use	at	the
local	level.	To	address	this,	the	project	incorporated	scheduled	SMS	features	and	email	alerts	to	push
data	to	those	who	were	entering	it	and	to	their	supervisors.	This	push	notification	system	facilitated
the	transition	process	from	having	a	“data-producing	role”	to	employing	a	“data-use	culture,”	thus
improving	decentralized	decision	making.8	This	experience	also	illustrates	the	importance	of	providing
orientation,	training,	and	support	to	those	who	are	expected	to	use	the	digital	health	application	so
they	are	comfortable	and	knowledgeable	about	how	to	use	the	application	itself	as	well	as	the	data
that	the	application	produces	in	order	to	improve	programming.
Understand	the	overall	technology	landscape,	including	available	infrastructure,	existing
programs,	opportunities	for	interoperability,	and	potential	technology	partners.	It	is	important
to	collect	information	about	the	technology	landscape,	including	cell	phone	and	Internet	coverage,	to
make	decisions	about	what	type	of	technology	will	be	most	appropriate.	In	addition,	time	and
resources	can	be	saved	when	building	upon	existing	digital	services	to	add	new	functionalities
(especially	when	the	intervention	is	built	on	open-source	software)	and	when	ensuring	that	digital
health	interventions	are	interoperable,	meaning	they	can	“talk”	to	each	other	to	exchange	information.
Increasingly,	decision	makers	and	implementers	are	seeking	to	create	links	among	different	digital
health	systems	and	services	to	further	achieve	systems-level	outcomes	and	impact.22,24	In	Tanzania,	a
mobile	phone-based	family	planning	screening	and	counseling	job	aid	for	CHWs	was	created	within	an
existing	mobile	phone-based	HIV	counseling	tool	rather	than	building	a	separate	tool	on	a	different
platform,	thus	leveraging	existing	resources	and	facilitating	family	planning	and	HIV	integration	in
service	delivery.24	Many	mobile	digital	platforms,	such	as	those	that	offer	counseling	and	screening
tools	for	providers,	also	collect	data	regarding	number	of	clients	per	method	or	products	distributed
and	are	becoming	compatible	with	HMIS	software	such	as	DHIS	2	so	that	health	indicators,	including
for	family	planning,	can	be	incorporated	and	reported	on	at	the	national	level.	Familiarity	with	national
data	security	and	privacy	standards	can	help	to	build	digital	systems	that	are	compliant.
Determine	the	potential	scale	for	the	project	and	the	resources	necessary	for	its	long-term
operation.	As	the	field	of	digital	health	matures,	more	interventions	are	reaching	scale—used	by	large
numbers	of	individuals	or	at	national	or	near-national	levels	of	coverage,	and	institutionalized	into
existing	systems	and	processes	with	high	levels	of	engagement	and	ownership	by	local	stakeholders.
Successful	projects	have	engaged	local	stakeholders	from	the	beginning	in	a	deliberate,	systematic,
and	continuous	process.25	A	contraceptive	stock	tracking	application	in	Malawi	achieved	scale	up	by
getting	Ministry	of	Health	endorsement,	creating	a	dedicated	task	force,	and	maintaining	close
engagement	and	coordination	with	partners,	including	mobile	network	operators,	resulting	in
government	ownership	and	administration	of	the	system.6
Consider	realistic	options	for	sustainable	financing. 	Digital	health	interventions	need	to	be
developed	in	a	way	that	is	appropriate	to	the	local	context	while	at	the	same	time	considering	cost
implications	should	the	project	be	scaled	nationally.	Costs	can	include	program	design,	equipment
procurement,	hosting	fees,	short-code	fees,	data	packages,	and	server	maintenance.	Different
approaches	are	associated	with	different	financial	and	technical	support	implications,	whether	using
smartphone	applications,	SMS,	or	voice.	For	example,	interventions	that	use	SMS	can	become	costly	as
they	scale—the	more	SMS	sent	and	received,	the	higher	the	cost.	While	some	services	have	succeeded
in	obtaining	reduced	or	free	SMS,	voice,	and/or	data	rates	through	public-private	partnerships,	most
do	not,	and	governments	may	not	be	in	a	position	to	assume	the	costs	as	projects	transition	to
national	scale.	Furthermore,	programs	may	want	to	explore	other	less	costly	platforms	such	as
Facebook	and	WhatsApp.	Regardless	of	the	technology,	if	digital	health	interventions	are	proven	to	be
more	cost-effective	than	non-digital	alternatives,	or	to	bring	cost-efficiencies,	then	governments	may
successfully	advocate	for	internal	or	external	funding	assistance.
Monitor	the	implementation	and	performance	of	your	digital	health	service.	 Like	all	health
interventions,	monitoring	and	evaluation	should	be	planned	for	from	the	start	as	part	of	program
design	and	should	be	linked	to	the	program’s	logic	model.	What	is	unique	to	digital	health
technologies	is	the	ability	to	rapidly	collect	monitoring	and	evaluation	data	through	various
techniques,	including	through	routine	system	data	as	well	as	through	other	quantitative	and
qualitative	approaches	such	as	surveys	deployed	via	the	digital	platform.	The	ability	to	garner	near
real-time	process	monitoring	information	enables	rapid	design	and	implementation	improvements.	In
addition,	if	designed	well,	evaluations	of	digital	health	interventions	can	determine	their	effectiveness,
including	value	for	money,	as	well	as	impact,	though	these	evaluations	may	or	may	not	be	conducted
using	only	digital	data	collection	methodologies.20	Once	ready	to	document	and	disseminate	results
from	monitoring	and	evaluation,	implementers	may	find	the	mHealth	Evidence	Reporting	and
Assessment	(mERA)	Checklist,	developed	by	the	mHealth	Technical	Evidence	Review	Group	at	the
World	Health	Organization,27	to	be	a	useful	resource.
©	2015	PMA2020/Shani	Turke,	Courtesy	of	Photoshare
Priority	Research	Questions
These	research	questions,	reviewed	by	the	HIP	technical	advisory	group,	reflect	the	prioritized
gaps	in	the	evidence	base	specific	to	the	topics	reviewed	in	this	brief	and	focus	on	the	HIP	criteria.
In	what	circumstances	is	the	use	of	digital	health	interventions	in	family	planning	most	cost-
effective	for	offering	training,	training	follow-up,	or	continuing	education	to	providers?
In	what	circumstances	are	digital	health	interventions	most	cost-effective	for	use	in
contraceptive	counseling	and	screening?
In	what	circumstances	are	digital	health	interventions	in	family	planning	cost-effective
compared	with	non-digital	interventions?
Do	digital	applications	that	support	family	planning	systems	contribute	to	client-level	outcomes
such	as	the	modern	contraceptive	prevalence	rate?
Tools	and	Resources
Principles	for	Digital	Development:	A	set	of	nine	principles	based	on	lessons	learned	in
implementing	digital	technologies	in	development.
mHealth	Planning	Guide:	A	thorough	orientation	to	the	mHealth	planning	process	for	anyone
looking	to	learn	more	about	integrating	mobile	technology	into	health	programs	in	low-	and
middle-income	countries.
mHealth	Assessment	and	Planning	for	Scale	(MAPS)	Toolkit :	A	self-assessment	tool	that	guides
project	teams	to	sustainably	scale	up	their	mHealth	innovations.
Global	Digital	Health	Network:	A	networking	forum	for	thousands	of	members	from	94
countries	to	share	information,	engage	with	the	broader	community,	and	provide	leadership	in
digital	health	for	global	public	health.
Former	Digital	Health	HIP	brief	entitled:	mHealth:	Mobile	technology	to	strengthen	family
planning	programs.	This	brief	synthesized	the	evidence	and	offered	tips	for	implementation	as
of	2013.
References
1.	 Pew	Research	Center.	Emerging	nations	embrace	Internet,	mobile	technology:	cell	phones	nearly
ubiquitous	in	many	countries.	Washington,	DC:	Pew	Research	Center;	2014.
http://www.pewglobal.org/2014/02/13/emerging-nations-embrace-internet-mobile-technology/
2.	 Amoakoh-Coleman	MB,	Borgstein	A,	Sondaal	S.	Effectiveness	of	mHealth	interventions	targeting
health	care	workers	to	improve	pregnancy	outcomes	in	low-	and	middle-income	countries:	a
systematic	review.	J	Med	Internet	Research.	2016;18(8):e226.	https://doi.org/10.2196/jmir.5533
3.	 Stephani	V,	Opoku	D,	Quentin	W.	A	systematic	review	of	randomized	controlled	trials	of	mHealth
interventions	against	non-communicable	diseases	in	developing	countries.	BMC	Public	Health.
2016;16:572.	https://doi.org/10.1186/s12889-016-3226-3
4.	 Catalani	C,	Philbrick	W,	Fraser	H.	mHealth	for	HIV	treatment	&	prevention:	a	systematic	review	of
the	literature.	Open	AIDS	J.	2013;7:17-41.	https://doi.org/10.2174/1874613620130812003
5.	 High	Impact	Practices	in	Family	Planning	(HIPs).	Family	planning	high	impact	practices	list.
Washington,	DC:	U.S.	Agency	for	International	Development;	2017.
http://fphighimpactpractices.org/high-impact-practices-in-family-planning-list-2/
6.	 Lemay	N,	Sullivan	T,	Jumbe	B.	Reaching	remote	health	workers	in	Malawi:	baseline	assessment	of	a
pilot	mHealth	intervention.	J	Health	Commun.	2012;17(suppl	1):105-117.
https://doi.org/10.1080/10810730.2011.649106
7.	 Haas	S.	mHealth	compendium,	special	edition	2016:	reaching	scale.	Arlington,	VA:	African	Strategies
for	Health,	Management	Sciences	for	Health;	2016.	http://www.unicefstories.org/wp-
content/uploads/2016/08/mHealth-Compendium-Special-Edition-2016-Reaching-Scale-.pdf
8.	 Levine	R,	Corbacio	A,	Konopka	S,	et	al.	mHealth	compendium,	volume	5.	Arlington,	VA:	African
Strategies	for	Health,	Management	Sciences	for	Health;	2016.	
https://www.msh.org/resources/mhealth-compendium-volume-five
9.	 Diedhiou	A,	Gilroy	KE,	Cox	CM,	et	al.	Successful	mLearning	pilot	in	Senegal:	delivering	family
planning	refresher	training	using	interactive	voice	response	and	SMS.	Glob	Health	Sci	Pract.
2015;3(2):305-21.	https://doi.org/10.9745/GHSP-D-14-00220
10.	 Center	for	Human	Services.	Texting	for	maternal	wellbeing:	use	of	mobile	phones	by	CHWs	to	offer
family	planning	services.	Chevy	Chase,	MD:	University	Research	Co.,	Center	for	Human	Services;
2015.	http://www.urc-chs.com/resources/texting-maternal-wellbeing-use-mobile-phones-chws-
offer-family-planning-services
11.	 Borkum	E,	Sivasankaran	A,	Sridharan	S,	Rotz	D,	et	al.	Evaluation	of	the	information	and
communication	technology	(ICT)	continuum	of	care	services	(CCS)	intervention	in	Bihar.	Princeton,
NJ:	Mathematica	Policy	Research;	2015.	https://www.mathematica-mpr.com/our-publications-and-
findings/publications/evaluation-of-the-information-and-communication-technology-ict-continuum-
of-care-services-ccs
12.	 Braun	R,	Lasway	C,	Agarwal	S,	et	al.	An	evaluation	of	a	family	planning	mobile	job	aid	for
community	health	workers	in	Tanzania.	Contraception.	2016;94(1):27-33.
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.contraception.2016.03.016
13.	 Advancing	Partners	and	Communities	(APC).	Situation	analysis	of	community-based	referrals	for
family	planning.	Arlington,	VA:	APC;	2016.
https://www.advancingpartners.org/sites/default/files/technical-
briefs/apc_situation_analysis_cbfp_brief.pdf
14.	 Henry	J,	Winters	N,	Lakati	A,	et	al.	Enhancing	the	supervision	of	community	health	workers	with
WhatsApp	mobile	messaging:	qualitative	findings	from	2	low-resource	settings	in	Kenya.	Glob
Health	Sci	Pract.	2016;4(2):311-325.	https://doi.org/10.9745/GHSP-D-15-00386
15.	 Flaming	A,	Canty	M,	Javetski	G,	Lesh	N.	The	CommCare	evidence	base	for	frontline	workers.
Cambridge,	MA:	Dimagi;	2016.	http://www.dimagi.com/wp-content/uploads/2016/06/CommCare-
Evidence-Base-July-2016.pdf
16.	 Burke	E,	Gold	J,	Razafinirinasoa	L,	Mackay	A.	Youth	voucher	program	in	Madagascar	increases
access	to	voluntary	family	planning	and	STI	services	for	young	people.	Glob	Health	Sci	Pract.
2017;5(1):33-43.	https://doi.org/10.9745/GHSP-D-16-00321
17.	 Health	Finance	and	Governance	Project.	Mobile	money	for	health:	case	study	compendium.
Bethesda,	MD:	Abt	Associates,	Health	Finance	and	Governance	Project;	2015.
https://www.hfgproject.org/wp-content/uploads/2015/10/HFG-Mobile-Money-
Compendium_October-2015.pdf
18.	 Switilick-Prose	K,	Ahmed	R.	Follow	the	money:	how	to	increase	the	transparency,	efficiency	and
accountability	of	health	care	spending.	Devex	Newswire.	November	11,	2014.
https://www.devex.com/news/follow-the-money-how-to-increase-the-transparency-efficiency-and-
accountability-of-health-care-spending-84756
19.	 Knowledge	for	Health	(K4Health)	Project.	The	mHealth	planning	guide:	key	considerations	for
integrating	mobile	technology	into	health	programs.	Baltimore,	MD:	Johns	Hopkins	Center	for
Communication	Programs,	K4Health	Project;	2014.	https://www.k4health.org/toolkits/mhealth-
planning-guide
20.	 World	Health	Organization	(WHO).	Monitoring	and	evaluating	digital	health	interventions:	a
practical	guide	to	conducting	research	and	assessment.	Geneva:	WHO;	2016.
http://www.who.int/reproductivehealth/publications/mhealth/digital-health-interventions/en/
21.	 About.	Principles	for	Digital	Development	website.	http://digitalprinciples.org/about/
22.	 Digital	Health	and	Interoperability	Working	Group.	Taming	the	wild	west	of	digital	health	data:
linking	systems	to	strengthen	global	health	outcomes.	Health	Data	Collaborative;	2016.
https://www.healthdatacollaborative.org/news/article/taming-the-wild-west-of-digital-health-data-
linking-systems-to-strengthen-global-health-outcomes-79/
23.	 World	Health	Organization	(WHO).	Directory	of	eHealth	policies.	Geneva:	WHO;	2016.
http://www.who.int/goe/policies/en/
24.	 Agarwal	S,	Lasway	C,	Lengle	K,	et	al.	Family	planning	counseling	in	your	pocket:	a	mobile	job	aid	for
community	health	workers	in	Tanzania.	Glob	Health	Sci	Pract.	2016;4(2):300-310.
https://doi.org/10.9745/GHSP-D-15-00393
25.	 World	Health	Organization	(WHO).	The	MAPS	toolkit:	mHealth	assessment	and	planning	for	scale.
Geneva:	WHO;	2015.	http://who.int/life-course/publications/mhealth-toolkit/en/
26.	 Agarwal	S,	LeFevre	A,	Lee,	J,	et	al;	WHO	mHealth	Technical	Evidence	Review	Group.	Guidelines	for
reporting	of	health	interventions	using	mobile	phones:	mobile	health	(mHealth)	evidence	reporting
and	assessment	(mERA)	checklist.	BMJ.	2016;352(1174).	https://doi.org/10.1136/bmj.i1174
Suggested	Citation
High	Impact	Practices	in	Family	Planning	(HIPs).	Digital	health:	strengthening	family	planning	systems.
Washington,	DC:	U.S.	Agency	for	International	Development;	2017.	Available
from:	https://www.fphighimpactpractices.org/briefs/digital-health-systems/
Acknowledgments
This	document	was	written	by	Nicole	Ippoliti,	Trinity	Zan,	Margaret	D’Adamo,	and	Shawn	Malarcher.
Critical	review	and	helpful	comments	were	provided	by	Afeefa	Abdur-Rahman,	Michal	Avni,	Rita
Badiani,	Regina	Benevides,	Elaine	Charurat,	Arzum	Ciloglu,	Claire	Cole,	Ellen	Eiseman,	Heidi	Good,
Sherri	Haas,	Karen	Hardee,	Ishrat	Husain,	Joan	Kraft,	Alice	Liu,	Ricky	Lu,	Justin	Maly,	Emily	Mangone,
Cassandra	Mickish	Gross,	Erin	Mielke,	Dani	Murphy,	Lisa	Mwaikambo,	Alice	Payne	Merritt,	May	Post,
Heidi	Quinn,	Pam	Riley,	Ritu	Schroff,	Willy	Shasha,	Adam	Slote,	Sara	Stratton,	Caitlin	Thistle,	Reshma
Trasi,	Sarah	Unninayar,	Caroll	Vasquez,	Kimberly	Waller,	and	Tim	Wood.
This	brief	is	endorsed	by :	Abt	Associates,	Bill	&	Melinda	Gates	Foundation,	CARE,	Chemonics
International,	EngenderHealth,	FHI	360,	FP2020,	Georgetown	University/Institute	for	Reproductive
Health,	International	Planned	Parenthood	Federation,	IntraHealth	International,	Jhpiego,	John	Snow,
Inc.,	Johns	Hopkins	Center	for	Communication	Programs,	Management	Sciences	for	Health,	Options,
Palladium,	Pathfinder	International,	Population	Council,	Population	Reference	Bureau,	Promundo	US,
Public	Health	Institute,	Save	the	Children,	U.S.	Agency	for	International	Development,	and	University
Research	Co.,	LLC.
The	World	Health	Organization/Department	of	Reproductive	Health	and	Research	has	contributed	to
the	development	of	the	technical	content	of	HIP	briefs,	which	are	viewed	as	summaries	of	evidence
and	field	experience.	It	is	intended	that	these	briefs	be	used	in	conjunction	with	WHO	Family	Planning
Tools	and	Guidelines:	http://www.who.int/topics/family_planning/en/.
For	more	information	about	HIPs,	please	contact	the	HIP	team	at	fphip@k4health.org.
CONTACT
Twit You
ter Tub
e
QUICK	LINKS
HIP	LIST
WEBINARS
SUSTAINABILITY	PAPER
EQUITY	PAPER
ORGANIZATIONAL	STRUCTURE
HIP	BRIEF	DEVELOPMENT
CONTACT
Twitt YouT
er ube
©	2019	Johns	Hopkins	University,	All	Rights	Reserved.
Contact	Us
Credits
