 
mPEDIGREE 
BRIEF OVERVIEW ABOUT mPEDIGREE 
Counterfeit drugs are believed to be responsible for an mPedigree protects consumers from counterfeit drugs 
alarming number of deaths, especially in the developing in regions with low literacy and low technical capacity. 
world. According to a study by Y.A. Chowdary et al., all The model relies on negotiating deals with phone and 
types of products – whether affordable, expensive, drug companies and having manufacturers implement 
generic or branded – are being counterfeited and the program at the lowest possible cost. Matching the 
emerge in community pharmacies, hospitals, and other technology platform to regional infrastructure, Hewlett 
less-regulated settings. Previous methods have been Packard (HP) created a cloud-based system that tracks 
developed to combat the problem, yet proved pharmaceutical supply chain data on the back end, while 
unsuccessful. However, the use of ubiquitous leveraging the high mobile penetration in region for the 
information and communication technology (ICT) tools consumer interface. The innovative system allows 
has proven to be more promising.  buyers to verify the authenticity of medicines for free by 
text messaging a unique scratch-off code found on the 
Bright Simons, a Ghanaian social entrepreneur, has product to a universal number. This request is routed to 
developed a phone-based system called mPedigree to mPedigree’s servers and consumers receive a quick 
tackle the problem of counterfeit drugs. mPedigree is an response to authenticate their purchase.  
innovative anti-counterfeit ICT software application that 
seeks to empower the consumer so that they have a 
way of verifying their medication’s safety. Through the EVALUATION AND RESULTS 
provision of a free text message service, users are able 
Global partnerships have been developed with Fortune 
to verify the origin and authenticity of drug treatments 
500 companies, over two dozen telecom agencies, 
before use. 
regulators, and pharmaceutical companies. In 2011, 
The core technology was invented in 2005 and Themis Medicare became the first Indian healthcare 
mPedigree was formally launched in Ghana in 2007. company to sign up with the mPedigree Network. As of 
Since its launch, the service has expanded to India, February 2013, mPedigree’s verification codes have 
Nigeria, East Africa and South Asia.  appeared on almost ten million packs of medicine in 
Ghana, Kenya, India and Nigeria. Four other countries 
are currently conducting a beta launch.  
54 mHEALTH COMPENDIUM   │    VOLUME 2 
 
 LOGISTICS 
LESSONS LEARNED 
 An electronic resource system must be able to 
boost transparency in the marketplace and efficiency 
in the regulatory process 
 Electronic resource systems should also facilitate 
the promotion of common standards and enhance 
the capacity of manufacturers and marketers of 
medicines to benefit from regional economies of 
scale 
 Identifying collective interests, specifically loss of 
revenue for pharmaceutical companies and 
governments and the network expansion of local 
telecommunications companies, has allowed the 
network to secure support from the key 
constituents it needed to drive impactful change. 
 A sound marketplace for medicines requires an GEOGRAPHIC COVERAGE 
enrichment of the partnerships between drug Ghana, India, East Africa, Nigeria, South Africa 
manufacturers, marketers, pharmacists and 
regulators IMPLEMENTATION PARTNERS 
Hewlett Packard, Orange Health, National Agency for 
Food and Drug Administration and Control in Nigeria 
CONCLUSION (NAFDAC), Kenyan Pharmacy and Poisons Board (PPB), 
Through an unparalleled integration across West African Health Organization (WAHO), Several 
corporations, governments, and service providers, Telecom Companies  
mPedigree is enabling consumers in the developing 
world to place absolute confidence in any medication FUNDER 
they purchase or receive in the open market or from 
Several Pharmaceutical Clients, the U.S. Technical 
any provision outlet in the public sector. Fast, secure, 
Support Working Group (US TSWG), Founders  
and easily accessible in remote areas, the system 
addresses the main barriers to counterfeit monitoring 
and has helped avert the numerous deaths associated CONTACT INFORMATION 
with patients ingesting counterfeit drugs. It is a strong mPedigree 
example of how technology is meeting the challenge of  Bright Simons, President, mPedigree 
identifying these dangerous and lethal drugs.  Network  
Email: info@mpedigree.net 
Information was excerpted from:  
Chowdary, YA, et. al. “A Review on Anti-Counterfeit Packaging and Use of ICT Tools to Combat the Issue of Counterfeiting.” 
International Journal of Pharmaceutical & Biological Archives. 3.4 (2011): 706-711. Print. 
Jack, Andrew. “Faking It.” Feature of BMJ 345.e7836 (2012). Print. 
“Mission and Vision.” mPedigree. Web. 
Simons, Bright. “mPedigree: An African Blueprint for Consumer Empowerment.” Skoll World Forum. n.d. Web.  
Zedlmayer, Gabi. “mPedigree: A Collective Impact Case Study.” Stanford Social Innovation Review. 20 May 2011. Web.  
  MHEALTH COMPENDIUM  |  VOLUME 2 55 
