S upportive Su pervision (SS) for TB in 
  
N igeria 
 
B rief Overview 
 
Nigeria ranks tenth amongst the highest-burden 
tuberculosis (TB) countries in the world. Despite 
Nigeria’s rising TB detection rates and program 
coverage, many TB cases are still undetected.  
To improve the TB supportive supervision system 
in Nigeria, Health Systems 20/20 (HS 20/20) and its 
partners, led by Abt Associates, collaborated with 
Nigeria’s National TB and Leprosy Training Center 
(NTBLTC) to develop a standard, integrated TB 
supervision checklist to assess and monitor 
diagnostic laboratories and DOTS services in the public and private sectors. This checklist was then piloted in 
four states (Abia, Rivers, Kano, and Lagos) in 2010-2011, using personal digital assistants (PDAs).  
 
Automating the checklist allowed for on-the-spot calculations and analysis, resulting in the improvement of 
supervision, assessment and creation of action plans. Following the pilot, the project scaled up to over 200 
facilities in 2011-2012 and upgraded the technology platform to smartphones. 
 
 
 
  
 Geographic Coverage: 
Lagos, Abia, Cross River and Kano, Nigeria 
 
 Implementation Partners: 
NTBLTC & Health Systems 20/20, Abt. Associates Inc. 
 
Abt Associates Inc. leads a team of partners that includes: 
| Aga Khan Foundation | Bitrán y Asociados | BRAC University | Broad Branch 
Associates | Deloitte Consulting, LLP | Forum One Communications| RTI International | 
Training Resources Group | Tulane University School of Public Health 
 
 Funder: 
USAID 
 
 For More Information Contact: 
USAID 
 Scott Stewart; 
1300 Pennsyvania Ave NW, Washington DC, 2010; 
Tel: +1-202-712-1000; email: sstewart@usaid.gov 
Abt  
 Awa Dieng, Nigeria Country Coordinator, HS2020; 
4550 Montgomery Ave, Ste 800 North, Bethesda MD 20814-3343; 
Tel: +1-301- 347-5000; email: awa_dieng@abtassoc.com 
 
 73 
 
Service Delivery 
 Supportive Supervision (SS) for TB in Nigeria 
 
About SS for TB in Nigeria 
Supportive supervision visits are done monthly or Improvements in TB Outcomes in Lagos 
quarterly at TB care facilities to provide comprehensive Mainland 2011-2012 
monitoring of all clinical, commodity, and laboratory 
functions. The use of smartphones during these visits 
have eliminated the need for printed forms, minimized 
human error in data entry, reduced the lag time for 
getting data to policymakers and managers, and helped 
pinpoint ways to improve quality of care.  
 
Moving from a paper-based system to digital supervision 
entailed the following: 
 
1) Buying the smartphones; 
 
2) Programming the smartphones; and 
3) Developing a platform that allowed for data to Lessons Learned 
be immediately analyzed. 
 • There is a need for strong in-country 
The transition also utilized Nigerian expertise in 
leadership to facilitate stakeholder buy-in. 
technology and training, specifically national supervisors 
• Careful selection of technological inputs is 
and trainers, as well as NTBLTC IT experts. 
necessary. 
 
HS 20/20 lead the development and implementation of • With new systems and technologies it is 
trainings and hands-on practice for all actors in the important to take the time and start small and 
system: LGA and state-level supervisors; TB trainers; IT then build once the issues are resolved. 
experts; and stakeholders at higher levels of the health • Need incremental and planned scale-up. 
system.  • Strong programmers and database managers 
 are necessary. 
Evaluation and Results • With the right input, the technology is 
sustainable. 
Between 2010 and 2012, the pilot project implemented 
four rounds of supportive supervision using the 
smartphones in the four pilot states. Conclusion 
 This is the first time the National TB Program has used 
At the end of the pilot, Abia, Kano, and Lagos reported technology to improve supportive supervision. The 
substantial improvements in major areas of TB care, National TB Program is considering using the software 
including cure rates, TB/HIV co-infection treatment, and platform on the smartphones to link the TB supervision 
defaulter rates. data into the District Health Information Systems, which 
 is currently being rolled out in Nigeria. 
To date, over 50 supervisors have been trained in how  
to use the new smartphones and checklist, and more 
than 10 trainers are capable of training others how to 
use smartphones. Additionally, the National TB program 
has three IT experts who can troubleshoot issues with 
both the smartphones and the database. Figure 1 shows 
the impact of this improved supportive supervision 
process. 
Information was excerpted from: 
Dieng, Awa. March 2011. Using Technology for Supportive Supervision in Nigeria Powerpoint.  
Washington, D.C: Health Systems 20/20, Abt Associates Inc. 
74 Dieng, Awa and Leah Ekbladh. August 2012. Smartphones Improve Supportive Supervision for Tuberculosis in Nigeria Brief.   Bethesda, MD: Abt Associates Inc. 
Photo credit: Trevor Snapp/Digital Development Communications 
 
