mSOS 
Using mHealth to strengthen real-time disease surveillance and response in 
Kenya 
DATA COLLECTION 
Implementation date: 2013 
In many resource-constrained countries, there are barriers to reporting real-time, accurate and comprehensive information when 
outbreaks occur.  In Kenya, health facilities used paper forms, non-structured SMS and other means to report suspected priority 
diseases weekly to the sub-counties, while sub-counties used unstructured SMS, phone calls and an electronic web portal system 
for weekly reporting to the Ministry of Health (MOH). However, it could not be ensured that data moved up to appropriate levels 
and response to outbreaks all occurred in real-time. 
In order to address this critical gap, the MOH, in partnership with Japan International Cooperation Agency (JICA), Japan Science 
and Technology Agency (JST), Kenya Medical Research Institute (KEMRI) and Nagasaki University Institute of Tropical Medicine 
(JICA-JST SATREPS project), and in collaboration with Strathmore University Faculty of Information Technology, commissioned the 
development of mSOS, a mobile SMS-based disease outbreak alert system.  
About mSOS 
mSOS is a SMS-based disease notification system where owned by the MOH. MOH officials use these tools to map 
health care workers immediately relay information on incidences and plan outbreak containment measures.  
 
suspected priority diseases to sub-county, county and 
national MOH officials by sending structured SMS messages Priority diseases are mainly classified into three categories: 
to a toll-free number. The system can be used on both basic epidemic prone diseases, diseases targeted for elimination or  
mobile phones and smartphones. eradication, and diseases/conditions and events of public 
health significance. For example, if a physician sees a patient 
mSOS is also equipped with a password-protected web with symptoms consistent with Ebola, he/she can use mSOS 
 
portal where maps, epidemic graphs and tables of suspected to notify the designated MOH officers in real-time so they 
incidences (based on SMS notifications sent via mSOS) and are equipped with information to take immediate action. 
r esponse actions (based on reports by the MOH, county and 
sub-county disease surveillance coordinators) are displayed mSOS also sends mass SMS to relay important disease 
on the web portal in real-time. All information is displayed surveillance and response information, such as case 
and reviewed in real-time, and all data is stored at a server definitions and isolation measures, to mSOS-registered  
users. 
 
 34  |  mHealth Compendium Volume 4 
 Evaluation and Results 
A cluster randomized control study was 
conducted to assess the effectiveness of 
mSOS. In-depth interviews and documents 
reviews (clinical registers, surveillance reports, 
etc.) were conducted at 127 health facilities 
and 11 sub-county health management offices. 
The health facilities included public, private 
and faith-based facilities representing various 
levels in the Kenya health system, including 
dispensaries, health centers, district and sub-
district hospitals, medical clinics, maternity 
homes and nursing homes.  
In the six-month pilot period (November 2013 
to April 2014), 58 out of 127 health facilities 
were randomly selected to use mSOS. A total 
of 380 notifications were sent using mSOS. 
According to the in-charge interviews, 72.4 
percent (42) of those who used mSOS 
thought the system was easy to use and 72.4 
percent (42) thought mSOS was helpful in 
reducing reporting challenges. In addition, 55.2 
percent (32) thought mSOS was helpful in triggering a response action. Lastly, 79.3 percent (46) suggested that mSOS should 
be rolled out nationally. More results will be released in 2015. 
The system and has targeted 14 priority diseases since November 2013. To date, mSOS is operating in Kenya in seven sub-
counties in Busia County and five sub-counties in Kajiado County. The Kenyan MOH has also expressed interest in national 
scale-up. 
Lessons Learned 
Geographic Coverage: Busia and Kajiado 
 mSOS allowed opportunities to strengthen data collection and Counties, Kenya  
research on disease surveillance in Kenya 
Implementation Partners: AJICA-JST SATREPS 
 The system provided a platform for capacity enhancement, 
Project: Japan International Cooperation Agency 
supportive supervision and sensitization of health workers on 
(JICA), Japan Science and Technology Agency (JST), 
surveillance activities 
Ministry of Health Kenya, Kenya Medical Research 
 mSOS ensured sustainability by promoting the use of local Institute (KEMRI), Nagasaki University Institute of 
technology, which enabled modification and system integration to Tropical Medicine  
suit various platforms and local needs 
 The system enabled student mentorship (students in IT, public Funder: JICA-JST SATREPS Project  
health and epidemiology) and learning through engagements with Contact Information: 
a local university on system development and programming 
Ministry of Health, Kenya | Ian Njeru, Head, 
Disease Surveillance and Outbreak Response Unit 
Conclusion (DSRU); Shikanga O-Tipo, Disease Surveillance and 
Outbreak Response Unit (DSRU) 
mSOS, a mobile SMS-based disease outbreak alert system, has 
revolutionized the approach to disease surveillance and response by Nagasaki University Institute of Tropical Medicine | 
Kouichi Morita, Project Chief Advisor/Professor/
making data available real-time. mSOS has the potential to help 
Dean; Mitsuru Toda, JICA Expert 
control the spread of diseases and protect the Kenyan people. 
Through a wider rollout, there is potential to enhance notification, KEMRI | Matilu Mwau, Principal Research Officer 
detection and containment of potential disease outbreaks.  (mitsuru.toda@gmail.com) 
See References on page 89. 
 
mHealth Compendium Volume 4  |  35 
