
Are	you	looking	for	a	page	or	resource	from	k4health.org?
The	Knowledge	for	Health	(K4Health)	Project	ended	on	September	10,	2019.	For	over	a	decade	(2008-2019),	K4Health	served	as	a	neutral
knowledge	broker	for	program	managers	and	health	care	providers	working	in	family	planning,	reproductive	health,	and	other	global	health
areas.	Funded	by	the	United	States	Agency	for	International	Development	(USAID),	the	project	championed	the	use	of	knowledge
management	for	global	health	and	was	led	by	the	Johns	Hopkins	Center	for	Communication	Programs	(CCP)	in	partnership	with	FHI360,
IntraHealth	International,	and	Management	Sciences	for	Health.	K4Health’s	family	of	web-based	knowledge	products	—	including	Family
Planning:	A	Global	Handbook	for	Providers,	Global	Health	eLearning	Center,	Global	Health:	Science	and	Practice,	Photoshare,	POPLINE,	and
Toolkits	—	served	more	than	2.6	million	users	annually.
Knowledge	SUCCESS	is	a	new	project	that	continues	USAID’s	legacy	of	knowledge	management	for	family	planning	and	reproductive
health.	We’re	helping	to	make	family	planning	and	reproductive	health	information	available	and	accessible.	If	you	can’t	find	what	you’re
looking	for	in	the	list	below,	please	contact	us	and	we’ll	do	our	best	to	help	you.
Where	to	find	k4health.org	resources
Family	Planning:	A	Global	Handbook	for	Providers Go	to	www.fphandbook.org
Global	Health	eLearning	Center Go	to	www.globalhealthlearning.org
Global	Health:	Science	and	Practice Go	to	http://www.ghspjournal.org/
K4Health.org	blog	posts No	longer	available
K4Health.org	Topic	pages Streamlined	versions	of	the	Topic	pages	are	on	our	website.	
Knowledge	management	resources	and	tools Go	to	www.kmtraining.org
mHealth	or	digital	health	resources Go	to	www.mhealthknowledge.org
Photoshare Go	to	www.photoshare.org
POPLINE POPLINE	retired	on	September	1,	2019.	
Toolkits Family	Planning/Reproductive	Health-related	K4Health	Toolkits	are
Do	you	have	a	favorite	resource—something	you	use	all	the	time,	or	frequently
recommend	to	colleagues?
This	website	is	made	possible	by	the	support	of	the	American	People	through	the	
Knowledge	SUCCESS	(Strengthening	Use,	Capacity,	Collaboration,	Exchange,	Synthesis,	and	Sharing)	Project.	Knowledge	SUCCESS	is	supported	by	USAID’s
Bureau	for	Global	Health,	Office	of	Population	and	Reproductive	Health	and	led	by	the	
with	Amref	Health	Africa,	The	Busara	Center	for	Behavioral	Economics	(Busara),	and	FHI	360.	The	contents	of	this	website	are	the	sole	responsibility	of	CCP.	The
information	provided	on	this	website	does	not	necessarily	reflect	the	views	of	USAID,	the	United	States	Government,	or	the	Johns	Hopkins	University.	
Security,	Privacy,	and	Copyright	Policies
