Leon et al. BMC Medical Informatics and Decision Making 2012, 12:123
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1472-6947/12/123RESEARCH ARTICLE Open AccessApplying a framework for assessing the health
system challenges to scaling up mHealth
in South Africa
Natalie Leon1*, Helen Schneider2 and Emmanuelle Daviaud1Abstract
Background: Mobile phone technology has demonstrated the potential to improve health service delivery, but
there is little guidance to inform decisions about acquiring and implementing mHealth technology at scale in
health systems. Using the case of community-based health services (CBS) in South Africa, we apply a framework
to appraise the opportunities and challenges to effective implementation of mHealth at scale in health systems.
Methods: A qualitative study reviewed the benefits and challenges of mHealth in community-based services in
South Africa, through a combination of key informant interviews, site visits to local projects and document reviews.
Using a framework adapted from three approaches to reviewing sustainable information and communication
technology (ICT), the lessons from local experience and elsewhere formed the basis of a wider consideration of
scale up challenges in South Africa.
Results: Four key system dimensions were identified and assessed: government stewardship and the organisational,
technological and financial systems. In South Africa, the opportunities for successful implementation of mHealth
include the high prevalence of mobile phones, a supportive policy environment for eHealth, successful use of
mHealth for CBS in a number of projects and a well-developed ICT industry. However there are weaknesses in other
key health systems areas such as organisational culture and capacity for using health information for management,
and the poor availability and use of ICT in primary health care. The technological challenges include the complexity
of ensuring interoperability and integration of information systems and securing privacy of information. Finally,
there are the challenges of sustainable financing required for large scale use of mobile phone technology in
resource limited settings.
Conclusion: Against a background of a health system with a weak ICT environment and limited implementation
capacity, it remains uncertain that the potential benefits of mHealth for CBS would be retained with immediate
large-scale implementation. Applying a health systems framework facilitated a systematic appraisal of potential
challenges to scaling up mHealth for CBS in South Africa and may be useful for policy and practice decision-making
in other low- and middle-income settings.
Keywords: MHealth, Mobile phone technology, Health systems framework, Community-based health services,
South Africa* Correspondence: natalie.leon@mrc.ac.za
1Health Systems Research Unit, Medical Research Council of South Africa,
P.O Box 19070, Tygerberg, Cape Town 7505, South Africa
Full list of author information is available at the end of the article
© 2012 Leon et al.; licensee BioMed Central Ltd. This is an Open Access article distributed under the terms of the Creative
Commons Attribution License (http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/2.0), which permits unrestricted use, distribution, and
reproduction in any medium, provided the original work is properly cited.
Leon et al. BMC Medical Informatics and Decision Making 2012, 12:123 Page 2 of 12
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1472-6947/12/123Background
There is widespread enthusiasm for the use of mobile
phone technology to improve health services (or
mHealth), but evidence is limited on how to implement
mHealth effectively at scale in health systems. This
paper applies a health systems perspective to guide ana-
lysis of potential challenges of scaling up mHealth for
the monitoring and evaluation (M&E) of community-
based health services (CBS) in South Africa.
The growing enthusiasm for mHealth is driven not
only by the demonstrated benefits of mobile technology,
but also by the widespread availability of mobile phones,
and the relatively low levels of literacy required to use
them [1-4]. South Africa is amongst countries with
the highest proportion of mobile phone users per popu-
lation, with 93 out of 100 people being subscribed
to a mobile phone network [5-8]. There is also consider-
able interest in the broader use of mobile phone tech-
nology within government, with the health department
recently developing an eHealth strategy inclusive of
mHealth [9]. In a parallel initiative the South African
primary health care system (PHC) is undergoing a
process of revitalization in which the currently fragmen-
ted community-based ‘outreach’ functions are being
prioritised for greater development, through integra-
tion with and management by the health department
[10]. This formalisation of CBS is expected to bring
greater standardisation of M&E and supervision systems
for community health workers (CHWs). The National
Department of Health (NDOH) wanted guidance about
how mobile phone technology could support the newly
integrated, nation-wide community-based health service,
which prompted this investigation.
Benefits of mobile phone technology derive from the
rapid collection, transmission, storage and transform-
ation of data which allow for timely access to data, real
time monitoring of data gathering and programme activ-
ity, rapid analysis and auto-generated reporting. Mobile
phone technology also offers the benefit of communi-
cation with individuals and large groups, through for
instance, instant messaging. These functions have been
put to use in various applications of mHealth such as
research and disease surveillance, to support M&E,
supervision, planning and development of service deliv-
ery, as tools for decision-making in clinical services, in
health promotion and disease prevention and in educa-
tion of health professionals (see Table 1).
Despite the widespread enthusiasm for and use of
mHealth, a number of reviews in recent years have
drawn attention to gaps in evidence on the impact of
mHealth at scale, the main limitation being the small
scale of projects [2-4,6,11]. Also, not enough is known
about the social, organisational and cultural elements of
successful implementation and adoption of informationand communication technology (ICT) [12,13], a gap in
knowledge that extends to mHealth.
Most mHealth interventions considered successful in
low- and middle-income countries (LMICs) are based in
non-governmental organisations (NGOs) and not inte-
grated into the mainstream of public health services [4].
The challenges of system integration are compounded
by the fact that evaluations of mHealth (and eHealth)
interventions tend to focus on feasibility, rather than im-
pact and cost-effectiveness, making it difficult to con-
clude on benefits [4,13-15]. Projects using mobile phone
technology for data collection and monitoring have
compared data quality, accuracy, time, training required
and costs between traditional paper and pen methods
and the new mobile technology. The focus is on inter-
mediary outcomes, such as effects on convenience
and efficiency of information management and does not
extend to how this might be impacting on quality and
efficiency in terms of improving service delivery pro-
cesses, strengthening health systems and improving
health outcomes [3,4].
Reviews of mHealth projects in LMICs have identified
a range of challenges with implementation which would
have implications for the up-scaling of such projects.
Many of the barriers go beyond the complexity of the
mobile technology itself and are related to broader
health systems challenges – in the practices of health
personnel, the integration of new technology with exist-
ing information systems, sustainable funding and appro-
priate leadership to steer these shifts [2-4,6,11,14-21].
Using the case of community-based health services in
South Africa, we developed and applied a health systems
framework to appraise the potential opportunities and
challenges to effective implementation of mHealth at
scale in health systems.
Methods
The methods included interviews with key actors in the
field of mHealth, assessment of three local mHealth pro-
jects and a review of grey and indexed literature. Inter-
views were conducted with nineteen key informants
from organisations involved in mHealth programmes in
South Africa. They included research organisations,
NGOs and providers of mobile phone technology
systems (also referred to as digital providers). Table 2
shows the number and types of organisations that parti-
cipated in the research and the number of key infor-
mants interviewed. Organisations were selected based
on their involvement with mobile phone technology for
M&E of community-based services and/or involvement
with the provision of mobile phone technology services.
The initial list of individuals and organisations was
expanded through snow ball sampling until a point of
saturation was achieved. Key informants knowledgeable
Leon et al. BMC Medical Informatics and Decision Making 2012, 12:123 Page 3 of 12
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1472-6947/12/123
Table 1 Different applications of mHealth in community-based health care settings
mHealth applications Examples
Data collection • Electronic tools for data collection and rapid access to data for purposes of research and disease surveillance.
Management • Management of health information for planning, monitoring, evaluation and supervision of workers and
service delivery.
• Administrative help with data collection and rapid reporting.
• Facilitating communication amongst community health workers (CHWs) and between CHWs and supervisors.
• Improving administrative systems, for example, for human resource, financial and supply chain management.
Clinical service delivery • Providing support for health workers at point of care for diagnosis and treatment, via job aids and decision-making
tools in the form of electronic guidelines, algorithms and referral mechanisms.
• Patient electronic health records that can be accessed by both community and facility-based health personnel.
• Patient access to medication via electronic prescribing system.
Health promotion activities • Health promotion messaging via mobile phones directly to patients to increase health awareness, support
treatment adherence or promote access to health services.
• Audiovisual applications available on mobile phones to use as a job aid for CHWs.
• Support for scheduling of home visits and targeted advice.
Education and training • Training personnel via distance learning opportunities.
• Evaluation of the impact of the education through distance quizzes.
• Ongoing training through regular electronic updates and access to reference material.of their organisation’s use of mobile technology were
selected for interviews.
Three local mHealth projects were purposefully
selected following the key informant interviews to assess
how different software applications were used in
research and service delivery settings. The review of pro-
jects drew on interviews with management and with
digital providers, site visits where the mobile technology
management systems were demonstrated and document
reviews. Finally, indexed and grey literature on the use
of mHealth in CBS was reviewed to understand the con-
text, scope, purpose and effectiveness of the mobile
phone technology used in various projects in South Af-
rica and other low- and middle-income country settings.
Interviews were conducted between August and No-
vember 2011, using a semi-structured interview schedule
that explored the organisations’ use of mobile phone tech-
nology, the implementation processes and the benefits and
challenges. Interviews with the digital providers explored
their experiences with the development and implementa-
tion of the software and data management systems.Table 2 Description of types and numbers of participating or
Types of organisations
Research organisations using mobile phones for community-based research
use in community-based health care settings.
Non-governmental organisations (NGOs) using (or planning for the use) of m
and/or monitoring and evaluation of services.
Developers and providers of mobile phone management systems (for profit
Other: An NGO providing management support for community–based NGOs
TotalThe three case examples of mHealth applications dis-
cussed in more depth include the use of mHealth for:
 Data collection and management of a community-
based intervention research study conducted
by the Health Systems Research Unit (HSRU)
of the Medical Research Council of South
Africa (MRC).
 Real-time monitoring the activities of lay health
workers spread across facilities from a central
point, by a social media NGO that provides
country-wide health education and awareness
services in clinic waiting rooms and in community-
based settings.
 Routine data collection for M&E of community-
based health services by two community health
care organisations.
Interviews were digitally recorded and recordings were
used to supplement notes taken during the interviews.
Case examples were described according to key featuresganisations and key informants (KIs)
No. organisations (No. KIs)
projects and or evaluating its 3 (6)
obile phones for the delivery 4 (7)
and non-profit organisations). 4 (5)
. 1 (1)
12 (19)
Leon et al. BMC Medical Informatics and Decision Making 2012, 12:123 Page 4 of 12
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1472-6947/12/123that included the setting, purpose and nature of the
mHealth solution, software development, funding sources
and whether the mHealth intervention was evaluated.
The elements, benefits and challenges were compared
and contrasted. These were then categorised and dis-
cussed under the four main areas of the health systems
framework described below.
Taking the local experiences and broader challenges
identified in the literature as starting points, a frame-
work was developed to appraise the health systems chal-
lenges of implementing mHealth for CBS at scale. The
proposed framework includes an assessment of the stew-
ardship, organizational, technological and financial
dimensions of systems. It formed the basis for a theoret-
ical analysis of the system challenges South Africa may
face in up-scaling mHealth for CBS. Through the use of
the conceptual framework and the challenges identified
by the case examples, interviews and the literature else-
where, we interpreted what we understood to be the
challenges of implementing mHealth at scale. From this
the main recommendations to inform policy and prac-
tice decisions were generated.
Ethical approval for the study was granted by the Ethics
Committee of the University of Western Cape. Key infor-
mants were required to give written informed consent.
Results and discussion
Developing a health systems framework for decision-
making about mHealth for CBS
Against the background of multiple systems challenges
identified in the literature, we identified the need for
a framework with a more explicit focus on the health
system dimensions of implementing mHealth. We devel-
oped a health systems framework to guide our reflection
on the potential challenges of scaling up mHealth
for the monitoring and evaluation of CBS in the South
African setting. The framework, illustrated in Figure 1
and detailed in Table 3, has four main, interconnected
health system dimensions, each with two or more key
elements that should be addressed when making deci-
sions about mHealth implementation. These are govern-
ment stewardship, organisational systems, technological
systems and financial systems.
The proposed health systems framework adapts and
draws on three existing approaches to reviewing imple-
mentation of various eHealth applications. Ali & Bailur
[19] in their analysis of the prerequisites for sustainable
ICT development in LMICs, identified five categories,
namely institutional/organisational, social/cultural, finan-
cial, technological, and environmental sustainability, with
key questions to be addressed in each category.
Bukatchi and Pakenham-Walsh [11], in their review
of ICT in LMICs, highlighted the importance ofinfrastructural and cultural context and systems chal-
lenges. They noted:
“The implementation of health ICTs in developing
countries and in sub-Saharan Africa in particular has
been hampered by traditional obstacles: poor
infrastructure; lack of resources; and insufficient
political commitment and support”. [11]
The authors summarised this as the ‘Four Cs” where
variation usually occurs: ‘Culture’ of information and
technology use, ‘Capacity’ to manage effective implemen-
tation, use, and maintenance of the new information
technology, ‘Connectivity’ which refers to the interlinking
or interoperability of information and technology sys-
tems and the ‘Costs’ or financial implications.
Finally, an eReadiness assessment tool developed by
Khoja and colleagues [20] highlight similar areas for
review: readiness in planning, technology, learning, soci-
etal and policy spheres. The three approaches described
above do not focus on mHealth exclusively, but rather on
various other eHealth and telemedicine applications. Our
framework re-configured these various categories and pre-
sents them in simple, but comprehensive health system
terms. It places the emphasis more squarely on the
appraisal of health system dimensions for guiding
informed decisions about the acquisition and implementa-
tion of mHealth at scale. The framework does not assume
that implementing mHealth is the inevitable outcome of
the early decision-making process - as would be the ex-
pectation of some readiness assessment tools and staging
models used, for instance, in telemedicine [20,22]. Never-
theless, decision-making and implementation processes
are not static, and this framework may also be useful when
mHealth programmes are already implemented, to review
progress and to optimize mHealth interventions.
The dimensions of the health system framework are
detailed in Table 3, with an overarching question and
key elements of systems capacity spelt out. Whilst the
focus in this paper is on monitoring and evaluation
strategies for CBS, these health system requirements are
common to other eHealth and mHealth interventions,
and have been well documented in related areas in Africa,
Asia and Latin America [1-4,6,11,15,18,19,21,23-25].
We have thus also drawn from the lessons and recom-
mendations from these reviews, using this as a set of cri-
teria for appraising the challenges for scaling up mHealth
for monitoring and evaluation of CBS in South Africa
(Table 3).
Applying the health system framework to current
examples of mHealth for CBS in South Africa
There have been several studies documenting the fea-
sibility and benefits of mHealth technology in South
Leon et al. BMC Medical Informatics and Decision Making 2012, 12:123 Page 5 of 12
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1472-6947/12/123
• Strategic • Culture of
leadership information use
• Learning • Capacity for
environment implementation
Stewardship Organisational
Financial Technological
• Sustainable • Useability
funding • Interoperability
• Cost
effectiveness • Privacy andsecurity
Figure 1 Health systems framework for decision-making about mHealth for community-based health services. The framework adapts
and draws on three existing approaches to reviewing various eHealth applications. Figure 1 illustrates the four health systems dimensions
that should be considered when applying a health systems perspective to appraise the challenges of scaling up mHealth; stewardship and
organisational, technological and financial systems. Each dimension has two or more elements that are important to consider when making
decisions about acquiring and or scaling up mHealth.Africa, including the use of personal digital assistants
(PDAs) and mobile phones for research and for man-
aging and monitoring community-based social and
health services [8,26-30]. There have also been studies of
mHealth applications for health promotion and adher-
ence support [7,8,27,29-33]. In a more recent applica-
tion, mobile phones have been used as a tool for
supporting the delivery of an integrated community-
based health care package of services aimed at saving
newborn lives in a large randomised controlled trial [28].
Although none of these projects were implemented at
scale, they point to the potential benefits of mobile
phone technology for CBS in South Africa. Table 4 col-
lates the findings from key informant interviews and
document reviews and describes the setting, purpose,
details and funding of each of the three mHealth appli-
cations used by three organisations in South Africa.
The organisations in the three case examples used
mobile phone technology to electronically report on
core process indicators of their daily work, such as regis-
tration of households, assessment of household health
needs, recording details of home visits and facility
educational sessions, and reporting to supervisors and
managers. A key feature of the technology was the
use of mobile phones in combination with a web-based
interface that provided for the aggregation of electronic
data from mobile phones onto a management ‘console’
which could then be accessed by supervisor and
managers and if need be, by health facility personnel.This provided for a range of tools for supervisors and
managers to improve their efficiency. The organisa-
tions all reported similar benefits related to an increase
in convenience and efficiency of data collection, transfer,
storage and analysis and management of data, as
compared with paper-based systems. In the research
project for instance, supervisors could in real-time,
access the completed surveys and do quality checks
of the data and they could auto-generate reports -
shortening the time from data collection to final report-
ing on results.
Other benefits reported include that the costs and
delays of using paper-based data collection were
removed. For the service delivery NGOs, the rapid
access to data on CHW activities meant less time spent
on aggregation of data, improved mechanisms for data
quality checks, auto generated reports and reduction of
backlogs in reporting. Managers reported that these infor-
mation gathering benefits in turn allowed for increased
efficiencies in monitoring and evaluation, supervision,
management and planning. An added advantage was that
mobile management systems allowed for two-way com-
munication between supervisors and CHWs (e.g. updat-
ing forms and home visit schedules).
Below we applied the health systems framework to re-
view the experiences of mHealth interventions in these
organisations and to highlight the differences between
these and large-scale projects required for mainstream
health service delivery.
Leon et al. BMC Medical Informatics and Decision Making 2012, 12:123 Page 6 of 12
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1472-6947/12/123
Table 3 A Health systems framework: Health system dimensions required for scaling up mHealth for community based
health services
Health system dimension Health system capacity requirements
Government stewardship: Is there a policy environment • Strategic leadership: Strategic leadership is present through policy guidelines
supportive of mHealth? that promote alignment with strategic health goals, funding sources, common
ICT standards and partnerships for collaboration nationally and internationally.
• Learning environment: Government stewardship includes creating a learning
environment, where projects are evaluated systematically and where collaboration
and sharing of knowledge can contribute to a central repository of evidence on
mHealth, which in turn can influence policy and practice.
Organisational: Is there a culture of and capacity for • Capacity for implementation: The health system has the capacity, managerially
using information technology for management? and technologically, to successfully implement mHealth interventions. This
includes assessment of eReadiness, a functional ICT environment and effective
mechanisms for implementation, support and monitoring and evaluation.
• Culture of information use: There is an organizational culture and tradition of
using health information for management - to ensure that the increased access
to electronic information is used for quality improvements in health services.
Technological: How useable, integrated and sustainable • Use-ability: The technology has ease of use, flexibility and durability and end
is the chosen technology? users experience the new technology as benefiting their work.
• Interoperability: Interoperability of information systems ensures there is smooth
communication across technological and information platforms as well as smooth
integration with existing work practices. Common standards (required for
interoperable systems) are developed through consensus amongst the multiple
stakeholders including health ministries, digital providers, health management,
clinical staff, patients, and funders. The relative merits of open source versus
proprietary software are addressed as this has implications not only for
interoperability, but also for financial sustainability.
• Privacy and security: Privacy and security of data is ensured. Additional
regulations for protecting electronic data may be required to secure privacy
of data.
Financial: Is adequate financial provision being made • Sustainable funding: Securing sustainable funding for large-scale implementation
for the medium to long term use of mHealth? is a major requirement and requires clear business and funding plans. Plans should
be realistic, especially as ICT projects may cost more and take longer than initially
planned.
• Cost-effectiveness: The cost-effectiveness of mHealth strategies is evaluated.
mHealth interventions are weighed up against other priority and evidence-based
interventions (in terms of the costs, resources and capacity requirements), and
opportunity costs are routinely considered. Unintended consequences of
introducing new technology within a weak health system are monitored to
minimize negative effects.Stewardship
In all three instances, projects were initiated by the orga-
nisations themselves rather than by the health depart-
ment. The interventions were on a small-scale and not
integrated with the broader public health system and con-
sequently did not require government level policy sup-
port. The management of these organisations provided
strategic leadership and they ensured that the mHealth
intervention was aligned with their goals - mainly to de-
termine if mobile phone systems could increase efficiency
of data collection and monitoring of CHWs.
Organisational systems
As described earlier, all three organisations reported that
the rapid access to data allowed for increased efficiencies
in the management of their information flow and super-
vision of community health workers. The major benefit
was a reduction in time from data collection toresearchers and managers accessing the data, shortening
the time required for aggregating, analyzing and report-
ing. For example, in the evaluation of the Choice and
Valley Trust use of mobile phones, the utilisation of the
electronic solution was more advantageous when com-
pared with the paper-based system. With electronic
solutions CHWs were able to collect information in half
the time required for a paper-based system [29]. Another
benefit was that the management tools allowed for more
efficiently monitoring of the work processes of CHWs
(such as updating and checking progress with home vis-
itation schedules). The research manager described the
substantial reduction in time from data collection to
data analysis and reporting and commented that she
“could not imagine doing future community-based
research projects without using mobile phones”.
The organisations reported few implementation pro-
blems. Training of CHWs, the front end users of the
Table 4 Three case examples of mHealth applications in community-based services in South Africa
Example Organisation Community-based services research Monitoring of facility based lay workers Information collection on community-
Medical Research Council of South Africa (MRC): NGO: Community Media Trust (CMT) based services NGOs: Choice Trust
Health Systems Research Unit and Valley Trust
Setting • The Good Start research study, conducted by MRC. • A social-media NGO providing health awareness • Two community-based health care NGOs in
The study was a large scale community-based, cluster education and treatment literacy at clinics and the Limpopo and Kwazulu-Natal provinces,
RCT promoting ante- and post natal care in rural and schools throughout South Africa. providing health promotion and prevention
peri-urban areas in Western Cape and Kwazulu-Natal services for HIV, TB and chronic disease.
provinces.
Purpose of mHealth application • Daily data collection and monitoring of community • Increase efficiency of monitoring and supervision • Feasibility and efficiency of a mobile
health worker (CHW) activities. of treatment literacy practitioners (TLPs). management software application, for monitoring
and evaluation of CBS, compared to a paper-
• Management and supervision of large numbers based monitoring system.
of CHWs.
Nature of mHealth application • Mobile phones combined with web-based interface • Mobile phones used for electronic reporting of • CHW electronic data collection from any
for data collection, management and supervision. core indicators in daily work. location with immediate transmission to their
supervisors.
• Focus on recruitment of study mothers, monitoring • TLPs filled in their pre-loaded work log sheet • CHWs used a patient specific bar code to log
the fidelity of the intervention delivery, and managing on their mobile phones from any location and into the mobile management system via the
caseloads and reporting. immediately transmitted it to a web-based phone, to update patient records during
consol. home visits.
• CHWs issued with entry-level mobile phones with
pre-loaded electronic survey forms for data capturing.
• Able to immediately enter data collected from their • Allowed managers to access, aggregate, analyse, • Data captured and stored on custom-designed
allocated households and transmit completed forms correct errors and report on TLPs’ activities web-based patient and workforce management
via mobile phones, using internet connectivity, to a more quickly. system accessible to supervisors.
central computer server.
• Supervisors used a custom-designed management • A management console allowed for aggregation • Allowed doctors and nurses at clinic level to
console (or computer terminal) for daily access to of data and auto-generated management reports. interact with the data using a web browser,
data, monitoring and planning of CHW activity. to monitor patient follow-up.
Software development • The electronic survey form and management console • A software system, called Capture, was developed • A software system, called Nompilo, was
developed in collaboration with a for-profit digital by a non-profit digital provider, using open-source developed by a for-profit digital provider, using
provider, using a proprietary software application software. proprietary software.
called Mobenzi Researcher.
Leon et al. BMC Medical Informatics and Decision Making 2012, 12:123 Page 7 of 12
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1472-6947/12/123
Leon et al. BMC Medical Informatics and Decision Making 2012, 12:123 Page 8 of 12
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1472-6947/12/123phones, took less than a day with occasional updates as
most CHWs are familiar with cell phones. Training of
supervisors on the use of the management console was
more challenging for some as it involved a higher level
of computer literacy. All three organisations reported
that their biggest challenge was ensuring appropriate use
and proper care of the mobile hand set – which required
new human resource policy and strict enforcement. One
manager reported that:
“People were losing their phones or it was stolen . . .
allowing their children to play with them, not taking
care, like getting it wet. Initially it was hard to find the
right balance to be fair and make sure they take
responsibility for the phone”. (Interview, CMT
programme manager)
Technological systems
The organisations reported very few problems related to
the new technology. They reported that CHWs found
the technology acceptable and useful for their work.
Digital providers emphasised the importance of ‘use-
ability’ for sustaining effective use of the mobile man-
agement system. One digital provider who designed the
system for the CMT organisation noted:
“If CHWs do not see a direct benefit for their work,
such as reduction in the time it takes to document
things or getting useful feedback from supervisors, the
technology will not be used effectively”. (Interview,
digital provider)
Entry level phones were sufficient for the required
tasks. CHWs were familiar with this level of mobile
phone technology and it also kept the cost of purchasing
mobile handsets low. The mobile software applications
and support services were designed by local digital pro-
viders (non-profit and for-profit), attesting to the highly
developed mobile phone industry in South Africa. Both
open-source and proprietary software systems were
used. There were no major requirements for interoper-
ability of the mobile phone system with existing infor-
mation systems (due to the small scale of the projects).
The organisations were able to protect the security of
their data with access control codes that allowed for dif-
ferent levels of access for CHWs and managers.
One NGO reported experiencing technical problems
due to unreliable internet access. This NGO also advised
that more time should be allocated for mHealth imple-
mentation projects as it took longer than planned and
required adjustments along the way. They also noted
that not being able to capture qualitative data was a
limitation and that indigenous language options should
be made available [29].Financial systems
The mHealth interventions were initiated with the help
of donor funding, which may pose a challenge for sus-
tainability in the long term. Information on costs was
limited and where available it was difficult to interpret
as some of the technology was subsidized by the digital
providers and none of the projects evaluated the cost-
effectiveness. The one evaluation study that was done
focused on feasibility and efficiency gains only and not
on impact on effectiveness of core activities [29,30].
To summarise, the key informant interviews and local
case studies established the facts of how mHealth is
implemented and the local benefits and challenges of
current mHealth interventions for CBS in South Africa.
The organisations and digital providers in these exam-
ples represent a small number of role-players who, with
the support of donor funding, are learning rapidly and
circulating knowledge on their experiences. The case
examples described in Table 4 illustrate the benefits of
mHealth applications for M&E and for supporting and
developing management and supervision of CBS in a
research and service delivery setting. The few challenges
identified related to ensuring responsible use of the mobile
phones and in one case, unreliable internet connectivity.
Whilst the positive experience of these organisations
attest to the enormous potential for mHealth to
strengthen health systems in South Africa, what remains
unclear, is the extent to which this new technology can
achieve a fit with the social, technological and organisa-
tional dimensions of the current public sector health
system. As is the case in the broader literature, the
examples reviewed here, are small scale, donor funded,
sometimes short-term and not integrated into the
mainstream health system [2,4,18]. What we do not
know is whether benefits witnessed in these local case
examples (and those in the broader literature) would
be retained and what might be the opportunities and
challenges of implementation at scale in a routine public
sector environment.
Appraising health systems challenges for mHealth for CBS
in South Africa
Stewardship
The lack of high level strategic, policy and financial sup-
port from governments is a key reason for the absence
of large scale government sponsored mHealth projects
[3,4,6,11,19,21,25,34]. In South Africa, the national
health ministry is increasingly taking a stewardship role
as part of a renewed focus on improving health informa-
tion systems. The emergence of new technological plat-
forms such as a web-based routine district health
information system (DHIS), an electronic record system
for antiretroviral treatment and an eHealth strategy, are
examples of leadership in the health information field.
Leon et al. BMC Medical Informatics and Decision Making 2012, 12:123 Page 9 of 12
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1472-6947/12/123The first question - is there a policy environment
supportive for mHealth, appears largely satisfied in the
South African context.
Nevertheless, there are other stewardship challenges
that include alignment of policy with and integration into
health sector plans, strategies and systems [3,4]. This
includes leadership and coordination in finding workable
solutions to interoperability, (through for instance, devel-
oping common standards and national regulations), as
well as identifying workable and affordable open-source
and or proprietary software solutions. Stewardship tasks
that will require long-term commitment include develop-
ing an evidence base to document and learn from best
practices, identifying sustainable funding sources and cre-
ating partnerships with NGOs and the private sector to
assist with future implementation [2-4,6,17,18,21].
Organisational systems
There are a range of system and structural issues at
other levels that could challenge the successful imple-
mentation of mHealth solutions at scale [2-4,6,11,17,
18,20,21]. A recent (2011) report evaluating the imple-
mentation of national eHealth strategies in Europe noted
that “the complexity of eHealth as a management chal-
lenge has been vastly underestimated” [35].
The South African health system has been charac-
terised as weak compared to other LMIC countries that
spend a smaller proportion of their gross domestic
product (GDP) on health care and show better health
outcomes [36]. Whilst part of the comparatively poor
health outcomes are ascribed to the high HIV &TB bur-
den of disease (and to some extent also due to the exist-
ence of two systems, public and private), health system
weaknesses contributing to poor outcomes include poor
governance, management and accountability systems,
and a still weak PHC system with inadequate access and
quality of health care. The result of these organisational
weaknesses is a gap between new policy formulation and
effective implementation, including for introduction and
use of new information technology [10,21,36,37].
One organisational challenge is how to effectively align
the use of mobile phone technology with the strategic
goals and priority interventions of national and pro-
vincial health departments [3,4,6,21]. In South Africa, a
major area of health system weakness is the poor cap-
acity of provinces and districts to use health information
for management [5,10,36] and this could limit the poten-
tial value of new mobile technology. In a large, multi-
country WHO/Health Metric Network assessment in
2009, South Africa scored below 50% in key areas such
as overall availability of health information resources,
data management and use of information for implemen-
tation and action [38]. These gaps were confirmed in a
recent (2011) rapid needs assessment of the routinedistrict health information system that showed a low
capacity for, and little time spent on, health information
for management [39]. The NDOH report also high-
lighted an environment where ICT was weak and not
firmly entrenched – with inadequate availability and use
of ICT (such as computers, the internet, updated soft-
ware) and deficiencies in the management and mainten-
ance of these services. Further, while there are a few
examples of provincial electronic health records systems,
the country is far from establishing a national patient
health record system [5].
Supervision of health workers in South Africa and
other low- and middle-income settings have been char-
acterised as weak [10,40]. Fragmentation associated with
delivery of community-based services by NGOs could be
considered as adding a further structural weakness in
the supervision of community-based services. The range
of problems with CBS supervision in South Africa
include a lack of adequate and standardized health infor-
mation tools and processes, lack of integration of infor-
mation into the existing routine health information
system, lack of dedicated M&E staff and budgets and
inadequate training at all levels [8,29,41-43].
With the planned PHC re-engineering, the supervision
of CBS will shift from an NGO base to local public sector
players. This is of concern as the current PHC facility
supervision systems are themselves weak and in need of
intervention. For instance, in 2010, some districts had less
than half the required PHC supervision visits per year
[10]. The broader reasons for inadequate supervision of
health personnel in LMIC settings include a range of
obstacles at multiple levels of the health system such as
low management skills, poor co-ordination, lack of motiv-
ation, inexperienced and untrained staff, obstacles that
will require broader health systems changes [40,44,45].
MHealth experts have cautioned against regarding
mobile technology as an intervention that will solve
problems of poorly functioning systems [4] and it may
be unrealistic to expect a mobile management system to
improve supervision problems in the context of a strug-
gling PHC system in South Africa. In addition, the
quasi-federal provincial governance system makes for a
complex implementation environment where provinces
are not compelled to follow national government im-
provement plans and where uncertain funding streams
could further threaten the sustainability of large scale
mainstreamed mHealth projects.
Technological systems
Ensuring the use-ability of mobile phone management
systems may present a challenge for a large-scale
mHealth for CBS project, given the variety of stake-
holders involved [4,11,21]. Whilst use-ability of front-
end users (the CHWs) have been highlighted, perhaps as
Leon et al. BMC Medical Informatics and Decision Making 2012, 12:123 Page 10 of 12
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1472-6947/12/123big a challenge is ensuring that supervisors and man-
agers at local, district, provincial and national levels
experience the mobile phone technology (and the infor-
mation generated) as useful. This would require exten-
sive training on the use of the management systems as
well as building technical capacity for maintaining and
fixing mobile systems [4,11,19,21].
An interoperable mHealth system needs to ensure
that various routine and other information systems are
able to connect, ‘communicate’ and share information
[3,18,21,25]. Examples include transmitting data col-
lected in community-based services to the routine health
information system, the linking of community and
clinic–based electronic patient records in a way that
allows for tracking bi-directional referral, follow-up care
and prescribing of medicine. The technological and
organisational challenges to satisfy the interoperability
and privacy requirements [1,3,4,21] of a newly integrated
large-scale CBS would be considerable, especially given
the multiple levels of access required for various levels
of health workers.
Financial systems
As mentioned earlier, securing sustainable funding for
large-scale implementation is one of the stewardship
functions of government, one that could represent a
major challenge [3,4,11,19]. Plans for implementation
and sustainability of mHealth projects would need to be
realistic, especially as ICT projects may cost more and
take longer than initially planned [3,25]. One of the
digital providers interviewed spoke to the broader chal-
lenge of financial planning when he referred to the
importance of achieving the ‘Goldilocks zone’ – a place
where the present requirements of the technology, the
scope for future expansion of the technology and its
affordability, are perfectly matched with the require-
ments of the client seeking to implement mHealth.
Achieving the ‘Goldilocks zone’ for a large-scale
mHealth intervention for M&E of CBS will no doubt be
harder than for smaller organisations.
In the absence of evidence on cost–effectiveness of
mHealth strategies at scale [4], it is also difficult weigh-
up mHealth interventions against other priority and
evidence-based interventions in South Africa (in terms
of the costs, resources and capacity requirements).
There may be unintended negative consequences of
introducing new technology within a weak health system
[4], such as staff avoiding engagement with health infor-
mation systems that are not functioning properly. These
and other implementation challenges would have to be
monitored alongside evaluation of cost-effectiveness.
However, such evaluations have been absent from other
ICT interventions in South Africa. For example, the
majority of telemedicine projects implemented in thepast decade failed to survive past the pilot phase,
prompting the South African NDOH in 2010 to put a
moratorium on the implementation of new telemedicine
projects until a strategy could be found to increase the
success rate [22]. This illustrates the complexity of
implementing and sustaining modern ICT in this setting.
Conclusion and recommendations
Against a background of increasing enthusiasm for the
use of mobile phone technology in health services in
LMICs, this paper reviewed the benefits of mHealth for
the monitoring and evaluation of CBS and the chal-
lenges of scaling this up for mainstream health services
in South Africa. We identified the need for a health
systems perspective that could guide our appraisal of the
challenges, one that would address the range of health
systems complexities, whilst also integrating the techno-
logical issues that need to be addressed. The paper pro-
posed a health systems framework that focused attention
on the broader health systems dimensions of steward-
ship, organisational, technological and financial systems
when considering mHealth at scale for community based
health care - a framework that is generic enough to
apply to other mHealth and eHealth applications, as well
as to other LMIC settings.
In sum, our analysis suggests that although mobile
phone management systems can benefit the monitoring
and management of service delivery in CBS, it is uncer-
tain that these benefits would be realized and or sus-
tained for large-scale mainstreamed mHealth for CBS
programmes. South Africa has a positive environment
for mHealth implementation that includes a high preva-
lence of mobile phones, a well developed ICT industry,
examples of small-scale successful use of mHealth for
CBS and a government supportive of eHealth develop-
ment. Nevertheless there are major weaknesses in the
functioning in the public sector PHC system that could
jeopardize the successful implementation and value of
mHealth programs. Challenges to scaling up exist in all
four of the health systems dimensions (stewardship, or-
ganisational, technological and financial). Chief amongst
these are the weaknesses in organisational capacity and
culture of using health information for management and
a still weak ICT environment.
Against the background of a struggling health system
with uncertain implementation capacity and the lack of
an evidence base on cost-effectiveness of large scale
mHealth solutions, it would seem wise to not opt at this
stage for full-scale use of mobile management systems
for M&E of CBS in South Africa. Rather, we recommend
that South Africa adopt a developmental approach
to the implementation of mHealth. In selected areas
where organisational capacity for implementation exist,
the health department could follow a building blocks
Leon et al. BMC Medical Informatics and Decision Making 2012, 12:123 Page 11 of 12
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1472-6947/12/123approach that involves encouraging the initial imple-
mentation of smaller, phased and heavily evaluated ‘lead’
projects, within the routine service environment. Imple-
mentation should pay particular attention to the techno-
logical issues of end-user acceptability, interoperability
with both technical and human resource systems as well
as ensuring security and privacy of patient information.
This will allow for growing the capacity for implementa-
tion and the evidence base on mHealth in mainstream
health settings - evidence that can in turn inform future
developments in policy and practice.
A limitation of this study is that evaluating challenges
of scaling up was complicated by the lack of an evidence
base on effectiveness of mHealth and absence of guid-
ance on effective implementation of new ICT in health
services. The interviews and case examples of organisa-
tions using mHealth showed a positive appraisal of
mHealth and this view does not take account of those
who may have had a less positive experience, nor does it
take account of mobile applications for purposes other
than monitoring and evaluation of CBS. In the absence
of a systematic evidence base, the authors therefore had
to rely on a range of methods and a theoretical consider-
ation of health systems challenges, to generate know-
ledge that could be used to guide decision-making on
mHealth policy and practice in South Africa.
This review was limited to using mobile technology
systems for the M&E for CBS. Whilst there is stronger
evidence of effectiveness of using mHealth interventions
for delivering preventive health messages and promoting
adherence to health care and medication, it is likely that
scaling up of such interventions in LMICs will be faced
with similar implementation challenges.
To conclude, the message from this investigation is
that, in addition to the need for more evidence on effect-
iveness, policy makers and implementers would benefit
from considering the broader health systems dimensions
of up-scaling mHealth. The proposed health systems
framework can assist with such deliberations. It also can
assist with demystifying the complexities and the ‘hype’
associated with the field of mHealth - by refocusing it as
a health systems issue rather than an exclusively tech-
nical question of information technology. Recommenda-
tions flowing from applying such a framework will be
able to more holistically address the appropriateness and
‘fit’ of mobile phone technology within a health system,
and how such technology may be employed to add value
in improving health systems and health outcomes.
Competing interests
The authors declare that they have no competing interests.
Authors’ contributions
HS, ED, NL conceived of the study and participated in its design and
coordination. NL was responsible for the acquisition, analysis and
interpretation of data. NL, HS and ED have been involved in drafting themanuscript and revising it critically for important intellectual content. All
authors read and approved the final manuscript.
Acknowledgements
The authors would like to thank all research participants for giving
generously of their time and for sharing their knowledge of and enthusiasm
for mHealth and for commenting on the technical report that formed the
basis for this article. We acknowledge the contribution of Professor Uta
Lehmann (School of Public Health, University of Western Cape) who
participated in the study design and gave valuable feedback and Mr. Wesley
Solomon from Health Systems Research Unit, Medical Research Council of
South Africa, who provided expert knowledge on mobile technologies. Dr.
Christopher Colvin (University of Cape Town) provided valuable conceptual
and editing feedback. The research was made possible by grants to the
School of Public Health, UWC, from the Atlantic Philanthropies and Centers
for Disease Control.
Author details
1Health Systems Research Unit, Medical Research Council of South Africa,
P.O Box 19070, Tygerberg, Cape Town 7505, South Africa. 2School of Public
Health, University of the Western Cape, Private Bag X17, Bellville, Cape Town
7535, South Africa.
Received: 9 June 2012 Accepted: 17 October 2012
Published: 5 November 2012
References
1. World Health Organization: Legal frameworks for eHealth. Geneva: WHO; 2012.
2. World Health Organization: mHealth: new horizons for health through mobile
technologies: second global survey on eHealth. Geneva: WHO; 2011.
3. The Rockefeller Foundation: From Silos to Systems: An Overview of eHealth’s
Transformative Power. New York: Rockefeller Foundation; 2010.
4. Mechael P, Batavia H, Kaonga N, Searle S, Kwan A, Goldberger A, Fu L,
Ossman J: Barriers and Gaps Affecting mHealth in Low and Middle Income
Countries: Policy White Paper. New York: Center for Global Health and
Economic Development Earth Institute, Columbia University; 2010.
5. Mars M, Seebregts C: Country Case Study for eHealth: South Africa. New York:
Rockefeller Foundation; 2008.
6. United Nations Development Programme: Mobile Technologies and
Empowerment: Enhancing human development through participation and
innovation. Geneva: UNDP; 2012.
7. de Tolly K, Nembaware V, Skinner D: Encouraging HIV testing through SMS:
Can it work, and do content and dosage impact? Durban, South Africa:
South African AIDS Conference; 2011.
8. Tomlinson M, Solomon W, Singh Y, Doherty T, Chopra M, Ijumba P, Tsai AC,
Jackson D: The use of mobile phones as a data collection tool: a report
from a household survey in South Africa. BMC Med Inform Decis Mak 2009,
9:51.
9. National Department of Health: EHealth strategy South Africa. Pretoria:
South African Government; 2012.
10. Naledi T, Barron P, Schneider H: Chapter 2: Primary health care in SA since
1994 and implications of the new vision for PHC re-engineering. Durban:
Health Systems Trust; 2011.
11. Bukachi F, Pakenham-Walsh N: Information Technology for Health in
Developing Countries. Chest 2007, 132:1624–1630.
12. Gagnon MP, Légaré F, Labrecque M, Frémont P, Pluye P, Gagnon J, Car J,
Pagliari C, Desmartis M, Turcot L, Gravel K: Interventions for promoting
information and communication technologies adoption in healthcare
professionals. Cochrane Database Syst Rev 2009, :CD006093.
13. Chaudhry B, Wang J, Wu S, Maglione M, Mojica W, Roth E, Morton SC,
Shekelle PG: Systematic review: impact of health information technology
on quality, efficiency, and costs of medical care. Ann Intern Med 2006,
144:742–752.
14. Black AD, Car J, Pagliari C, Anandan C, Cresswell K, Bokun T, McKinstry B,
Procter R, Majeed A, Sheikh A: The impact of eHealth on the quality and
safety of health care: a systematic overview. PLoS Med 2011, 8:e1000387.
15. DesRoches CM, Campbell EG, Vogeli C, Zheng J, Rao SR, Shields A:
Electronic Health Records' Limited Successes Suggest More Targeted
Uses. Health Aff 2010, 29:639.
16. Greenhalgh T, Russel J, Ashcroft RE, Parsons W: Why National eHealth
Programs Need Dead Philosophers: Wittgensteinian Reflections on
Leon et al. BMC Medical Informatics and Decision Making 2012, 12:123 Page 12 of 12
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1472-6947/12/123Policymakers’ Reluctance to Learn from History. Milbank Q 2011,
89:533–563.
17. Avgerou C, Walsham G: Information technology in context: Studies from the
perspective of Developing Countries. Aldershot: Ashgate; 2000.
18. Vital Wave Consulting: Health Information Systems in Developing Countries:
A Landscape Analysis. Palo Alto, California: Vital Wave Consulting; 2009.
19. Ali M, Bailur S: The Challenge of "Sustainability" in ICT4D-Is Bricolage the
answer? São Paulo, Brazil: The 9th International Conference on Social
Implications of Computers in Developing Countries; 2007.
20. Khoja S, Scott RE, Casebeer AL, Mohsin M, Ishaq AFM, Gilani S: e-Health
Readiness Assessment Tools for Healthcare Institutions in Developing
Countries. Telemedicine and e-Health 2007, 13:425–431.
21. Information Development Program: Improving health, connecting people: the
role of ICTs in the health sector of developing countries. A framework paper.
Washington, DC: Information Development Program, World Bank; 2006.
22. van Dyk L, Fortuin J, Schutte C: A maturity model for telemedicine
implementation. Valencia, Spain: eTELEMED 2012: The Fourth International
Conference on eHealth, Telemedicine, and Social Medicine; 2012.
January 30 - February 4, 201.
23. Batchelor S, Evangelista S, Hearn S, Peirce M, Sugden S, Webb M: ICT for
Development Contributing to the Millennium Development Goals: Lessons
Learned from Seventeen infoDev Projects. Washington, DC: Information for
Development Program, World Bank; 2003.
24. Grameen Foundation: Mobile technology for community health in Ghana:
What it is and what Grameen Foundation has learned so far. New York:
Columbia University; 2011.
25. Lucas H: Information and communications technology for future health
systems in developing countries. Soc Sci Med 2008, 66:2122–2132.
26. Clarke M, Schoeman H, Friedman I: Towards a generic surveillance system to
measure the impact of Community Health Worker programmes in South
Africa: a comparison of paper-based and mobile/cell phone methods. Durban:
Heath System Trust; 2007.
27. Seebregts CJ, Zwarenstein M, Mathews C, Fairall L, Flisher AJ, Seebregts C,
Mukoma W, Klepp KI: Handheld computers for survey and trial data
collection in resource-poor settings: development and evaluation of
PDACT, a Palm Pilot interviewing system. Int J Med Inform 2009,
78:721–731.
28. Tomlinson M, Doherty T, Jackson D, Lawn JE, Ijumba P, Colvin M, Nkonki L,
Daviaud E, Goga A, Sanders D, et al: An effectiveness study of an
integrated, community-based package for maternal, newborn, child and
HIV care in South Africa: study protocol for a randomized controlled
trial. Trials 2011, 12.
29. Ogunmefun C, Mothibe N, Friedman I: Electronic Community Care Giver
(CCG) Study: A summative evaluation of the implementation of an Electronic
Monitoring and Evaluation Solution for CCG programmes. Durban: Health
Systems Trust; 2010.
30. Ogunmefun C, Friedman I, Mothibe N: Electronic Community Care Giver
(CCG) Study: An evaluation of the implementation of an Electronic Monitoring
and Evaluation Solution for CCG programmes. Durban: Health Systems Trust;
2010.
31. Skinner D, Rivette U, Bloomberg C: Evaluation of use of cellphones to
aid compliance with drug therapy for HIV patients. AIDS Care 2007,
19:605–607.
32. deTolly K, Technau K, Benjamin P: Helping HIV+ mothers protect their babies:
Improving follow-up and HIV testing rates of exposed infants through SMS.
Durban: South African AIDS Conference; 2011.
33. Wouters B, Barjis J, Maponya G, Martiz J, Mashiri M: Supporting Home Based
Health Care in South African Rural Communities Using USSD Technology.
San Francisco, California: Fifteenth Americas Conference on Information
Systems; 2009. August 6th-9th 2009.
34. Labelle R: ICT Policy Formulation and e-Strategy Development: A
Comprehensive Guidebook. Bangkok, Thailand: United Nations Development
Programme - Asia Pacific Development Information Programme (UNDP-
APDIP); 2005.
35. eHealth Strategies: European countries on their journey towards national
eHealth infrastructures: eHealth Strategies Report. Belgium: European
Commission; 2011.
36. Chopra M, Lawn JE, Sanders D, Barron P, Abdool Karim SS, Bradshaw D,
Jewkes R, Abdool Karim Q, Flisher AJ, Mayosi BM, et al: Achieving the
health Millennium Development Goals for South Africa: challenges and
priorities. Lancet 2009, 374:1023–1031.37. Coovadia H, Jewkes R, Barron P, Sanders D, McIntyre D: The health and
health system of South Africa: historical roots of current public health
challenges. Lancet 2009, 374:817–834.
38. Statistics South Africa: National Department of Health: Assessment of the
health information system in South Africa, 2009: Technical report. Pretoria:
Statistics South Africa; 2009.
39. National Department of Health: District health information system (DHIS)
rapid needs assessment. Pretoria: Government of South Africa; 2012.
40. Wringe A, Cataldo F, Stevenson N, Fakoya A: Delivering comprehensive
home-based care programmes for HIV: a review of lessons learned and
challenges ahead in the era of antiretroviral therapy. Health Policy Plan
2010, 25:352–362.
41. Ogunmefun C, Friedman I, Mothibe N, Mbatha T: A national audit of home
and community-based care (HCBC) organisations in South Africa. AIDS
Care 2011, 1.
42. Lehmann U, Sanders D: Community health workers: What do we know about
them? Geneva: WHO: Evidence and Information for Policy, Department of
Human Resources for Health; 2007.
43. Odendaal A, Mtshizana Y, Lewin S, Hausler H: A formative evaluation of
integrated community-based treatment and adherence support models for TB
and HIV clients. Cape Town: Medical Research Council of South Africa and
TB Care Association; 2011.
44. Rowe AK, Lanata CF, Victora CG: How can we achieve and maintain
high-quality performance of health workers in low-resource settings?
Lancet 2005, 366:1026–1035.
45. Rowe AK, Onikpo F, Lama M, Deming MS: The rise and fall of supervision
in a project designed to strengthen supervision of Integrated
Management of Childhood Illness in Benin. Health Policy Plan 2010,
25:125–134.
doi:10.1186/1472-6947-12-123
Cite this article as: Leon et al.: Applying a framework for assessing the
health system challenges to scaling up mHealth in South Africa. BMC
Medical Informatics and Decision Making 2012 12:123.Submit your next manuscript to BioMed Central
and take full advantage of: 
• Convenient online submission
• Thorough peer review
• No space constraints or color figure charges
• Immediate publication on acceptance
• Inclusion in PubMed, CAS, Scopus and Google Scholar
• Research which is freely available for redistribution
Submit your manuscript at 
www.biomedcentral.com/submit
