 
SMART 
SMS printer technology for early infant diagnosis of HIV/AIDS 
In Nigeria, approximately 230,000 HIV-positive pace with the rapid expansion of EID, CHAI, in 
pregnant women are at risk of infecting their babies partnership with the Federal Ministry of Health and 
due to the absence of adequate care. Early infant Implementing Partners (IPs), scaled up SMART in January 
diagnosis (EID) and immediate treatment with 2010, integrating the program into local and national 
antiretroviral therapy (ART) are necessary measures management structures.  
to reduce this burden. However, almost 50% of 
infants tested for HIV across sub-Saharan Africa never Implementation date: January 2010 
receive their test results. Moreover, EID of HIV 
requires sophisticated virologic testing using PCR, 
which can only be performed at a handful of About SMART 
laboratories in Nigeria. This creates challenges for Nearly every district in Nigeria has network coverage 
communicating the results back to the health facilities, for mobile telecommunications, even in remote areas 
and thus, contributes to delays in providing timely lacking roads and electricity. SMS printers combine 
treatment. To address these challenges, the mobile SMS technology and small, battery-operated 
Government of Nigeria, in collaboration with a range printers, allowing health facilities to receive and print 
of partners, has coordinated an aggressive response EID test results without the need for computers and 
by scaling up prevention of maternal-to-child internet access or waiting for hard copies to be 
transmission (PMTCT) programs from 2010 to 2015.  delivered. The only consumable involved is thermal 
paper for printing. 
The Clinton Health Access Initiative (CHAI) chose to 
address one of the primary objectives of Nigeria’s When an infant is tested at a remote health facility, the 
PMTCT scale-up plan: to ensure that at least 90% of all sample is sent to the lab. HIV test results are 
HIV-exposed infants have access to EID services. CHAI immediately reported back to the health facility via SMS 
partnered with two engineering companies to develop a technology, received and printed by the SMS printer, 
new technology, SMS printers, to strengthen EID and shared with the baby’s caregiver. Unskilled health 
services by reducing the turnaround time for test results workers are easily trained on operating the printers and 
by more than half. These SMS Printers to Accelerate minimal maintenance requirements. 
Return of Test Results for Early Infant Diagnosis of HIV/
CHAI works closely with the Federal Ministry of Health, 
AIDS became known as the SMART Program. To keep 
the PCR lab units and the IPs from both the President’s 
Emergency Plan for AIDS Relief (PEPFAR )and the 
Global Fund to Fight AIDS, Tuberculosis and Malaria to 
develop management and technical expertise, both 
locally and nationally. The Hewlett-Packard Company 
also works with local universities to provide a 
centralized computing infrastructure as well as software 
applications for labs to enable real-time management and 
monitoring of program data.  
Evaluation and Results 
Since scale-up in January 2010, a total of 203 SMS 
printers have been installed in health facilities across all 
6 geopolitical zones of Nigeria and over 500 skilled and 
unskilled health workers have been trained on printer 
operation. In 2012, a large scale, national impact 
66 mHEALTH COMPENDIUM   |   VOLUME 3 
 
SMART 
SMS printer technology for early infant diagnosis of HIV/AIDS  SERVICE DELIVERY 
assessment of the SMS printer program to evaluate its guide in response to many sites that failed to report 
impact on the National EID Program and generate if printers were not functioning properly  
robust evidence on its benefits was carried out in 33 
study sites.  
Conclusion 
The impact assessment report was disseminated in 2013 
The SMART program addresses a critical barrier to EID 
to serve as an advocacy tool for partner buy-in on the 
by leveraging simple mobile technology and design to 
technological innovation. Analysis of results showed 
more rapidly communicate HIV test results from the 
significant reduction in turnaround time by 
laboratories back to the health facilities. By providing 
approximately 21 days when compared to traditional 
aggregated data across all SMART-implemented sites, 
paper-based methods, and the SMS printer system was 
the government is then able to track PMTCT 
4.6 times cheaper than the paper-based method. Further 
performance indicators nationally, thereby tailoring 
analysis suggested that infant loss-to-follow-up was 
prevention and treatment efforts.  
reduced through the use of SMS printers to facilitate 
return of results.  -------------------------------------------------------- 
The report highlighted key recommendations to address Geographic Coverage: Nigeria 
programmatic and operational challenges with the 
SMART program. One recommendation was to Implementation Partners: Clinton Health Access 
demonstrate the needed support from all IPs for the Initiative (CHAI), Federal Ministry of Health of Nigeria, 
successful operation of SMS printers on the field. Thus HIV/AIDS Division; Hewlett-Packard Company; Institute of 
far, CHAI has secured buy-in from 50% of IPs who carry Human Virology, Nigeria; PEPFAR Implementing Partners; 
out routine monitoring and evaluation of health facilities Global Fund Implementing Partners 
and the SMS printers in the field, and provide 
Funder: mHealth Alliance, WHO’s Department of 
troubleshooting assistance when required. Some 
Reproductive Health and Research 
partners have also procured SMS printers for use at 
their EID sites. CHAI continues to partner with the Contact Information: 
Federal Ministry of Health to provide technical support CHAI Nigeria: Rosemary Archibong, Senior Program 
to IPs on SMS printer-related matters, when needed.  Officer, Laboratory (rarchibong@clintonhealthaccess.org) 
CHAI: Zachary Katz, Director of Diagnostic Services 
(zkatz@clintonhealthaccess.org) 
Lessons Learned mHealth Alliance: Francis Gonzales, Program Associate 
 The ability to instantly transfer results from the lab (202.419.6412, fgonzales@mhealthalliance.org) 
to the health facility via SMS has been demonstrated  
to reduce turnaround time significantly, thereby References: 
helping caregivers and clinicians to promptly initiate 1. Children and AIDS: fourth stocktaking report, 2009. UNICEF, 
life-saving ART, resulting in fewer infants being lost UNAIDS, WHO, UNFPA, 2009. 
to follow-up. 2. Federal Ministry of Health of Nigeria. National scale-up plan 
towards elimination of mother-to-child transmission of HIV in 
 IPs lacked a sense of ownership over the technology 
Nigeria 2010-2015. Government of Nigeria, 2011. 
because they were not involved in the initial stages 
3. Francis Gonzales. IWG Grantee Year 1 Update: CHAI Nigeria. 
of design. To resolve this issue, CHAI adjusted its 
Health UnBound, May 3, 2013. Web. 
installation approach by adopting a “train-the-
4. mHealth Alliance. IWG Round 1 Grant Winners. CHAI – 
trainer” model in order to foster a greater sense of 
SMART (Nigeria) Project Profile. The World Health 
ownership among partners.  
Organization, 2013. Web.  
 CHAI created and disseminated a troubleshooting 5. SMART Impact Assessment Report 2013  
  mHEALTH COMPENDIUM   |   VOLUME 3 67 
