 
 
Scaling Up Mobile Technology 
Applications for Accelerating 
Progress on Ending Preventable 
Maternal and Child Deaths 
 
USAID mHealth Meeting  
Addis Ababa, Ethiopia (2013) 
 
 Government
 
End Users Donors
Project Investors
Implementers
Hardware Mobile Software 
Vendors Developers
Mobile Network 
Operators
December 12, 2013 
 
This publication was produced for review by the United States Agency for International 
Development.  It was prepared by the African Strategies for Health Project and USAID. 
 
 
     Technical Meeting Report 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Scaling Up Mobile Technology 
Applications for Accelerating 
Progress on Ending Preventable 
Maternal and Child Deaths 
 
 
USAID mHealth Meeting  
Addis Ababa, Ethiopia (2013) 
 
 
DISCLAIMER 
The authors’ views expressed in this publication do not necessarily reflect the views of the United 
States Agency for International Development or the United States Government. 
 
 
 
Acknowledgments 
The meeting on “Scaling Up Mobile Technology Applications for Accelerating Progress on Ending 
Preventable Maternal and Child Deaths” was hosted by the Federal Ministry of Health and Social 
Welfare of Ethiopia and USAID/Ethiopia. It was organized and driven by the country teams who 
made remarkable efforts towards its success through extensive preparation and exchange of 
experiences at the meeting. The United States Agency for International Development’s Bureau for 
Global Health/Office of Population and Reproductive Health, the Bureau for Africa, USAID/Ethiopia 
and FHI 360 provided the technical and logistical support to the country teams.  
 
This report was prepared by Lungi Okoko (ASH Project) in close collaboration with Ishrat Husain 
(USAID/AFR) Margaret D’Adamo (USAID/GH) and Kaitlyn Patierno (USAID/AFR), and additional input 
from the organizing committee and meeting participants.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
1 | P a g e  
 
 
 
Table of Contents 
Introduction ............................................................................................................................... 3 
Country Progress and Future Plans ..................................................................................... 4 
Mobilizing Innovative Financing for Scaling up Mobile Technologies ........................... 6 
Making the Business Case to the Private Sector .............................................................. 8 
Conclusion and Future Directions .................................................................................... 10 
Annex 1: Summary of Country Progress and Future Actions .................... 12 
Annex 2: List of Participants ............................................................................... 17 
Annex 3: Meeting Agenda ................................................................................... 21 
 
  
2 | P a g e  
 
Introduction 
 
This report documents key points presented and discussed at the regional meeting “Scaling Up 
Mobile Technology Applications for Accelerating Progress on Ending Preventable Maternal and 
Child Deaths” held November 10, 2013 in Addis Ababa, Ethiopia on the fringes of the third 
International Conference on Family Planning. The one-day meeting was sponsored by the Bureau 
for Africa’s (AFR) Office of Sustainable Development, the Bureau for Global Health’s (GH) 
Office of Population and Reproductive Health of the United States Agency for International 
Development (USAID), and USAID/Ethiopia. It brought together more than 155 representatives 
from governmental and non-governmental organizations, the private sector and civil society 
from 15 countries and two regional USAID programs. This was the fourth in a series of meetings 
organized by the country teams to share experiences and ideas for improving family planning 
programs.  
 
As a follow-up to the November 2012 meeting on “Using Mobile Technology to Improve Family 
Planning and Health Programs” (attended by 170 representatives) in Dar es Salaam, this 
November 2013 meeting aimed to provide a forum for country teams to share progress made in 
implementing their one-year action plans and to discuss future actions.  
 
Participants were welcomed by 
the Representative of the Federal 
Ministry of Health of Ethiopia and 
USAID Deputy Assistant 
Administrator for Global Health 
Robert Clay. In her introductory 
remarks, USAID Director of PRH 
Ellen Starbird underscored the 
importance of bringing country 
teams together to exchange ideas 
and information and discussed 
how the Addis meeting builds on 
previous Family Planning meetings 
organized by USAID (i.e. the 
Road from Kigali to Addis). 
USAID Senior Health Advisor 
Ishrat Husain noted that by 
improving efficiency, enhancing quality of services, and empowering people to take charge of 
their own health, mobile technology presents a unique opportunity for addressing key challenges 
faced by health systems.  
 
Panel discussions featured speakers from NGOs and the private sector who shared successful 
business models and innovative financing approaches. Discussants also shared models for 
3 | P a g e  
 
mHealth programs that are already operating at scale. Participants were able to meet separately 
with experts to explore next steps for particular countries and mHealth applications. 
Country Progress and Future Plans 
 
Country teams were asked to present progress made on the implementation of the one-year 
action plans they formulated in Dar es Salaam as well as future actions. Future actions were 
particularly oriented toward preventing maternal and child deaths and further strengthening the 
key role of family planning programs in contributing to these goals.  Considerable progress has 
been achieved by countries in moving towards scaling up the use of mobile technology for 
health. Table 1 presents a snapshot of country progress on key actions necessary for effective 
scale up (based on information presented by countries)1: 
 
Table 1: Snap Shot of Country Progress since Dar Meeting in November 2012 
 
1. Establishment/strengthening 
national mHealth coordination       ✔   ✔ ✔   ✔   ✔ ✔         
/governance mechanism 
2. Developed e-health 
strategy/policy or framework      ✔ ✔       ✔   ✔ ✔   ✔   ✔ 
3. Mapping of uses of Mobile 
Technology and Stakeholders             ✔ ✔ ✔         ✔     
4. Agreements/ discussion with 
the Mobile Operators             ✔   ✔   ✔ ✔   ✔     
5. Advocacy for scaling up ✔ ✔ ✔ ✔ ✔ ✔ ✔ ✔ ✔ ✔ ✔ ✔ ✔ ✔ ✔ ✔ 
6. Expansion of pilots or 
programs ✔ ✔ ✔ ✔ ✔ ✔ ✔ ✔ ✔ ✔ ✔ ✔ ✔ ✔ ✔ ✔ 
* East Africa also presented results from a regional study and a pilot. 
 
Table 2 shows the objectives of the one-year action plans countries committed to at the Dar es 
Salaam meeting in November 2012. Overall, countries who participated in both USAID mHealth 
regional meetings have achieved significant progress, especially when comparing the progress 
reported by countries in Table 1 to the one-year action plans in Table 2.2  
 
                                                 
1 Table 1 only includes information presented by countries. Some countries may have made progress not reflected 
in this table (as some country teams did not present this information at the meeting). 
 
2 Burundi and Mozambique participated in the November 2012 mHealth regional meeting in Dar es Salaam but did 
not attend the November 2013 meeting in Addis. 
 
Niger, Senegal, and Mali participated in the November 2013 meeting in Addis but did not attend the November 
2012 mHealth regional meeting in Dar es Salaam. 
4 | P a g e  
 
Angola 
Benin 
Burkina 
Faso 
DRC   
Ethiopia 
Guinea 
Kenya 
Madagascar 
Malawi 
Niger 
Nigeria 
Rwanda 
Senegal 
Tanzania 
Togo 
Uganda 
Table 2: Key Points in Country Action Plans Dar mHealth Meeting (November 
2012) 
 
1. National strategy                           
2. Guidelines                           
3. Public-Private Partnerships                           
4. Assessment (what's out there)                           
5. Evaluation (what works best)                           
6. Scale up                           
7. Introduce innovation                           
8. Costing                           
9. Advocacy                            
10. Task Force                           
 
A full summary of country progress and future actions is annexed to this report.  A few notable 
highlights of country actions are summarized below: 
 
 Rwanda is scaling up the use of mobile technology to support equity in health care. Each 
community health worker is equipped with a mobile phone and uses SMS to support 
provision of quality care in remote areas. The connectivity of the whole health system is 
being improved. Rwanda has an eHealth strategy and an office of eHealth in the Ministry 
of Health. 
 Kenya is mobilizing domestic resources through mobile banking and strengthening public-
private partnerships for scaling up mHealth. mPesa (mobile money system) provided 
health cards to allow individuals and families to save and spend on health. The Kenyan 
government has formed a task force on mHealth that includes the private sector, 
developed an eHealth strategy with a focus on the engagement of the private sector, and 
established an office on eHealth in the Ministry of Health.  
 Malawi is using mobile technology to strengthen essential components of its health 
system, such as improved supervision and logistics. It completed an eHealth mapping 
exercise, leading to the development of scale-up strategies for key programs, including 
the use of SMS for family planning.  
 Madagascar is using GPS to map overlap between service supply points and Airtel (a 
mobile network operator) coverage to identify sites to install village phones in areas 
5 | P a g e  
 
Angola 
Burundi 
DRC 
Ethiopia 
Guinea 
Kenya 
Madagascar 
Malawi 
Mozambique 
Nigeria 
Rwanda 
Tanzania 
Uganda 
where network coverage is low.   Madagascar is also using a web based dashboard for 
supply chain tracking. Burkina Faso is strengthening data collection at the district level 
and below in order to improve the availability of commodities.  
 Tanzania is developing standard operating procedures for mHealth solutions. Tanzania 
has also launched a new mHealth strategy and developed partnerships with the private 
sector. 
 Guinea is creating a multi-stakeholder, national mHealth platform. This platform will be 
used for scaling up mobile technology application. 
Mobilizing Innovative Financing for Scaling up Mobile 
Technologies 
 
Meeting participants also gained substantive insight into various financing options for mobile 
technology projects. Presenters from Safaricom and PharmAccess Foundation shared examples 
of strong partnerships 
between mobile network 
operators (MNO) and the 
private sector in the 
mobile health arena. 
Private equity firm Renew 
Strategies provided an 
overview of mechanisms 
for raising private capital 
as a financing option. 
 
PharmAccess’ mHealthLab 
has facilitated the 
development of an 
mHealth application that 
allows users to save funds 
for healthcare through an 
mPesa mobile wallet 
application on their 
phones. The application 
aims to increase health spending and decrease out-of-pocket costs through risk pooling. The 
benefits of this mobile wallet application include same-day payments and lowering of transaction 
(overhead) costs for healthcare providers, the creation of a trusted brand for the mobile 
network operator, and increased access to services for the user. In addition to this value 
proposition, the mobile health payment infrastructure’s great potential for sustainability stems 
from its multiple financing sources including private contributions (subscriber, [inter]national 
6 | P a g e  
 
remittances, and communal Harambee fundraising), donor-funded benefits and government-
funded benefits.  
 
The representative from Safaricom and its philanthropic arm—the mPesa Foundation— 
explained the value of mobile health applications from the perspective of private MNO. For 
Safaricom, investing in mHealth is more than just about data, voice, SMS, marketing, profit or 
altruism: the company is genuinely interested in delivering innovative, commercially viable and 
sustainable solutions that transform the lives of Kenyans by increasing access to services. 
Globally recognized as the leader in mobile money with its award-winning mPesa platform, 
Safaricom boasts more than 20 million cellular subscribers and currently supports mobile 
innovation in six sectors: Health, Energy, Agriculture, Education, Women, and Special Needs 
populations. The company’s mHealth priority interventions include solutions ranging from Dial-
a-Doctor tele-triage services and MNCH Tracking and Wellness Messaging to a Micro Health 
Insurance scheme and Logistics Management Information Systems. In its presentation, Safaricom 
provided a clear rationale 
for its investment in 
mHealth (see the 
Safaricom slide copied 
here). In terms of scale, 
since the same level of 
human and financial 
resources is often required 
for a pilot as for large-scale 
projects, pilots are not 
always attractive for 
mobile network operators. 
Safaricom stressed the 
importance of finding 
simple, creative ways to 
reach its diverse customer 
base with solutions that 
have a clear roadmap for 
scale. 
 
Renew Strategies shared its experience working with angel and social impact investors in Africa, 
and discussed the steps governments, donors and implementing partners can take to stimulate 
potential investment.  The private equity firm discussed investments that are most attractive to 
angel investors—both in terms of financial profit and social impact. Renew focuses on high net 
worth individuals and groups who make direct investments into local businesses at a critical 
stage of their growth in developing countries. Through firms such as Renew, investors look for 
opportunities to capitalize on Africa’s rapid economic growth by providing financial capital for 
viable, start-up companies (not yet publicly traded on a stock exchange) that have the potential 
to generate significant profit. These companies are often small to medium size enterprises with 
7 | P a g e  
 
innovative ideas, a potential for growth, and an exit strategy for investors to get a considerable 
return on investment (greater than 20%). The average size of each investment is typically about 
$500,000. Companies often ask for more, but do not have the management systems to absorb 
more.   
 
Since equity financing is riskier than debt financing, donors such as USAID can play a key role in 
mitigating some of the risk by providing investors with partial credit guarantees (through 
instruments such as USAID’s Development Credit Authority), and political risk insurance. 
USAID and governments can lower the transaction cost by creating an enabling environment 
that favors private investment and by providing technical assistance to start-up companies to 
strengthen their management systems so they are ready to scale. USAID can also train key 
partners on how to identify and operationalize opportunities to engage corporate and financial 
partners and leverage private capital to magnify the impact of development assistance.3 
 
Some private investors (social impact investors) looking for opportunities may be willing to 
sacrifice all or part of their return to support social good. Entrepreneurs who can clearly 
demonstrate the impact of their social development innovation can increase the likelihood of 
attracting such investors. 
Making the Business Case to the Private Sector  
 
Country teams began to explore ways to develop and strengthen partnerships with public and 
private organizations related to the use of mobile technology such as mobile network operators, 
other technology companies, internet providers, and organizations with interest in scaling up the 
use of mobile technology in health. Participants received guidance on how to develop a strong 
business case for private sector investment in mobile technology for health. Lack of sustainable 
financing models has slowed down the growth of mHealth. Scale is beginning to happen in some 
countries, but there are still too many small scale pilot programs that rely exclusively on donor 
funding. Vital Wave Consulting conducted a study commissioned by the mHealth Alliance to 
identify options and opportunities for mHealth sustainable financing models in low and middle-
income countries. One of the most important findings from this study4 is to understand the 
value chain (including, and most importantly end-users, but also project implementers, 
government, network operators, and funders) for each mHealth application. A value chain is the 
                                                 
3 For more information on USAID’s potential role in facilitating greater private investment in Africa, visit: 
http://www.usaid.gov/news‐information/fact‐sheets/private‐capital‐group‐africa 
 
http://egateg.usaid.gov/news/leveraging‐private‐capital‐african‐development‐may‐workshop‐southern‐africa‐
build‐pilots‐east‐a 
 
4 For more information on the mHealth value chain and the value proposition for stakeholders, read the full Vital 
Wave and mHealth Alliance report “Sustainable Financing for Mobile Health (mHealth): Options and opportunities 
for mHealth financial models in low and middle‐income countries”. This full report is available at: 
http://www.mhealthalliance.org/images/content/sustainable_financing_for_mhealth_report.pdf 
8 | P a g e  
 
whole series of activities that create and build value at every step of development of an mHealth 
application.  Value chain analysis requires an in-depth understanding of the local incentive 
structures and limitations faced by each of an mHealth application’s key stakeholders. This 
analysis must be continually updated to account for changes in health conditions, market 
environments and technological improvements. Performing regular analyses of the “gives” and 
“gets” for each stakeholder helps mHealth implementers adjust their value chain models in 
order to maintain financial sustainability in the long term. Vital Wave identified five critical 
success factors for sustainability:  
1. Ensuring value proposition for all stakeholders involved (understanding each player’s 
incentives along the value chain) 
2. Planning for the long-term economic buyer from the start (anticipating where money is 
going to come from, early and later);  
3. Localizing the business model within each specific environment, players and context;  
4. Performing monitoring and evaluation of impact, cost savings, efficiency gains, and return 
on investment to generate economic buyer support  
5. Keeping it (i.e. the value chain model) simple.  
The presentation by Abt Associates’ USAID Health Finance and Governance (HFG) project 
focused on how to develop a strong value proposition.  mHealth partners in the development 
community need to build effective partnerships with mobile operators to go beyond 
philanthropy. Current models rely too heavily on short-term donor grants. While this “aid” 
model can be advantageous for early stage development and demonstration of use or usefulness, 
it does not offer a self-sustaining business case. Mobile network operators are typically driven by 
the need to increase revenue per customer and decrease churn (customers changing networks). 
By developing a partnership 
that is a “win” for both sides, 
development partners can 
benefit from the mobile 
network operator’s vast 
reach into mass market 
through distribution channels, 
market research, and 
consumer trust as a 
transaction partner of choice, 
as well as its ability to rapidly 
develop and deploy value-
added services, and its 
incubation platforms that 
leverage technology for social 
good. On the other side, by 
partnering with development 
partners on mHealth 
9 | P a g e  
 
solutions, mobile operators may be able to keep users on their SIM cards (instead of switching 
to other companies) by creating incentives for loyal customers (e.g. subsidized health insurance), 
generating content that attracts and retains users, and tapping into networks of trusted 
champions such as community health workers.  
 
It is important for USAID and other development partners to learn to speak the language of 
network operators. These companies are heavily taxed and regulated, and, in most countries, 
operate in a highly competitive market. Development partners should also carefully weigh the 
cost and benefits of entering into exclusivity agreements with one mobile operator instead of 
multiple ones. It may also be worth exploring together with mobile operators opportunities for 
getting tax waivers for mobile services that provide social/public goods. Discussions on 
exclusivity and tax waivers should involve national telecommunication regulatory bodies. 
 
The Georgetown Institute for 
Reproductive Health shared 
lessons learned from developing a 
business case for its CycleTel 
application — an SMS-based 
version of the Standard Days 
Method via mobile phone.  The 
presentation stressed the 
importance of conducting market 
research, developing a business 
plan, and approaching mHealth 
innovations from three lens: 1) 
Desirability or what do people 
desire?; 2) Feasibility or what is 
technically and organizationally 
feasible?; and 3) Viability or what 
can be financially viable? Within 
the value chain, it is important to realize that the mobile market moves quickly. A socially or 
health focused organization needs to evolve with the market. 
 
Scott Radloff, Senior Scholar and Director of PMA2020 at the Gates Institute for Population and 
Reproductive Health (and former Director of USAID’s Office of Population and Reproductive 
Health) presented Performance Monitoring and Accountability 2020’s approach to mobile-
assisted data collection for household level surveys in 10 countries. 
Conclusion and Future Directions 
 
mHealth continues to hold great  potential to transform the health sector by strengthening the 
health system at many levels.  It can also play a key role in helping USAID achieve its five year 
10 | P a g e  
 
goal of reducing under-five mortality to 39 deaths per 1,000 live births, reducing maternal 
mortality to 157 deaths per 100,000 live births, and preventing 122 million unintended 
pregnancies. Discussions held at the meeting underscored the tremendous potential of mobile 
technology to improve equity in the health care arena and help to reduce poverty.  Mobile 
technology can make important contributions to addressing serious health system constraints 
such as access in remote areas, communication with health workers and routine reporting.  
Africa is leap frogging in its use of cell phones and the internet, enabling it to potentially reduce 
the digital divide in all sectors, including health. Each country team identified specific actions to 
take to move the mHealth agenda forward. USAID country-level Missions are working with the 
country teams to scale-up of workable pilot programs with the potential to impact health 
systems.   Partnerships with the private sector, especially providers of airtime, can play a 
significant role in attaining scale, but determining effective approaches for engaging the private 
sector remains a major challenge.    
 
In his closing remarks, USAID Deputy Assistant Administrator for Global Health Robert Clay 
commended countries for progress made since the 2012 Dar meeting and stressed the 
importance of continuing to exchange experiences and lessons between countries.  He also 
called for increased coordination and nationwide scale up of effective mHealth applications.  Dr. 
Clay pointed to the economic transition of health—with many African countries experiencing 
significant economic growth—and mobile technology’s potential for enabling a more efficient use 
of the increased national resources available for health. With the flat lining of U.S. Government 
funding for health, the need to work in partnership with both public and private actors is critical. 
He announced that USAID is developing an eHealth and mHealth strategy, and that a draft 
version of this document will likely be shared with meeting participants for comments.  Dr. Clay 
concluded his remarks by encouraging country teams to look beyond program elements (FP/RH, 
HIV, MCH, Malaria, etc) and towards mHealth platforms that strengthen the broader health 
system.   
11 | P a g e  
 
Annex 1: Summary of Country Progress and Future Actions  
(USAID mHealth Meeting in Addis, November 2013) 
 
Country Progress (since the Dar meeting) Future Plans 
NIGERIA    
 Constituted of Country Working Group on mHealth  Inaugurate an mHealth Nigeria Country Team as a 
 Framework & Implementation Guidelines Development coordination mechanism 
 Continued Advocacy with Mobile Network Operators  Collaborate with mHealth Alliance on Country-level  mHealth Activities in Nigeria. 
 Collated and documented existing mHealth Programs  Secure multi-sectoral partnerships/support with the private 
 sector and donor agencies 
 Continue advocacy to government on policy regulation and 
to MNOs on standards 
MADAGASCAR   
 Madagascar has made progress in a number of areas and  Organize a partners meeting early in FY 2014 to assess 
is now home to about 10 mHealth projects, including the experience from the 35 supply points and to discuss how to 
Village Phone Project (VPP):  take this innovative partnership forward in FY 2014 and 
o VPP conducted mapping simulation overlays supply beyond. 
points GPS coordinates with existing Airtel coverage  Finalize the partnership agreement between PSI and Airtel 
which revealed: on VPP implementation 
 460 sites are suitable or VPP ‘able’  
 186 sites are <15 kilometers from the tower and 
require on-the-ground testing  
o VVP trained 35 supply points in 2 districts on credit 
management and mobile phone technology  
o Dashboard development (web-based application) for 
supply chain tracking  
KENYA    
 Established a broader mHealth Committee with 3  Evaluate the one2one—a comprehensive integrated digital 
working groups (research, linking supply and demand,  HIV and RH hotline platform that includes bulk SMS, 
and stakeholder mapping) website, and chat function, new/social media such as 
o Members of the mHealth Committee are from both Facebook, Twitter, radio and TV programs as well as print 
the private sector and work under leadership and media. 
coordination of MOH  Identify areas of weakness in implementation of e strategy 
 Kenya’s mHealth Task Force is very active and meets  Strengthen the mHealth Committee 
quarterly   
 eHealth is now a department within the MOH  
 Conducted a stakeholder mapping to know identify what 
all partners are doing in mHealth 
 Ongoing discussion between MOH and the 
Communication Commission of Kenya (CCK)  for 
affordable tariffs for mHealth applications 
MALAWI   
 eHealth mapping exercise successfully conducted leading  Finalize eHealth Strategy 
to scaling up strategies for some initiatives 
 Continue with mHealth sub-committee quarterly meetings 
 New initiatives launched and scale up underway through and annual ICT innovation fairs 
partnerships 
 Fully engage the mobile regulatory authority and the 
o New SMS service launched for family planning eGovernment Department 
12 | P a g e  
 
Country Progress (since the Dar meeting) Future Plans 
o C-stock initiative being scaled up  Use DRH’s position as advantage to promote the need its 
o Mobile mentoring with HSAs initiative being scaled up involvement in mHealth 
 Quarterly mHealth Sub-Committee meetings and the o previously RH was a unit under Department of Clinical 
ICT Innovation Fair (now an annual event) have become Services 
a platform for the establishment of stakeholder working  
relationships  
 Advocacy towards removal of interconnectivity charges 
underway 
 eHealth Strategy for Malawi under development  - Zero 
draft being finalized 
 ICT for Development Policy drafted  
o it seeks to provide an environment where ICT can 
thrive to enable improved delivery of health care 
services 
BURKINA FASO     
 The Dar action plan on mHealth was shared with senior  Scale up mobile data collection while awaiting funding for 
MOH officials server-based SMS platform for reporting maternal and 
 Held a stakeholders meeting on mHealth in 10 districts. neonatal deaths and RH commodities logistics 
The main focus of discussions was on mobile data  Request technical assistance for design of mobile data 
collection. platform   
 Began advocating to government agencies, UNFPA and  Continue advocating to government agencies, UNFPA and 
other donors to push for investment in mobile data other donors to push for investment 
collection 
TOGO   
 Agreement from the Ministry of Health to make contact  Actively searching for financial and technical partners  
with DataWinners for a pilot project 
 Contact with DataWinners and the development of a  
test form for the collection of logistics data 
 Discussion with donors on the funding for a pilot project 
in one region of the country 
UGANDA   
 Uganda’s MOH has put a moratorium on mHealth  Finalize the national eHealth Strategy, Policy, Roadmap and 
project development and implementation until the lift moratorium 
national eHealth policy, strategy and roadmap are 
developed. The current status is that the MOH only  Determine total cost of ownership of mHealth platforms 
provisionally has approved for a few mobile systems to and seek funding 
move forward  Develop National mhealth system 
 Drafting criteria for approving new mHealth platforms. o Pilot and evaluate this system 
Criteria include: strategic fits with national agenda, 
interoperability, timeline, cost, local capacity, and o Roll-out to districts 
sustainability.  
 MOH uses WHO eHealth Toolkit to ensure mHealth is 
implemented through a health systems lens. 
TANZANIA   
 Forged partnerships with private sector to create  Work on integrating HMIS with mHealth whenever 
reasonable win-win solutions, and move away from appropriate  
expecting cost-free solutions. 
 Complete the development of SOPs and guiding principles 
 Launched eHealth strategy in October 2013 for initiating and managing mhealth innovations  
 Began the development of guidance and standard  Continue discussions with MNOs to reduce SMS rates and 
operating procedures (SOP) for mHealth solutions general mHealth costs 
 MOHSW in discussion with MNOs to reduce SMS rates 
13 | P a g e  
 
Country Progress (since the Dar meeting) Future Plans 
and general mHealth costs 
 Mapping of all mHealth initiatives in Tanzania 
 Hosted the first Hackathon Challenge on Family Planning, 
combined elements of sustainability (October 2013)    
GUINEA    
 Mobile technology is used for clinical referral,  Elaborate an mHealth strategic plan  
coordination, data collection and LMIS 
 Continue to scale up  
 New partners now use SMS for data transmissions in 
more than 15 districts. These include PMI/USAID  Create linkages between the existing mobile data platforms  
partners and Engender Health   Equip health facilities with solar panels 
 Organized a national-level workshop to discuss the 
harmonization of mHealth solutions 
 Established a multi-stakeholder mHealth working group, 
which includes donors, MOH, and MNO Orange 
 Advocated to the Ministry of Communication and the 
MNO regulatory agency to help resolve key challenges 
DRC    
 Fiber optic cable deployed in July 2013 (expected to go-  Evaluation of mHealth pilots 
live in November 2013) 
 Development of policy 
 Debriefed MOH after the Dar meeting 
 Develop and adopt standards for information exchange 
 Constituted a National Health Informatics and 
Technology Working Group under the MOH leadership 
 MOH gave approval for large scale Health Information 
Technology (HIT) project 
 Developed partnerships with MNOs 
 HIT policies under early stage of development 
 
The following countries did not specify whether progress reported was since the Dar meeting 
or not: 
 
Country Progress (unspecified timeframe) Future Plans 
RWANDA  
(timeframe of progress not specified – based on Dar report, all information reported in Addis existed before Nov 2012) 
 Government of Rwanda works closely with MNO –  Scale up Training in all Districts on new Tracking 1000 days 
Technical Working Group for Health include member indicators 
from MNO companies. MNOs are thus are part of the 
conversation from beginning of the process.   Strengthen implementation through Quality checks and CHW coordination meetings 
 Before establishing operations in Rwanda, mobile 
network operators (MNO) have to sign an agreement  Ensure regular supervision of CHWs 
with the government to ensure they will engage in social  Provide regular feedback based on data analysis 
development 
 Deliver response to all “red alerts” sent to the system  
 Rwanda’s MOH has been rolling out three different but 
complementary mHealth technologies:   Continue to actively pursue public-private partnerships for 
o implementing the 3 mHealth technologies  m4RH: sends interactive, accurate reproductive 
health information to young people 
o mUbuzima: used by all CHWs to collect and report 
MDG indicators at the community level 
o RapidSMS: used only by Maternal CHWs to track 
14 | P a g e  
 
Country Progress (unspecified timeframe) Future Plans 
each pregnant woman’s first 1000 days from 
pregnancy (ANC) to delivery and post-partum 
ETHIOPIA  
(Based on timeline provided, only bullet #1 seems to have been initiated since Dar, but it’s clear that the country is very 
active)                                                                         
 In 2013, MOH aligned with partners to deploy mHealth  Endorse the National eHealth Strategy to the successful 
in more districts  implementation, monitoring and evaluation of eHealth 
 In 2012, MOH started proof of concept pilot systems and services 
implementation of an initial platform in 4 districts   Adopt widely accepted  eHealth Standards  to facilitate data 
 After a national mHealth strategy in 2010 and developing exchange across the health sector 
sets of interoperability standards in 2011, Ethiopia now  Adopt legislation and Standards that ensure  the 
has 10 mHealth projects confidentiality, security and integrity of eHealth system (data 
 Ethiopia’s MOH now plans to empower each Health and networks) 
Extension Worker with mobile technology for:  Strengthen the national multispectral steering committee 
o Data exchange for health events engagement  
o Referrals to facilities  Increase coordination  mechanisms  of mHealth applications, apparatus, finances and resources 
o Consultations with physicians and nurses 
o Supply chain management 
o Training and education 
ANGOLA  
(information presented did not specify what actions took place since Dar)  
 Discussions on policy and systems for mobile technology  Request TA  to scale up mHealth pilot into sustainable 
and health programming are ongoing programs 
 mHealth projects include:  Develop strategy for strengthening the very weak HIS and 
o The national level SMS Mulher (SMS Woman) increase access and demand for RH services 
initiative—a system sending maternal and child health  Use the opportunity of the new Angolan National Health 
information to women via SMS strategy being costed 
o The National Malaria Control Program mobile data 
collection initiative  Use the Angola USAID Mission CDS for PPP initiatives on Mobile technology/health 
 
The following countries did not participate in the Dar meeting: 
 
Progress (for countries not in Dar) Future Plans 
BENIN  
 mHealth piloted during the past three years by 3  Expand mHealth coverage through public-private 
community-based projects: collaboration between MOH, civil society and phone service 
o BASICS iCCM Project (MSH) in five districts in 2011- providers. 
12: Malaria and IMCI  Aim for national coverage to include all health units and 
o CARE/Benin in 2011 – present: maternal health, CHWs. 
EONC and referrals  Develop mHealth national policy as part of the national 
o URC/CHS (PRISE-C) Child Survival Project, 2011 – strategy for community health. 
present: FP and MCH  Intensify use of mHealth for MCH, FP and Malaria. 
 Benin’s MOH has demonstrated a high level of  Add training modules for the use of mHealth to current 
commitment toward mHealth  modules for data reporting, disease consultations and 
mentoring. 
 Advocate for better development infrastructure: increase 
rural electrification, improved mobile phone coverage 
across the country. 
15 | P a g e  
 
Progress (for countries not in Dar) Future Plans 
  
NIGER    
 Niger’s HMIS is paper-based from District to Region, and  Integrate into DHIS  a mobile data collection application to 
web-based from Region to National level. track stock levels for RH commodities 
 Niger MOH is experiencing delays in FP data  Advocate for funding to finance the integration of a mobile 
transmission  platform with DHIS  
 A project is piloting the integration of a mobile platform 
with health information system DHIS 
 Another project is piloting the use of mobile technology 
sending RH information and alerts to women  
SENEGAL   
 A few pilot mHealth projects are underway, including  Develop partnerships with multiple MNOs to reduce cost 
one by IntraHealth which uses open-source, and increase coverage 
interoperable technology to provide: 
 Explore new sources of renewable energy for charging 
o voice-based capacity building to health care providers mobile devices 
o mobile LMIS  
 
 
 
 
  
16 | P a g e  
 
Annex 2: List of Participants 
(USAID mHealth Meeting in Addis, November 2013) 
 
Country Team Name Organization Email 
Angola Dra. Maria Ines Leopoldo Castela das Neves MINSA isildaneves28@yahoo.es  
Angola Patrick Gaparayi SIAPS/MSH PGaparayi@msh.org  
Angola Dr. Valentim Altino da Chantel Matias SIAPS/MSH   
Angola Akko Eleveld PSI akko@psiangola.org 
Angola Gisele Guiamares USAID gguimaraes@usaid.gov 
Benin Milton Amayun USAID mamayun@usaid.gov  
Benin Dr. Olga Agbouhoui MOH  
Benin Mr. Jean Affo JSI   
Benin Dr. Margaret Behanzin PSI   
DRC Fidel Mbadu MOH mbadu_m@hotmail.com  
DRC Dr. Bernard Ngoyi IMA bernardngoy@imaworldhealth.org 
DRC Mano Ntayingi IMA ManoNtayingi@imaworldhealth.org 
DRC Thibaut Mukaba USAID tmukaba@usaid.com  
DRC Arsene Binanga Tulane abinanga@gmail.com  
DRC Jane Bertrand Tulane bertrand@tulane.edu 
DRC Mashant, Emilio IRC Emilio.Mashant@rescue.org  
Guinea Madina Rachid MPHJ mdinakebe@gmail.com 
Guinea Dr KOUROUMA Mamady  MPHJ mamadykourouma@yahoo.fr 
Guinea Marietou Satin USAID masatin@usaid.gov  
Guinea Diakhaby Fatoumata MOH fatdiakhaby@gmail.com 
Kenya Jerusha Karuthiru USAID Jkaruthiru@usaid.gov 
Kenya Mutuku, Mwende Rachel PSI  RMutuku@psikenya.org     
Kenya Lucy Maikweki PSI LMaikweki@psikenya.org  
Kenya Dr. Marsden Solomon FHI 360 msolomon@fhi360.org  
Kenya Alice Olawo FHI 360 aolawo@fhi360.org  
Kenya Dr. MAINA, Jonah DRH jonahmwangi@yahoo.com  
Kenya Dr. Gladys Someren DRH gsomeren_drh@dfh.or.ke  
Kenya George Kichamu NCPD gkichamu@ncpd-ke.org 
Kenya Lucy Kimondo NCPD lkimondo@ncpd-ke.org 
Kenya  Sheila Macharia USAID smacharia@usaid.gov  
Madagascar Robert Kolesar USAID Rkolesar@usaid.gov 
Madagascar Lalaina Razafinirinasoa SIFPO/MSI lalaina.razafinirinasoa@mariestopes.mg   
Madagascar Julien Raharison SIFPO/MSI julien.raharison@mariestopes.mg  
Madagascar Andry Rabemanantsoa  JSI/MAHEFA andryr@mahefa.mg  
Madagascar Antoni Homsi JSI/MAHEFA homsifran@yahoo.fr  
Madagascar Patricia Norolalao PSI patrician@psi.mg  
Madagascar Jaona Rakotoarisoa PSI jaonar@psi.mg  
Madagascar John Yanulis  PHC Project jyanulis@msh.org  
Madagascar Dr Benala Rakotoarisoa Hajamamy PHC Project hrakotoarisoa@msh.org 
Malawi Elias Mwalabu JSI emwalabu@jsimw.com 
Malawi Veronica Chirwa USAID vchirwa@usaid.gov  
Malawi Lilly Banda USAID lmbanda@usaid.gov 
Malawi Edith Tsilizani Airtel edith.tsilizani@mw.airtel.com  
Malawi Carol Bakasa PSI cbakasa@psimalawi.org  
Malawi Lolade Oseni JHPIEGO Lolade.Oseni@jhpiego.org  
Malawi Premila Bartlett JHPIEGO pbartlett@savechildren.org  
Malawi Fanny Kachale Directorate of RH  fankachale@yahoo.co.uk  
Mali Sidibe Garangue Souko  GOM soutoura.souko@gmail.com 
17 | P a g e  
 
Country Team Name Organization Email 
Mali Symbara Fatalmoudou Toure  GOM   
Mali Madina Sangare USAID msanagare@usaid.gov  
Mali Bore Saran Diakite, Mrs GOM sarandiakite66@yahoo.com 
Mali Keita Oumou Keita GOM keitaoumou05@yahoo.fr 
Nigeria Kayode Morenikeji USAID kmorenikeji@usaid.gov  
Nigeria Mr. Temple Jagha SFH/ESMPINProject   
Nigeria Mrs. Foluke Shobowale     
Nigeria Mrs. Nkem Oteka     
Nigeria Mr. Steve Ubuh NPHCDA steve.uduh@nphcda.gov.ng  
Nigeria Mr. Tonte Ibraye White Ribbon Alliance tonteibraye@msn.com   
Nigeria Sikiru Buyuwa    
Rwanda Judy Chang USAID jchang@usaid.gov  
Rwanda  Vestine Mutarabayire     
Rwanda Suzanne Mukakabanda  RFHP smukakabanda@rwandafhp.org  
Rwanda  J Berchmans Niyibizi RFHP jniyibizi@rwandafhp.org  
Rwanda Dr. Anicet Nzabonimpa  MOH anicetnzab@yahoo.com 
Rwanda Dr. James Senfuka  UNFPA ssenfuka@unfpa.org 
Rwanda Daphy Nyirasafali    UNFPA nyirasafari@unfpa.org 
Rwanda Dr. Anastase Nzeyiman ROADS/FHI 360 anzeyiman@fhi360.org  
Rwanda George Gahenda      
Senegal Dr Fatou Ndiaye  USAID fndiaye@usaid.gov 
Senegal Abdoulaye Diedhiou  IntraHealth adiedhiou@intrahealth.org  
Senegal Sébastiana Diatta ChildFund  sdiatta@senegal.childfund.org 
Senegal Maïmouna Sow ChildFund  msow@senegal.childfund.org 
Senegal Mamadou Bocar Daff MOH  bmdaff@gmail.com  
Senegal Chimere Diaw MOH chimerediaw@yahoo.fr 
Senegal Siga Diop, FHI 360  FHI 360 sdiop@fhi360.org  
Senegal Mohamed Diadhiou CEFOREP diadhioumohamed@yahoo.fr  
South Sudan Dr. Taban Kenyi Jhiego  Taban.Kenyi@jhpiego.org  
Speaker Scott Radloff JHSPH sradloff@jhsph.edu  
Speaker Pieter Walhof  PharmAccess p.walhof@Pharmaccess.org  
Speaker Sanda Ojiambo Safaricom SOjiambo@Safaricom.co.ke  
Speaker Kees van Lede PharmAccess   
Speaker Brendan Smith VitalWave Consulting brendan.smith@vitalwave.com  
Speaker Pamela Riley Abt. Associates Pamela_Riley@abtassoc.com  
Speaker Abayruesh Mekonnen VitalWave Consulting   
Speaker Matt Davis RENEW Strategies Mdavis@renewstrategies.com  
Speaker Alexis Ettinger Georgetown University  abe25@georgetown.edu  
Tanzania  Maurice Hiza MOH Maurice.hiza@gmail.com   
Tanzania  Lucy Silas D-Tree lfulgence@d-tree.org 
Tanzania  Elizabeth Ndakidemi FHI 360 eNdakidemi@fhi360.org 
Tanzania  Christine Lasway FHI 360 clasway@fhi360.org  
Tanzania  Kisoka, Esteria PSI Ekisoka@psi.or.tz  
Tanzania  Victoria Marijani PSI vmarijani@psi.or.tz 
Tanzania  Prudence Matern Masako PSI pmasako@psi.or.tz 
Tanzania  Gayo Mhila  D-Tree gmhila@d-tree.org 
Tanzania  Feddy Mwanga  Engender fmwanga@engenderhealth.org  
Tanzania  Nassor Kikumbih Engender nkikumbih@engenderhealth.org  
Uganda James Duworko USAID jduworko@usaid.gov  
Uganda Dr. Espilidon Tumukurate UHMG etumukurate@uhmg.org  
Uganda Amy Rwakihembo MSI amy.rwakihembo@mariestopes.org 
Uganda Mildred Latigo MSH/STRIDE mlahigo@msh.org 
18 | P a g e  
 
Country Team Name Organization Email 
Uganda Deepla Mahla MSI deepmala.mahla@mariestopes.or.ug  
Uganda Kenneth Mugumya FP Consortium kennethmugumya@gmail.com  
Uganda Zainab Akol, Dr MOH zainabakol@gmail.com  
Uganda Angela Akol, Dr FHI 360 aakol@fhi360.org 
USA Okoko Lungi MSH/ASH lokoko@as4h.org 
USA  David McAffee HNI dmcafee@hni.org 
USA Baker Maggwa FHI 360 bmaggwa@fhi360.org 
USA Rose De Buysscher FHI 360 rdebuysscher@fhi360.org 
USA  Kelly L'Engle FHI 360 klengle@fhi360.org 
USA Jeremy Wacksman Dimagi jwacksman@dimagi.com 
USA  Heather Vahdat FHI360  HVahdat@fhi360.org  
USA Sono Aibe PathFinder International saibe@pathfinder.org 
USA Dr. Defa Wande EngenderHealth dwane@engenderhealth.org 
USAID/W Robert Clay USAID rclay@usaid.gov  
USAID/W Ellen Starbird USAID Estarbird@usaid.gov  
USAID/W Ishrat Husain USAID Ihusain@usaid.gov 
USAID/W Kaitlyn Patierno USAID kpatierno@usaid.gov 
USAID/W Monica Bautista USAID mbautista@usaid.gov 
USAID/W Alex Todd USAID atoddlippock@usaid.gov  
West Africa SERME, Ladiama DELIVER aadiama8@yahoo.fr  
West Africa Maggie Murphy DELIVER maggie_murphy@jsi.com  
West Africa Mr. Cletus Adohinzin WAHO cadohinzin@wahooas.org 
West Africa Dr. Johanna Austin-Benjamin WAHO jaustin@wahooas.org 
West Africa Dr. Adama Kemou FMOH/Niger Kemou_adama@yahoo.fr 
West Africa Dr. Kassouta Ntapi Togo ntapi22@yahoo.fr 
West Africa Dr Bicaba Isabelle Burkina Faso bicabaisabelle@yahoo.fr 
West Africa Daniele Nyrandutiye USAID dnyrandutiye@usaid.gov 
East Africa Julia Henn USAID jhenn@usaid.gov  
East Africa Dr. Getachew Tefera RCQHC gtefera@rcqhc.org 
East Africa Louis MURANGO EAC   
East Africa Dorothy MUROKI FHI360 dmuroki@fhi360.org 
East Africa Dr. Odongo Odiyo ECSA odongo@ecsa.or.tz  
East Africa Dr. Rogers Ayiko ECSA   
East Africa Dr. Doreen Othero Lake Victoria Basin Commission   
Ethiopia Elizabeth Haytmanek USAID ehaytmanek@usaid.gov 
Ethiopia Yigeremu Abebe CHAI yasemere@clintonhealthaccess.org 
Ethiopia Dr.Serekeberehan Deres CHAI SDeres@clintonhealthaccess.org 
Ethiopia Daniel Yigezu CHAI dyigezu@clintonhealthaccess.org 
Ethiopia Dr.Mebratu Bejiga CHAI mbejiga@clintonhealthaccess.org 
Ethiopia Wosenyelesh Teka   wessuyet@gmail.com 
Ethiopia Dr. Mengistu H/Mariam   agamkega@yahoo.com 
Ethiopia Mekonnen Engda  PHID mekonen_engda@yahoo.com 
Ethiopia Yemeserach Kefelew  PHID ykefelew@yahoo.com 
Ethiopia Biruk Alemayehw  PHID birukalex77@gmail.com 
Ethiopia Tekalene Moges DPC teklaz@yahoo.com 
Ethiopia Dr. Samrawit Tasew  HRD samritass@gmail.com 
Ethiopia Hentsa Haddush  FMOH hentsa5@gmail.com 
Ethiopia Melaku Yilma  HEP  melaku.yilma@yahoo.com 
Ethiopia Dr. Abiyot Bayou  MCIT abiyot.bayou@mcit.gov.et 
Ethiopia Dr. Mengistu Kifle  MOH kiflemengistu@yahoo.com 
Ethiopia Gemechu Kuffa MOH gemechukuffa@yahoo.com 
Ethiopia Mebratu Mahtsetu FMOH mmahtsentu@yahoo.com 
19 | P a g e  
 
Country Team Name Organization Email 
Ethiopia Francis Okello FHI 360 fokello@fhi360.org 
Ethiopia Bethelhem Fekade kersssie FHI 360 BFekade@fhi360.org  
Ethiopia Tum Burkly Telemed Medical Services tim@theafricagroup.com 
Ethiopia Dr. Yohans Woaje Telemed Medical Services yohans.hellodoctor@gmail.com 
Ethiopia Yared Getachew Mekuria FHI 360 YGetachew@fhi360.org  
Ethiopia Admasu Terefe Wolteji FHI 360 ATerefe@fhi360.org 
Ethiopia Abner Tewoldeberhan Mamuye FHI 360  ATewoldeberhan@fhi360.org  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
20 | P a g e  
 
Annex 3: Meeting Agenda 
Scaling Up Mobile Technology Applications for Accelerating Progress on Ending 
Preventable Maternal and Child Deaths 
Lalibela Ball Room, Sheraton Hotel, Addis, Ethiopia 
Sunday, November 10, 2013 
8:00 – 8:20 Registration and Coffee  
8:20-8:45 Opening Session  
Welcome by the Representative of the Federal Government of Ethiopia 
Ellen Starbird, Director, Office of Population and Reproductive Health, USAID  
Ishrat Husain, Senior Health Advisor, Africa Bureau, USAID  
8:45-9:00 Highlights of Rwanda’s Achievements in eHealth/mHealth and Future Plans 
Dr. Anicet Nzabonimpa, Ministry of Health, Government of Rwanda 
9:00-10:15 Progress on mHealth: Country Experiences by Country Teams 
10:15 – 10:30 Coffee/Tea Break 
10:30 – 12:00 Progress on mHealth: Country Experiences by Country Teams (continued) 
12:00-1:00 Lunch 
1:00-2:30 Mobilizing Innovative Financing for Scaling up Mobile Technologies 
Pieter Walhof, PharmAccess Foundation 
Sanda Ojiambo, Safaricom and & mPesa Foundation 
Matt Davis, RENEW Strategies 
2:30-2:45 Coffee/Tea Break  
2:45-4:15 Making the Business Case to the Private Sector  
Brendan Smith, Vital Wave Consulting  
Pam Riley, Health Finance and Governance Project, Abt. Associates  
Alexis Ettinger, Georgetown Institute for Reproductive Health 
4:15-4:30 Performance Monitoring and Accountability 2020’s new approach to mobile-assisted 
data collection  
Scott Radloff, Senior Scholar and Director, PMA2020, Gates Institute for Population and 
Reproductive Health 
4:30-5:00 Closing session 
Robert Clay, Deputy Assistant Administrator, Bureau for Global Health, USAID  
5:00-6:00 Optional networking/roundtables with panelists 
 
 
 
21 | P a g e  
 
