  
  
 
Mobile 4 Reproductive Health (m4RH) 
 
 
B rief Overview 
 
 
Family planning is an area where mobile phones provide 
enormous potential to increase and broaden the reach of 
health messaging. In Tanzania, only 27 percent of women of 
reproductive age use family planning and the fertility rate 
remains high at 5.4 births per woman, demonstrating that 
numerous obstacles prevent women and men from seeking 
and using contraception. Disseminating family planning 
information via mobile phones has promise because 
characteristics of mobile phones such as privacy, portability 
and ubiquity may overcome some of these barriers. 
 
Mobile 4 Reproductive Health (m4RH) is an opt-in SMS-
based health communication program through which users 
can access information about nine family planning (FP) 
methods. m4RH was developed in 2009 by FHI 360 and its 
partners, and is funded by USAID through the PROGRESS 
(Program Research for Strengthening Services) project.  
 
m4RH was piloted in Kenya and Tanzania from 2010-2011 as part of a research study aimed at determining 
the feasibility of providing FP information via text message, the reach of this communication channel, and 
suggested impact on FP use. It remains operational in Kenya and Tanzania now.  
 
  Geographic Coverage: 
 Kenya and Tanzania 
 
 Implementation Partners: 
Kenya:  The m4RH project in Kenya is led by FHI360 in partnership wth Text to 
Change, Family Health Options Kenya (FHOK), Marie Stopes Kenya (MSK), Population 
Services International (PSI), and The Ministry of Public Health and Sanitation of Kenya 
 
Tanzania: The m4RH project in Tanzania is led by FHI360 in partnership wth Marie 
Stopes, PSI, Pathfinder, FHI 360 ROADS Project, Die Deutsche Gesellschaft für 
Internationale Zusammenarbeit (GIZ), FHI 360 Ishi project, Comprehensive Community 
Based Rehabilitation in Tanzania (CCBRT), and the Ministry of Health and Social 
Welfare of Tanzania 
 
 Funder: 
USAID 
 
 For More Information Contact: 
USAID  
 Mihira Karra, AOR PROGRESS Project;  
Tel: +1-202-712-5934; email: mkarra@usaid.gov 
 
FHI 360  
 Kelly L’Engle, Principal Investigator, m4RH; 
 Tel: +1-919-544-7040 ext. 11528; email: klengle@fhi360.org  17 
 
 
Behavior Change Communication 
 Mobile 4 Reproductive Health (m4RH) 
 
About m4RH  
The m4RH service provides automated information to respondents. Users were well represented across all age 
opt-in users on nine different long-acting, short-acting groups, with the majority of users 29 years of age and 
and coitally dependent family planning methods. The younger. In Tanzania, the most popular contraceptive 
messages address side effects, method effectiveness, method queried was natural family planning, followed by 
duration of use, and ability to return to fertility.  emergency contraception. In Kenya, condoms and 
 natural family planning were most popular. 
The m4RH messages were developed using evidence-  
based content, including the WHO family planning Lessons Learned 
handbook for providers, and crafted specifically for SMS • m4RH can reach a broader audience than 
use, staying within the 160 character limit. Each message traditional family planning services, including 
was designed and tested to ensure user comprehension. young people and men. Therefore programs 
 can better meet the needs of specific target 
Users access the m4RH program by “opting in” or populations.  
sending a text message containing the keyword “m4RH”  
to a short code. The structure is menu-driven and • The process used to develop FP messages can 
allows the option to choose which type of family be replicated for new content (HIV, 
planning method information the user desires.  maternal/child health, tuberculosis).  
  
The service also provides a database of local clinics, 
• Managing an opt-in information service like 
searchable by province (Kenya) or ward (Tanzania).  
m4RH involves ongoing liaising with the 
m4RH users are able to search for a local clinic by 
technical partner (software developer/IT 
simply texting the first three letters of their province or 
specialist) and maintaining relationships with 
district to the m4RH system. After the user responds 
government ministries and partners.  
with the province or district code, the user receives an 
 
SMS listing of all clinics in the queried location.  
• After incurring start-up costs, projects like 
 
m4RH need to plan for maintenance. In order 
The platform uses a “ping-pong” system through which 
to sustain a project such as m4RH, resources 
the user sends a code, receives a response, sends 
are required for ongoing leasing of the short 
another code, and receives another response, meaning 
code, offering free text messages and 
that users only receive messages as they request them. 
promoting the service to new users.  In 
The architecture can also be used to develop, test, and 
addition management costs need to cover such 
address other FP issues (reminders, refills).  
issues as updating content and coordinating 
 
with partners. 
Evaluation and Results 
 
Within the first four months of implementation, the 
m4RH service received over 2,000 hits. Contraceptive Conclusion 
methods that users inquired about were logged by the The program demonstrates that family planning 
mobile phone system.  Text questions assessing gender, information can feasibly be delivered via mobile phone. 
age, promotion point, and potential family planning Use of mobile phones to disseminate family planning 
impact were sent to each user. During the pilot period, information helps reach many different population 
2,870 and 4,817 unique users accessed the m4RH segments, including young people and men, and has the 
system in Tanzania and Kenya, respectively. Slightly potential to impact contraception and condom use 
more than half of the users who reported their gender behavior. 
were female (56% in Tanzania and 61% in Kenya), and 
men represented a substantial proportion of  
Information was excerpted from: 
http://www.fhi360.org/en/Research/Projects/Progress/GTL/mobile_tech.htm 
18 FHI_360_m4Rh_booklet_Final_pdf  L'Engle, Kelly L., et al. "Evaluating feasibility, reach and potential impact of a text message family planning information service in 
Tanzania." Contraception (2012). 
 
