
Global Observatory for eHealth
Menu
Launch of Global diffusion of Launch of Atlas of eHealth eHealth and innovation in Directory of eHealth policies
eHealth: Making universal healthcountry profiles 2015 women's and children's health:
coverage achievable A baseline review
The Directory of eHealth Policies is a
The third global survey on eHealth conducted by comprehensive and up-to-date source of
The third global survey on eHealth conducted bythe WHO Global Observatory for eHealth (GOe) Improving the health of women and children is a national eHealth policies or strategies sourced
the WHO Global Observatory for eHealth (GOe) has a special focus – the use of eHealth in global health imperative, reflected in two of the from around the globe created by the Global
has a special focus – the use of eHealth in support of universal health coverage. eHealth most compelling Millennium Development Goals Observatory for eHealth. 
support of universal health coverage. eHealth is plays a vital role in supporting universal health which seek specifically to reduce maternal and policies relating to Telehealth to broaden its
pivotal in supporting universal health coverage coverage in a variety of ways relating to cost, infant deaths by 2015. This joint report by the scope and usefulness. 
in a variety of ways relating to cost, access, access and quality of services. This Atlas World Health Organization (WHO) and the referring to this online resource when developing
quality and the range of services that can be presents data collected on 125 WHO Member International Telecommunication Union (ITU), their eHealth policies or reviewing existing ones.
provided. Published in December 2016, this States. The survey was undertaken between based on a 64-country survey, demonstrates -
report analyses how eHealth can be used to April and August 2015 and represents the most as never before in such detail - the vital role that More information about the directory
make universal health coverage achievable. Thecurrent information on the use of eHealth in information and communication technologies Country list of eHealth and telehealth policies
first global study of its kind, this publication will these countries. (ICTs) and particularly eHealth are playing today
be useful for policy makers in eHealth and in helping achieve those targets. It demonstrates
telecommunications, academics and students, Read more how, every day, eHealth is saving the lives of
and eHealth professionals. Alphabetical list of the eHealth country profiles, women, their babies and infants in the some of
2015 the most vulnerable populations around the
Read more world, in a wide variety of innovative ways.
Read more
Global Observatory for eHealth
eHealth is the use of information and communication technologies (ICT) for health. It is recognised as one of the most rapidly growing areas in health
today.
The Fifty-eighth World Health Assembly in May 2005, adopted Resolution WHA58.28 establishing an eHealth strategy for WHO. The resolution
urged Member States to plan for appropriate eHealth services in their countries. That same year, WHO launched the Global Observatory for eHealth
(GOe), an initiative dedicated to the study of eHealth—its evolution and impact on health in countries. The Observatory model combines WHO
coordination regionally and at headquarters to monitor the development of eHealth worldwide, with an emphasis on individual countries. Recognizing
that the field of eHealth is rapidly transforming the delivery of health services and systems around the world, WHO is playing a central role in shaping
and monitoring its future, especially in low- and middle-income countries.
Resolution WHA58.28 eHealth
Mission and objectives
The Observatory’s mission is to improve health by providing Member States with strategic information and guidance on effective practices and
standards in eHealth.
Its objectives are to:
provide relevant, timely, and high-quality evidence and information to support national governments and international bodies in improving policy,
practice, and management of eHealth;
increase awareness and commitment of governments and the private sector to invest in, promote, and advance eHealth;
generate knowledge that will significantly contribute to the improvement of health through the use of ICT; and
disseminate research findings through publications on key eHealth research topics as a reference for governments and policy-makers.
WHO eHealth site
Headlines
Directory of eHealth policies
Contact
Global Observatory
for eHealth
World Health Organization
HIS/SDS/EHL
20, Avenue Appia
CH-1211 Geneva
Switzerland
GOEsurvey@who.int
Global Observatory for eHealth
What we do

Regions

About us

Subscribe to our newsletter
Privacy Legal Notice
© 2019 WHO
