KoBoToolbox
SIGN	UP
SIMPLE,	ROBUST	AND	POWERFUL	TOOLS	
FOR	DATA	COLLECTION
Created	by	users	for	users
FEATURES
FORM	BUILDER
Design	forms	quickly	and	easily
using	our	intuitive	form	builder
Reuse	existing	questions	and	blocks	of	questions
and	manage	them	in	the	question	library
Build	complex	forms	with	skip	logic	and	validation
More	than	20	different	question	types	available
including	location,	image,	video,	rating,	matrix,	etc.
Easily	share	projects	with	colleagues
and	set	granular	permission	levels
Import	and	export	XLSForms
Import	via	URL	or	upload	from	your	computer
COLLECT	DATA
Online	and	Offline
On	phones,	tablets	or	any	browser
Using	KoBoCollect	on	Android	devices	and	Enketo	on	any	modern	browser
Synchronize	data	via	SSL
Ensures	data	can't	be	read	by	a	third	party
Strong	safeguards	against	data	loss
Even	on	very	long	interviews
Data	immediately	available	right	after	it's	collected
ANALYZE	AND	MANAGE	DATA
Create	summary	reports	with	graphs	and	tables
and	fine-tune	your	report's	charts,	colors	and	questions
Visualize	collected	data	on	a	map
includes	a	heatmap,	clustering,	other	base	layers,	etc.
Disaggregate	data	in	reports	and	maps
i.e.	by	gender,	region	or	educational	level
Export	all	your	data	at	any	time
Supported	formats:	Excel,	CSV,	KML,	ZIP	(for	media)	and	SPSS
Access	your	data	through	our	robust	API
GET	STARTED
Get	started	with	KoBoToolbox	now,	it's	free	and	it	takes	under	a	minute.	We	have	two	publicly-available
instances	of	KoBoToolbox	you	can	choose	from:
Unlimited	Use	for
Humanitarian	Organizations
Provided	by	UN	OCHA
Unlimited	Submissions
Unlimited	Data	Storage
Unlimited	Projects
CREATE	AN	ACCOUNT
or	login
Researchers,	Aid	Workers	
&	Everyone	Else
Provided	by	KoBoToolbox
10,000	Submissions	Per	Month
5GB	of	Data	Storage	Per	Month
Unlimited	Projects
CREATE	AN	ACCOUNT
or	login
For	more	information	on	the	differences	between	the	two	servers	and	to	help	determine	which	one	is	right	for
you,	please	read	our	Which	Server	Should	I	Use?	support	article.
Advanced	users	can	also	install	KoBoToolbox	on	their	own	server	(or	on	a	local	machine)	using	Docker.	See
our	kobo-install	repository	on	GitHub	for	details.
OPEN	SOURCE	DEVELOPMENT	SUPPORTED	BY
	 	
WITH	ADDITIONAL	SUPPORT	FROM
	 	 	
	 	 	 	 	 	
	 	
	 	 	
ABOUT	KOBOTOOLBOX
KoBoToolbox	is	a	suite	of	tools	for	field	data	collection	for	use	in	challenging	environments.	Our
software	is	free	and	open	source.	Most	of	our	users	are	people	working	in	humanitarian	crises,	as	well
as	aid	professionals	and	researchers	working	in	developing	countries.	Our	teams	of	developers	and
researchers	are	based	in	Cambridge,	MA	and	many	other	places	around	the	world.
Quickly	collecting	reliable	information	in	a	humanitarian	crisis	–	especially	following	a	natural	disaster
such	as	a	large	earthquake	or	a	typhoon	taking	place	in	a	poor	country	–	is	the	critical	link	to	saving	the
lives	of	the	most	vulnerable.	Understanding	the	population’s	needs	is	often	neglected	for	lack	of	quick
means	to	gather	and	analyze	this	crucial	information.	KoBoToolbox,	developed	by	the	Harvard
Humanitarian	Initiative,	is	an	open	source	suite	of	tools	for	data	collection	and	analysis	in	humanitarian
emergencies	and	other	challenging	environments	that	was	built	to	address	this	gap.	KoBoToolbox	is
funded	entirely	through	generous	grants	and	donations	from	our	partners.
DEVELOPMENT
Our	work	is	open-source.	For	more	on	our	projects	and	to	learn	how	you	can	contribute,	click	on	one	of	the
projects	below.	You	can	also	go	to	our	organization	page	on	GitHub	for	a	full	list	of	our	projects.
KoBoToolbox	(KPI)
KoBo	Docker
Enketo	Express
KoBoCollect
OUR	TEAM
Phuong	Pham
co-founder
Patrick	Vinck
co-founder
Tino	Kreutzer
senior	advisor
John	Milner
lead	developer
Alex	Dorey
systems	architect
Penar	Musaraj
frontend	lead
Olivier	Leger
backend	developer
Leszek	Pietrzak
frontend	developer
Kevin	Coughlin
administrator
Stephane	Aloo
support	technician
Michael	de	St.	Aubin
project	coordinator
EXAMPLES	FROM	THE	FIELD
KoBoToolbox	is	used	by	many	organizations	and	researchers	in	a	variety	of	contexts	all	over	the	world.	
Here	are	a	few	examples	of	KoBoToolbox	in	action:
SUPPORT
For	issues,	questions,	ideas,	or	to	read	anouncements	on	new	releases,	please	head	to	our	community	forum	at
COMMUNITY.KOBOTOOLBOX.ORG
To	learn	how	to	get	started,	read	help	articles,	or	watch	tutorials,	please	head	to	our	help	page	at
SUPPORT.KOBOTOOLBOX.ORG
You	can	also	follow	us	on	Twitter	for	product	updates,	media	mentions	and	service	notices.	For	any	other	inquires	or	just
to	get	in	touch,	please	email	info@kobotoolbox.org
KoBoToolbox	at	the	Harvard	Humanitarian	Initiative
14	Story	St,	Second	floor,	Cambridge,	MA	02138
	
