 
MARIETXT:  A MOBILE POWERED 
MANAGEMENT INFORMATION SYSTEM 
ABOUT COMMCARE 
Eighty percent of the data is fed into the system through 
SMS and it is captured into a structured query language 
(SQL) database that has a web interface used to view 
the data. 
MSU’s BlueStar network includes a voucher project. The 
voucher module within MarieTXT takes record of the 
full life cycle of a voucher service. Record is taken 
through SMS reports sent at each stage of the voucher 
service cycle including voucher activation, issuance to 
the MSU officer, sale to a CBD, sale to a client and 
when the client takes the voucher to a BlueStar clinic 
for a service. By tracking this voucher cycle, including 
voucher redemption rates, health managers can look at 
ways to improve service delivery. 
The system captures service numbers of family planning 
(FP) methods offered on a weekly basis. This is done by 
BRIEF OVERVIEW service providers at BlueStar clinics.   
 In a fast paced world today, having access to real-time 
information and the ability to stay current based on 
rapid organizational shifts helps to serve clients more 
efficiently, as well as to inform planning.  
MarieTXT is a mobile powered management 
information system. The system was developed to build 
the capacity of the private sector to provide better 
services to clients and to enable real-time reporting and 
communication with service providers and managers of 
the Marie Stopes Uganda (MSU) social franchise 
(BlueStar) network. It is a web based modular system 
that has evolved into a fully short message service (SMS) 
powered management information system. 
MarieTXT was developed in 2012 by MSU and deployed 
across all BlueStar network health facilities in Uganda, to 
enable service providers and community based 
distributors (CBD) to report daily and weekly reports MarieTXT also offers a text based Hotline where users 
using mobile phones, as well as participate in knowledge are able to send questions and inquiries about sexual & 
assessments, and pre- and post-training evaluation. reproductive health, family planning, HIV/AIDS, referrals 
MarieTXT has also been piloted with other MSU service and obtain a response through SMS. 
delivery channels, business processes and quality 
assurance including Village Health Teams (VHT), MarieTXT takes electronic record of stock movement 
Integrated Marketing & Communications (Hotline), and to regions and teams, as well as stock disbursement to 
stock management. providers. The system helps procurement teams to 
66 mHEALTH COMPENDIUM   │    VOLUME 2 
c. 2011 Marie Stopes International 
 
 SERVICE DELIVERY 
monitor expiry status of selected family planning items CONCLUSION 
in the warehouse, and ensures providers are able to This project demonstrates mobile technology as an 
communicate quickly regarding stock levels, to avoid effective way an organization can achieve real time 
stock-outs and resulting loss of opportunity for service reporting while building the capacity of the private 
delivery.  sector. The use of mobile phones as reporting tools 
Finally, in addition to the above features, MarieTXT has enables access to real time information and data, 
an “opt in” feature where interested users and clients providing an up-to-date status of projects and programs 
are able to register and subscribe to periodic running in an organization. 
reproductive health and family planning information. This  
component predominantly targets youth.  GEOGRAPHIC COVERAGE 
Uganda 
EVALUATION AND RESULTS 
Within the first year of implementation, the system had IMPLEMENTATION PARTNERS 
1,965 registered users, produced 4,862 summary Marie Stopes Uganda (MSU), Marie Stopes International 
reports, and received a total of 29,984 messages. Of (MSI) for technical assistance  
those, 17,765 messages reported voucher sales.  On a 
weekly basis, these users receive questions relating to FUNDER 
their work. Based on the responses and their knowledge USAID, DFID 
levels, appropriate training and capacity building plans 
are developed. 
CONTACT INFORMATION 
Marie Stopes Uganda  
LESSONS LEARNED  Cedric Anil Muhebwa, SMS Technology 
Lead  
 MarieTXT can be used both internally (MSU) and 
Tel: +256-0-750-333-668, Email: 
externally (public/private health facilities), 
cedric.muhebwa@mariestopes.or.ug  
particularly in disseminating family planning 
 Lois Nantayi, RM&E Manager  
information to interested and prospective clients of 
Tel: +256-0-759-004-076, Email: 
MSU 
lois.nantayi@mariestopes.or.ug  
 The system is an open source software, expandable 
USAID 
to report on other services offered by MSU or 
 Daryl Martyris, Health Officer, USAID 
activities undertaken by partners, as the program 
Uganda  
and activities expand 
Tel: +256-414-306-001 x6557,     
 The process used to develop FP messages can be Email: dmartyris@usaid.gov  
replicated for new content such as HIV, maternal 
and child health, and tuberculosis 
 Like many other mobile technology projects after 
incurring start-up costs, projects like MarieTXT 
need maintenance. Resources are required for 
ongoing leasing of the short code, offering free SMS 
messaging, and encouraging and motivating service 
providers and partners to report regularly 
  MHEALTH COMPENDIUM  |  VOLUME 2 67 
