The ePartogram is a 
key component of a 
health systems approach 
to improving labor 
management practices and 
clinical care for laboring 
women and newborns. 
ePARTOGRAM
IMPLEMENTATION DATE:  January to June 2015 
Improving the management of labor and deliveries to reduce 
maternal and perinatal mortality in Tanzania
Maternal mortality is a major public health challenge in developing countries, particularly in sub-Saharan 
Africa. Most maternal and newborn mortality occurs around the time of delivery, and hence can be 
prevented with simple measures, including appropriate training, supplies, and equipment. One important 
tool for a safe delivery is the paper-based partogram, a graphical depiction of labor that supports 
decision-making during the management of labor to prevent and detect complications. Endorsed by the 
World Health Organization (WHO) for over 30 years, appropriate use of the partogram can decrease 
maternal and perinatal mortality by reducing prolonged or obstructed labor, sepsis, and unnecessary 
operative interventions.1,2
Despite these clear benefits, use of the paper partogram in developing countries is low and 
inconsistent.3,4 Challenges to consistent use are related to learning and remembering how to fill 
it in appropriately, and—once filled in—knowing how to interpret the clinical implications of the 
observations. Birth attendants may find it cumbersome, time-consuming, and simply fail to see its clinical 
value. To address the key challenges in partogram use and appropriate management of labor and 
delivery, Jhpiego, in collaboration with D-tree International, has developed an electronic, tablet-based 
tool which aims to be easier to use and provides the feedback missing from the paper version, through 
reminders and alarms.  The tool stores data both locally and on a server, which allows supervisors, 
referral facilities, and experts real-time access to patient care information. 
About ePartogram
The innovation of the ePartogram is two-fold: the  based on WHO guidelines to alert providers when critical tablet-based application uses validated clinical algorithms observations need to be made and if they are abnormal, and 
88  n  SERVICE DELIVERY 
Julia Ruben, D-tree International
it also strengthens the referral pathway between peripheral ePartogram saved time in entering and interpreting clinical 
and referral facilities by enabling electronic transmission of measurements and provided useful reminders for taking mea-
data between facilities and connecting providers for remote surements. They also appreciated the alerts and combination 
consultation. The ePartogram is a key component of a health alerts that help to ensure that action was taken when needed.
systems approach to improving labor management practices Next, Jhpiego will conduct a feasibility study of ePartogram use 
and clinical care for laboring women and newborns. It has the in three facilities in Zanzibar to assess acceptability by skilled 
following features:  birth attendants (SBAs) and ease of use when managing multi-
n Efficiency in entering and plotting observations as the ple clients, characterize how SBAs use and care for the tablets, 
software automatically graphs the data and confirm findings from the field refinement related to data 
 Prompts providers when critical observations need to  entry, screen flow, and technology performance. From there, a n
be made validation study is envisioned before pilot and scale-up.
n Provides alerts and decision-making support if 
complications occur Lessons Learned 
n Syncs data within a facility and automatically prioritizes n Even relatively educated health workers are often not 
laboring clients based on clinical algorithms, helping comfortable immediately with touch screen technology 
supervisors allocate staffing appropriately (in this case tablets). Training should allow ample time 
n Aggregates client data and clinical outcomes in a web- to learn and practice basic functionalities. 
based reporting dashboard n Both global standards and local realities need 
Evaluation and Results to be recognized and accounted for in application development and field refinement. 
The ePartogram received seed funding in Round 1 of the n The double burden of paper and electronic entry 
Saving Lives at Birth: Grand Challenge for Development to should be remembered and minimized during field 
define the functionality and software features for the device, refinement and piloting. It is best to pick facilities that 
assess the form, function, and acceptability of ePartogram in are not too busy. 
the Bondo District of Kenya, and develop a second-genera- n There should be an educational and training 
tion prototype. Recognizing that transformational innova- component, as well as opportunities for end-users to 
tion requires iterative validation of the clinical, public health, provide feedback, which can be applied to ongoing 
technology, business, and health systems value of a product, application optimization.
Jhpiego has since worked with service providers, ministries 
n Close collaboration with various stakeholders and 
of health in Zanzibar and Kenya, independent researchers, engagement with the government from the early stages 
and Dalberg Impact Group to address stakeholder needs of product development is critical.
throughout the development of the ePartogram. Since 2014, 
Jhpiego and D-tree International have developed the third 
generation of the ePartogram prototype and D-tree conduct- Conclusion 
ed an iterative three-month field refinement of the software 
at two facilities in Zanzibar. Providers there found that the The ePartogram provides the potential to increase consistent use 
of the partogram for labor management and even increase its 
efficacy and safety by providing feedback to the providers that 
the paper form lacks. The tool has been developed, tested, and 
refined in two facilities in Zanzibar, Tanzania, and a rigorous 
feasibility assessment is underway. The vision is for the ePar-
togram to be further refined, piloted, and scaled up, including 
possible integration with other mHealth applications.  n
  
Geographic Coverage:  Unguja, Zanzibar
Implementation Partners: Jhpiego, D-tree International, Zanzibar 
Ministry of Health  
Donors: GE Foundation, USAID
Contact Information: Brinnon Mandel, Director of Innovations, 
Jhpiego, brinnon.mandel@jhpiego.org 
mHEALTH COMPENDIUM  VOLUME 5  n  89
