 
WAZAZI NIPENDENI (PARENTS, LOVE ME): 
mHEALTH INITIATIVE TO SUPPORT 
MATERNAL CARE IN TANZANIA 
BRIEF OVERVIEW “mtoto” ('child' in Swahili) to the 
While maternal, new born and short code 15001 free of charge. 
child health (MNCH) has seen After registering, users receive a text 
improvements in Tanzania in the messages covering a comprehensive 
last few decades, Tanzanian range of safe pregnancy and early child 
women still face an unacceptably care information. The MOHSW 
high risk of preventable morbidity approved all messages and schedules 
and mortality during their them to specific months or weeks of 
reproductive years. Tanzania’s pregnancy or age of the baby. The 
maternal mortality ratio remains service offers the message registrants 
high at 454 deaths per 100,000 time sensitive reminders for ANC 
lives births, as does its infant visits and SP doses for prevention of 
mortality rate at 51 deaths per malaria, as well as information on 
1,000 live births. testing for HIV, nutrition, and 
individual birth planning.  
As part of the Wazazi Nipendeni 
(Parents, Love Me) project—a As the lead technology partner, Text 
national, multi-media Strategic to Change (TTC) designed and 
Behavior Change Communication implemented the technology for 
( S B C C )  c a m p a i g n  t h a t Wazazi  Nipendeni .  The text 
opera t iona l i zes  Tanzan i a ’ s messaging service uses an open-
Campaign on Accelera ted source platform called Vusion which is 
Reduction of Maternal Mortality developed in a partnership between 
(CARMMA TZ)—Text to Change the Praekelt Foundation and Text to 
developed and is implementing an Change. Its scalability and flexibility 
SMS-based service that seeks to make it a unique platform which can 
empower pregnant women and their partners to take be operated in all countries around the world. The 
the steps necessary for a healthy pregnancy and safe platform has been designed to enable campaign 
delivery. The service is an integral part of the overall managers to configure complex SMS text messaging 
Wazazi Nipendeni campaign developed by the Johns programs without the requirement for code changes or 
Hopkins Bloomberg School of Public Health Center for development support, allowing campaigns to be set up 
Communication Programs and led by the Ministry of within several hours or days. 
Health and Social Welfare (MOHSW). The campaign 
integrates all safe motherhood areas, including early and 
complete ANC attendance, malaria prevention, PMTCT, EVALUATION AND RESULTS 
individual birth planning, and safe delivery. By March 2013, the Wazazi Nipendeni text message 
service has been able to reach 100,000 active 
The Tanzania MOHSW launched Wazazi Nipendeni in registrants. Since its launch, more than four million text 
November 2012.  messages have been sent to those who signed up for the 
free healthy pregnancy and safe motherhood 
information. 
ABOUT WAZAZI NIPENDENI 
A unique mobile phone text messaging (SMS) 
component is an integral part of the Wazazi Nipendeni LESSONS LEARNED 
campaign. Pregnant women, mothers with babies up to  The success of the program relied heavily on the 
16 weeks and their supporters can send the word involvement and commitment of the stakeholders 
20 mHEALTH COMPENDIUM   │    VOLUME 2 
 
 BEHAVIOR CHANGE COMMUNICATION 
within the mHealth Tanzania Partnership, also 
GEOGRAPHIC COVERAGE 
ensuring the campaign design was in line with the 
Tanzania 
existing healthcare system 
 Encourage collaboration and ownership through a IMPLEMENTATION PARTNERS 
government-led initiative. Tanzania registers the Tanzania MOHSW Reproductive and Child Health 
highest average number of text messages sent per Section, Johns Hopkins Bloomberg School of Public Health 
month per subscriber in East Africa. The mobile Center for Communication Programs (JHU•CCP), Text to 
technology is therefore recognized by the ministry Change; Partners: National Malaria Control Program 
as a useful tool to offer crucial healthy pregnancy (NMCP), National AIDS Control Program (NACP), Health 
and safe motherhood information to even the most Promotion and Education Section, and mHealth Tanzania 
remote pregnant woman and her supporters. Public Private Partnership, Jhpiego, Elizabeth Glaser 
Pediatric AIDS Foundation, Mwanzo Bora Program, 
 Focusing on technologies that work on basic feature 
CCBRT, Tunajali project, PLAN International, Aga Khan 
phones will allow an mHealth project to reach scale 
Foundation  
 mHealth programs must be designed with the end 
user in mind  FUNDER 
USAID, PMI, PEPFAR, and the CDC Foundation. On the 
 mHealth campaigns work best in combination with 
ground support is also provided by the US Government, 
traditional media as part of a multimedia approach 
Aga Khan Health Services, and Canadian International 
Development Agency (CIDA)  
CONCLUSION 
The Wazazi Nipendeni clearly shows that with the right CONTACT INFORMATION 
partners, the right communication mix and relevant mHealth Tanzania Partnership  
content, it is possible to reach scale in mHealth. The  Sarah Emerson, Country Manager, 
high uptake of subscribers demonstrates that there was Tanzania  
a strong need for people to obtain easy access to Tel: +255-783-520-696, Email: 
healthy pregnancy information. Overall, the Wazazi semerson@mhealthtzppp.net  
Nipendeni information-sharing model is an effective and Text to Change  
affordable service that can be replicated in Tanzania and  Bas Hoefman, Director, Uganda  
other parts of sub-Saharan Africa. Tel: +256-779-890-945, Email: 
bhoefman@texttochange.com  
USAID 
 Alisa Cameron, USAID/Tanzania Health 
Team Leader  
Email:  acameron@usaid.gov  
Information was excerpted from:  
“Wazazi Nipendeni Safe Motherhood Campaign: Wazazi Nipendeni Campaign Overview.”  
The Johns Hopkins University Center for Communications Programs. 2011. Web. 
“Pregnancy: Wazazi Nipendeni (Love me, parents).” The Johns Hopkins University Global mHealth Initiative. n.d. Print.  
  MHEALTH COMPENDIUM  |  VOLUME 2 21 
 
DATA  
COLLECTION 
 
