There is no single, 
standalone component 
of the program that 
increased facility delivery 
and postpartum attendance 
rates.  The combined 
counseling, permission-
seeking, and escorting 
aspects—all supported 
by mHealth—served to 
motivate, comfort, and  
even convince families  
when needed.
mHEALTH for Safer Deliveries
IMPLEMENTATION DATE:  October 2011 to December 2014
An integrated intervention to improve the quality of care during delivery in Zanzibar
In Tanzania, despite high rates of antenatal care and relatively good access to health facilities, maternal 
and neonatal mortality remain high at 310/100,000 live births and 28/1,000 live births, respectively, and 
almost half of all deliveries are performed at home without a skilled attendant.1,2 Through commitment 
to Millennium Development Goals (MDGs) 4 and 5, as well as the government strategy for growth and 
reduction of poverty, the Revolutionary Government of Zanzibar has made a strong commitment to 
prioritizing this issue.3 However, significant reduction in mortality will not be achieved without increasing 
skilled care at birth. Hence, the Ministry of Health (MOH) has set specific targets to increase facility 
delivery from approximately half of deliveries up to 80 percent. D-tree International has been partnering 
with the MOH at the central and district levels since 2011 to help achieve this target. 
In Zanzibar, through the mHealth for Safer Deliveries project, D-tree and the MOH seek to reduce all of 
the “three delays” to receiving quality care at birth: (1) the decision to seek care; (2) reaching skilled care; 
and (3) the provision of adequate care at the health facility.4 The project ensures that mothers and their 
newborns reach care when they need it by engaging community health workers (CHWs) at the lowest 
levels and arming them with the knowledge, tools, and motivation to serve families at home.
About mHealth for Safer Deliveries
CH Ws are trained to use a simple phone with a decision- n record permissions from husband and family members support application so that with a single device the  agreeing to a facility-based delivery;
CHW can: 
n screen women (and their babies) for complications from 
n develop a birth plan with each woman based on medical pregnancy up to a week after delivery and refer them as 
and obstetrical history; needed to the health facility;
n counsel the mother and family on healthy behaviors and 
recognizing danger signs;
52  n  FINANCE
Mark Leong, WHO
n use mobile banking instead of cash to pay for transporta- all supported by mHealth—served to motivate, comfort, and 
tion to the health facility when the woman is in labor or in even convince families when needed.
case of complications; 
n use text or voice communication to notify a health facility Lessons Learned 
that a woman is in transit to ensure the facility is prepared. 
The phone also provides an electronic record for the mother n When possible, provide a vertical integration of various 
and infant that can be viewed both by CHWs on the phone mobile services, such as decision-support and mobile 
and by supervisors or government officials on an online money, to enhance program impact.
dashboard. D-tree worked with local leaders and health 
n mHealth interventions should be tailored to the 
facilities to enroll drivers into the program and prenegotiate cultural setting and be used as a tool to enhance oth-
fair rates for transport. D-tree also worked with local telecom er evidence-based approaches, such as behavior change 
company Zantel to expand pay points and reporting for the interventions.
CHWs’ mobile banking accounts and developed a real-
time online tracking system to trace account activity. After n mHealth program models should be scalable and sus-
an initial pilot in two districts in 2011, Phase 2 (2012–14) tainable, creating incentive and/or revenue for all parties 
supported 223 CHWs in six districts, including 112 wards involved.
recognized as having particularly low facility delivery rates n Data obtained as a byproduct of many mHealth 
and significant transport challenges. interventions should both dictate and be dictated by a 
rigorous monitoring and evaluation plan.
Evaluation and Results n Multiple levels of government should be involved 
in shaping the intervention from the beginning and be 
The mHealth for Safer Deliveries project now reaches over included in all phases of planning and implementation.
half the rural population of Zanzibar. The facility delivery 
n Building rigorous tracking systems to reconcile 
rate has reached 75 percent compared to an average of 35 the mobile money (financial) and mobile health 
percent.2 Among women who had given birth at home for (programmatic) data, while time consuming, can greatly 
their previous delivery, a subset considered most “at-risk” of facilitate scale-up and increase accountability.
home delivery, 63 percent delivered in a health facility. The 
impact on postnatal care attendance is also striking, with 88 
percent within 10 days compared to only 10.9 percent with- Conclusion 
in a week during the year prior to project implementation.5 
The success of the Safer Deliveries program came from 
In total, CHWs registered 13,690 pregnant women during the integrating novel mHealth health approaches—including 
project. They conducted 38,608 screenings on 12,882 women decision-support, data storage, mobile banking, and 
and made 27,011 postpartum visits. They made 14,940 refer- communications—into a community intervention that 
rals and overall, the program initiated close to 40,000 mobile effectively linked the institutional and community levels to 
money transactions for CHW transport and incentives. The overcome barriers to hospital deliveries within Zanzibar. It 
data yielded a number of unexpected, new insights, including was this combination that has spurred the beginning of a 
the very high number who have serious risk factors or danger “culture shift” in delivery practices in Zanzibar and shows a 
signs both before and after delivery. Almost half of the wom- great potential of improving maternal health outcomes and 
en in the program had a danger sign pre- or post-delivery reaching MDG 5 within Zanzibar, across Africa, and around 
that required an additional visit to the health facility. the world.  n   
Qualitative investigation increased knowledge of the causes 
of home deliveries when they did happen, including religious 
barriers, modesty norms, rumors of witchcraft, the desire 
of relatives to stay close to the mother, and hidden costs at 
health facilities. Interviews also revealed that there is no single, Geographic Coverage:  Unguja and Pemba, Zanzibar
standalone component of the program that increased facility Implementation Partners: D-tree International, Jhpiego, Ministry 
delivery and postpartum attendance rates. Despite the impor- of Health, Zanzibar 
tance of transport being available, it was by no means the sole Donor: Bill & Melinda Gates Foundation
determinant of a woman getting to a facility. Indeed, the com- Contact Information: D-tree International: Marc Mitchell, Presi-
bined counseling, permission-seeking, and escorting aspects— dent mmitchel@hsph.harvard.edu
mHEALTH COMPENDIUM  VOLUME 5  n  53
