 
Using Mobile Technologies for Healthier Aging 
By Ada Kwan 
mHealth Alliance, United Nations Foundation 
 
 
 
 
 
Table of Contents 
 
Acknowledgements ............................................................................................................................................................ 2 
Executive Summary ........................................................................................................................................................... 3 
A Graying World ................................................................................................................................................................. 4 
Existing mHealth Strategies and Opportunities for Healthier Aging .................................................................................. 7 
Putting an Aging Lens on mHealth .................................................................................................................................. 13 
mHealth and Aging Call to Action .................................................................................................................................... 15 
Conclusion: Advancing mHealth for Healthier Aging ....................................................................................................... 18 
References ....................................................................................................................................................................... 19 
Appendix A. Individual and Population Aging Frameworks ............................................................................................. 21 
1 
 
 
 
Acknowledgements 
Acknowledgements 
I would like to gratefully acknowledge the many people who helped put this report together. Many thanks go to the 
following individuals for their exchanges, reviews, discussions, resources, and the time they took out of their busy 
schedules to contribute and provide insight throughout this process: Jon Broyles of the Coalition to Transform Advanced 
Care; Unity Stoakes and Polina Hanin of StartUp Health; Alice Borrelli and David Prendergast of Intel Corporation; Jane 
Barratt of the International Federation on Ageing; Josh Collett and Bill Walsh of AARP; Julie Sipchen of the Alzheimer’s 
Association; Alice Fabiano of Johnson & Johnson; Heather Cole-Lewis of Columbia University; Alain Labrique of the 
Johns Hopkins Bloomberg School of Public Health; Rajiv Mehta of Bhageera Consulting; Nicholas Ward of Montana State 
University; Bethany Brown of HelpAge USA, and her colleagues Mark Gorman and Paul Ong of HelpAge International; 
and Brendan Smith and Brooke Partridge of Vital Wave Consulting. 
This report would not have been possible without the aforementioned individuals and their openness in sharing best 
practices, recommendations, examples, learned lessons, and their passion related to evolving a society better designed 
with today’s technologies and for a rapidly growing aging population.  
Most importantly, I would like to express my deepest appreciation and regards to the mHealth Alliance hosted by the 
United Nations Foundation, as well as Chris Gray and his colleagues at Pfizer, Inc. Their leadership, support, and 
commitment in advancing discussions on the role of mobile technology in global aging have been essential to this report 
throughout the entire process, beginning with its conception. The content in this report has drawn heavily from much 
research and experience in aging and in the integration of mobile phones for health. In the research and experience of 
both fields, I have found a current tide of transformations for which we have many reasons to be optimistic. It is my utmost 
desire that the product of these efforts will play a catalytic role in creating a practical ecosystem where healthier aging is 
the norm rather than the exception. 
2 
 
 
 
Executive Summary 
Executive Summary 
Introduction 
Globally, there is a demographic transition underway. People are living longer. Even though “old” is defined differently 
1
across the world, there will be more people over the age of 65 than children under five by 2015.  By 2050, there will be an 
2
estimated 1.5B people age 65 or older.  Without strong preparation around prevention, treatment, and rehabilitation, the 
so-called “silver tsunami” will significantly increase the burden of global diseases associated with aging, notably for non-
communicable diseases (NCDs), or chronic diseases such as cancer, diabetes, and cardiovascular diseases. The burden 
of disease will also include declining cognitive acuity and mental health without adequate preparation. Clearly, this 
situation creates urgent needs worldwide to extend access to health information, develop new and effective behavior 
change strategies, and expand access to appropriate health services. With the exponential spread and penetration of 
mobile phone coverage and access in even the most remote places, mHealth, or the use of mobile information and 
communication technologies for health, and related software applications offer unique opportunities. By advancing and 
accelerating innovative mHealth solutions for aging populations, the promise of greater longevity – additional active and 
productive years – is more likely to materialize. 
Objective 
The objective of this report is to provide momentum to an emerging conversation on ways mobile communications 
technology can help people age better and in good health. The report is mindful of the fact that different opportunities and 
challenges exist in low- and middle-income countries (LMICs) versus developed countries. At the same time, this report 
considers how mHealth innovations occurring in each are also instructive to one another. Many of the examples in this 
report are drawn from developed world contexts with a view towards how programs can be tailored for LMIC conditions. 
This report serves both as a resource and a call-to-action for all stakeholders including project implementers, 
organizations, the private sector, and policymakers. 
Methods 
This report was informed by a review of both white and gray literature on aging, chronic conditions, and the use of mobile 
technologies for health. New ideas and gaps in the existing knowledge base around mHealth and aging were also 
identified through primary and secondary research. Key informant interviews were conducted with experts in health, 
technology, and aging populations, as well as individuals with experience in the development and implementation of 
mHealth programs in countries around the world. 
Findings and Conclusions 
Research is prolific on aging issues and the base of analytical work around mHealth is growing, but coordination and 
sharing of lessons learned need improvement. There are several programs, only a few research initiatives, and even 
fewer trials that focus on the intersection of mHealth and age. Emerging evidence supports the use of mHealth to promote 
efficiencies in care management practices and improvements in individual and population health outcomes through 
behavior change strategies aimed at increasing healthier behaviors (e.g., exercise, appointment attendance, treatment 
compliance), reducing unhealthy behaviors (e.g., tobacco use), and expanding access to care for chronic disease 
management. Additionally, an mHealth for aging ecosystem is beginning to form that includes not only older people, but 
also others who are a part of an older person’s life, including friends, family, caregivers, and healthcare providers. 
Strategic planning and stronger coordination across the fields of health, information technologies, and aging are 
necessary to ensure that the full potential of mobile and wireless technology for the improvement of preventive and 
supportive care for conditions associated with aging can be realized for older people, the fastest growing segment of the 
population worldwide. A call-to-action is made to catalyze a conversation among stakeholders and to identify areas that 
can be advanced today. 
3 
 
 
 
A Graying World 
A Graying World 
Globally, there is a demographic transition underway. People are living longer. Even though what is considered as 
1a
“old” varies around the world, there will be more people over the age of 65 than children under five by 2015.  By 2050, 
2
there will be an estimated 1.5B people age 65 or older, with some estimates much higher.  This growth is attributable to 
decreasing fertility rates and increasing life expectancies, which reflect tremendous successes in improving health and 
quality of lifeworldwide.  
However, the impact of a demographic change of this magnitude presents an urgent and immediate challenge globally in 
1
health for governments, as well as private and not-for-profit sectors.  The extent of the challenge is particularly significant 
in low- and middle-income countries (LMICs), where the rapid rise in the number of older people far exceeds that of 
1
developed countries (See Figure 1).  Moreover, health systems in LMICs are not prepared to handle a rapidly aging 
1
population. In many cases, social safety nets such as social security are not in place.  Additionally, for many older people, 
1,2
costs and a lack of access to health services limit the services they receive.  
The objective of this report is to provide fresh momentum to an emerging conversation on ways mobile communications 
technology can help people age well. Mindful of the fact that many mHealth applications are occurring in the developed 
world context, the report also focuses on the opportunities and challenges in the LMIC context. 
Figure 1: Number of people age 60 or over in developed and developing countries between 1950 and 2050  
(Millions) 
2,500
2,000
1,500
1,000
500
0
Developing Countries Developed Countries
 
Source: UNFPA, 2012, p. 13. 
Source: UNDESA, World Population Ageing 2011(2012; forthcoming), based on UNDESA Population Division medium projection scenario, World 
Population Prospects: The 2010 Revision. 
Note: The group of “developed countries” corresponds to the “more developed regions” of the World Population Prospects: The 2010 Revision, and the 
group “developing countries” corresponds to the “less developed regions” of the same publication. 
                                               
a
 For this report, the term “older,” “older people,” or “elderly” will be used in reference to individuals age 60 and older. However, the term “older persons” 
is used by the United Nations, and “seniors” used in the United States in reference to people over age 60. 
4 
 
1950
1955
1960
1965
1970
1975
1980
1985
1990
1995
2000
2005
2010
2015
2020
2025
2030
2035
2040
2045
2050
 
 
A Graying World 
 
A Changing Health Landscape 
Without strong global action around prevention, treatment, and rehabilitation, the so-called “silver tsunami” will 
significantly increase the global disease burden for non-communicable diseases (NCDs),or chronic diseases, such as 
cancer, diabetes, and cardiovascular diseases. The burden of disease will also include declining cognitive acuity and 
mental health. However, many of these conditions are preventable and can be avoided or mitigated with cost-effective 
2
solutions.
Clearly, this situation creates an urgent need throughout 
 Fact Check: Non-Communicable Diseases 
the world to extend access to health information, 
develop new and effective behavior change strategies,  In 2008, NCDs alone accounted for approximately 
and expand service access. The fact that people are 86% of the disease burden in high-income countries, 
living longer can be celebrated – it means advances in 65% in middle-income countries, and 37% in  
sanitation, hygiene, and medical innovation have reaped low-income countries 
rewards in terms of years of life gained. The downside, 
 While NCDs are proportionally more prevalent 
however, is that some people are living longer in poor 
compared to communicable diseases in high-income 
health, sometimes for a decade or more. In fact, 
countries, 90% of NCD deaths worldwide occur in 
economic losses in LMICs from heart disease, stroke, 
LMICs 
and diabetes are expected to total US$83B accumulated 
2
between 2006 and 2015.  Thus, the challenge is to  In LMICs, where many older people are unlikely to 
adapt to the changing landscape as quickly as possible have access to healthcare, chronic conditions often go 
by strategically planning for the shifting healthcare undiagnosed because they are asymptomatic in early 
needs. stages 
Fortunately, during this demographic transition, another 
 Advanced chronic conditions will increase the strain on 
massive global trend is underway: the mobile phone 
existing health systems already suffering from critical 
revolution, or the exponential spread and penetration of 
health worker shortages, supply chain failures, and 
mobile phone coverage and access in even the most 
inefficiencies at the facility level 
remote areas. This year, mobile phone subscriptions 
have surpassed the 6B on mark for the world’s  In LMICs, economic losses from heart disease, stroke, 
3
population of 7B.  In a survey of older people in 36 and diabetes are expected to total US$83B 
countries including many LMICs, 61% of older people accumulated between 2006 and 2015 
1
had access to a mobile phone in 2011.  This trend offers 
 Treatment for chronic diseases cost US$3.5T across 
society a unique opportunity to develop and capitalize on 
OECD and BRIC countries in 2007 
options that can accelerate innovative solutions to not 
only extend life but to add healthy and productive years 
Source:National Institute on Aging, 2011. 
while simultaneously tackling the growing tide of health 
issues associated with aging. 
 Fact Check: Mobile Phones 
The promise of mHealth – the use of mobile information 
and communication technology and applications for  In 2012, there are over 6B mobile phone subscriptions 
health – is the ability to assist in preventing the onset of for a world population of over 7B 
debilitating, chronic diseases associated with age and 
 A survey of older people in 36 countries, including 
also to assist in the management and treatment of 
many LMICs, 61% of older people had access to a 
existing conditions toward a society of citizens who are 
mobile phone in 2011 
more productive, functional, and healthier. 
 In 2007, using mobile tools and services could have 
saved a total of US$175 to $210B on chronic disease 
treatment 
Source: UNFPA, 2012; McKinsey & Company, & the GSM Association, 
2010. 
5 
 
 
 
A Graying World 
 
b c
In 2007, where treatment for chronic diseases cost US$3.5T across OECD and BRIC countries, the use of mobile tools 
4
and services had a cost-saving potential of between US$175B and $210B.  
Even on mobile phones with less sophisticated features, which are more prevalent today in LMICs, the potential of voice- 
and text-based applications for age-related issues can provide valuable mHealth services in the form of education, data 
collection, and two-way communication between patients or caregivers and healthcare providers. As broadband and 
smartphones become more accessible around the world, refined and secure mHealth applications can offer more 
5
solutions in the form of remote diagnostics and monitoring, expert consultation, and health records management.  
But are the advances in mobile phone use disproportionately benefitting younger populations? Are incentives in place to 
encourage the use of mobile phones to advance healthy aging among young, but aging, cohorts? What is being done to 
increase mobile phone saturation and know-how among older populations? 
Already numerous efforts by government agencies and civil society organizations have begun to take advantage of the 
increasing affordability, ease of use, and ubiquity of mobile phones to implement a wide range of projects and products 
that enhance the delivery of health interventions. Despite these innovations, the US$175B to $210 billion dollars in 
savings has yet to occur for chronic diseases, and it will not until more investment is made in containing costs in 
healthcare across the world through mobile technology. This report serves as a call-to-action to spur the decisions and 
actions necessary to begin utilizing mobile phones to their full potential in aging, particularly for NCDs. With the parallel 
trends of a rapidly expanding older population and increasing mobile telephony, the opportunity is too good to pass up.
                                               
b
 There are 34 countries that are members of the Organisation for Economic Co-operation and Development. 
c
 Brazil, Russia, India, and China 
6 
 
 
 Existing mHealth Strategies and 
Opportunities for Healthier Aging 
Existing mHealth Strategies and Opportunities for Healthier Aging 
For aging populations, mHealth holds promise for improving health, enabling greater independence, and transforming the 
ecosystem of traditional healthcare delivery through potentially cost-effective mechanisms, whether it be a simple text-
based program or an advanced mobile application. Certain mechanisms focus on prevention for those who are healthy or 
in manageable stages of their conditions (e.g., screening, early treatment, behavior modification). Others serve those at 
advanced stages of illnesses (e.g., access to care, improved quality of care, adherence to care regimens, and caregiver 
support). Across prevention and care, solutions provided by mHealth generally fall into three broad categories: 
 Education – equipping individuals with easier access to validated health information  
 Motivation – encouraging individuals to adhere to treatment regimens and attend appointments through messages 
and reminders 
 Connectivity – creating new and strengthening existing communication channels, particularly between caregivers 
and older people; improving monitoring; and strengthening interventions 
In general, mHealth solutions leverage mobile phone features such as text or voice messages, which can be educational 
or motivational for the patient. At the same time, these features can improve connectivity. Chronic conditions benefit from 
near real-time monitoring of blood pressure, heart rate, and changes in cholesterol levels. End users of mHealth solutions 
include older individuals, healthcare providers, caregivers, and families, which create a seamless mobile ecosystem to 
enable a more functional andproductive lifestyle. Emerging evidence supports the use of mHealth to promote efficiencies 
in care management practices and improvements in individual and population health outcomes through behavior change 
strategies aimed at increasing healthier behaviors (e.g., exercise, appointment attendance, treatment compliance), 
reducing unhealthy behaviors (e.g., tobacco consumption), and expanding access to care for chronic disease 
management. In addition, the ability to link mobile devices to software applications and information hardware systems 
extends options for disease monitoring and surveillance, and medical record updates. 
The tremendous potential of mobile phones to promote wellness by enabling the individual to manage, maintain, and 
improve his or her own health is relevant for individuals at any age because, in fact, we are all getting older. Despite the 
promise, however, society is far from benefiting from the full potential of mHealth for aging. 
The Beginning of a Mobile Ecosystem for Aging 
In the past decade and through the increasing ubiquity of mobile phones, communities have emerged – for example 
groups of individuals responsible for caring for a friend or family member. Such informal groups connect with healthcare 
and service providers, forming a virtual network of support. Although not yet seamless, this “mHealth ecosystem” 
capitalizes on the ability of mobile phones to address four major areas (See Figure 2). 
  
7 
 
 
 Existing mHealth Strategies and 
Opportunities for Healthier Aging 
 
Figure 2: Four areas that mobile phones can address in the mHealth ecosystem 
  
Reduce the Increase Improve the Develop Aging-
Delay in Seeking Healthcare Patient-Provider Friendly Health 
 
Care Access Interaction Services 
 
Bring attention and Extend healthcare Turn short, discrete Broaden healthcare 
care to the present beyond health doctor visits at a to respond to 
 
moment or near facilities into the facility, where chronic conditions 
real-time, which community and providers ask and not merely 
 encourages more households, where patients to recall injuries, infections, 
proactive (and less wellness past events, to and emergencies 
 reactive) attitudes maintenance and more frequent, 
for health promotion management of small events in a 
 chronic conditions larger ecosystem, 
happen day-to-day where providers 
Within the forming mobile ecosystem, there are three main types of end users that applications are focusing on: (1) older 
individuals, (2) caregivers, and (3) providers (See Figure 3). 
Figure 3: The mHealth ecosystem surrounding healthier aging includes older people, their caregivers and family 
members, as well as health providers. 
 Health Providers 
– mHealth programs can take advantage of health providers’ pivotal and respected role in providing healthcare monitoring 
and information. However, this may not be feasible in all settings. The United Nations Population Fund (UNFPA) Ageing in 
the Twenty-First Century report mentions that some older people “often experienced the attitudes or lack of expertise of 
7
[healthcare] professionals as barriers to accessing adequate [healthcare].”  This was not reported for older individuals 
interviewed from Northern and Western Europe or Canada. Thus, using a thorough understanding of existing health 
system dynamics, the relationship between older individuals and providers, and the perceptions of older individuals on 
receiving health services, are necessary to inform an mHealth aging program before selecting providers as end users. 
Caregiversand Family 
– Some older people may be affected by conditions that influence their ability to easily interact with mobile phones, 
such as impaired hearing or dementia. Consequently, mHealth interventions that are focused on helping caregivers 
and family members could be valuable. For example, a community of friends and family of an older individual can use 
a mobile phone application to help maintain a schedule of caregiving activities. 
Older People 
– A recent New York Times article articulated one of the barriers to the uptake of mHealth in the older community: 
“What’s Wi-Fi and Do I Really Need a Smartphone?” The article described how many older adults feel fearful or 
anxious about technology, or embarrassed about their lack of understanding.6 Over time, individuals already 
comfortable and accustomed to having mobile technologies in their hands will surpass one of the arbitrary 
thresholds by which society considers them “old.” Characteristics of the older population will change, for example, 
as the Baby Boomer generation in the developed world surpasses age 65. However, there is still a large portion of 
the current older population that is resistant to using mobile technology for a variety of reasons. Understanding 
the perceptions of older individuals regarding technology will be critical for adoption to increase. 
8 
 
 
E xisting mHealth Strategies and 
Opportunities for Healthier Aging 
 
The Broad Landscape of mHealth for Active and Healthy Aging 
Some examples of mHealth applications are drawn from developed countries such as home monitoring, advances in 
social inclusion, smart homes, and sophisticated health technologies. In these cases, broader lessons can be learned that 
may be applicable to populations with limited resources. mHealth solutions in LMICs have been extracted from other 
health fields including HIV/AIDS and maternal and child morbidity and mortality and applied to the context of aging. For 
example, basic texting platforms, such as Text4Baby in the U.S., send text message with reminders and information to 
6
women during pregnancy and to new mothers regarding newborn care and health.  The same program can be tailored for 
an older population also at high risk for preventable diseases. 
To confront challenges in aging, the broad landscape of mHealth is developing projects and applications aimed at: 
 Increasing efficiency and coordination among caregivers through electronic health recordkeeping 
 Increasing physical, social, and cognitive stimulation 
 Improving health and living conditions, particularly for women who have longer life expectancies and may have lost a 
spouse, through income generation activities and health services 
 Improving health and living conditions for grandparents who may be raising grandchildren by providing support (e.g., 
in the case where middle-aged family members are moving to the cities and the older generation remain in rural 
settings to raise grandchildren or continue with family farms) 
 Expanding access to emergency services with systems that can receive emergency calls and arrange transportation 
to providers or other parts of formal health systems 
 Providing at-home support and health services to older individuals by connecting them with caregivers 
 Expanding health services to remote or rural areas through teleconsultation services or hotlines, where older 
individuals can reach providers or community health workers can reach older people with appropriate medicine and 
point-of-care applications uploaded to mobile phones (e.g., applications to do routine monitoring, procedures to 
identify advanced illnesses, measurements of vitals and degree of frailty, and mental health assessments) 
The following sections further detail prevention and supporting behavior change, NCDs, and cognitive decline and mental 
health in the context of aging. 
Prevention and Supporting Behavior Change 
Prevention plays a large role in healthy aging. By focusing on decreasing unhealthy behaviors such as smoking or 
increasing healthy behaviors, such as staying fit and taking actions to avoid getting sick, mHealth can help improve the 
1, 7
quality of life of older people so that they can continue supporting their families and communities.  Text messaging and 
one-on-one calls are examples of the way mobile phones are being used to improve lives by (1) helping people become 
better informed, motivated, and encouraged to practice self-management of their own health; (2) improving patient 
satisfaction levels; (3) offering more tailored and targeted interventions; and (4) improving patient-provider relationships.5 
In short, solutions facilitate education, motivation, and connectivity. These techniques can be applied to a number of 
prevention initiatives, such as weight loss, physical activity promotion, and blood pressure management. 
Behavior change is crucial for optimizing services and maximizing the impact of cost-effective prevention, care, and 
8
treatment.  Mobile behavior change communication (mBCC) includes such tools as electronic reminders to take 
medications and quizzes to improve the skillsets of healthcare providers. 
9 
 
 
 Existing mHealth Strategies and 
Opportunities for Healthier Aging 
 
Tobacco Use 
One example of how mHealth can support behavior change is mHealth for tobacco usage cessation. Smoking and 
tobacco use are common risk factors for cancer. Smoking also contributes to other NCDs such as chronic lung disease 
9
and cardiovascular disease.  It further accelerates a common concern of many older people – premature wrinkling. 
Although current evidence about the use of mHealth for tobacco use cessation is largely derived from developed world 
contexts, lessons learned may be applied in LMICs. Two studies – one conducted in New Zealand and the other in the 
United Kingdom – have found that individuals receiving personalized and motivational text messages were more likely to 
10,11 
quit smoking. Another study that evaluated a smoking cessation intervention that utilized email, webpages, interactive 
voice response, and text messages found that individuals receiving the intervention were significantly more likely to quit 
12
(22.3% vs. 13.1%).  In these types of studies, individuals were asked to set a specific quit date at enrollment, and 
13,14
behavior change models were used to inform the design of text message content.  
Non-Communicable Diseases 
While some mHealth solutions focus on behavior change to mitigate risk factors, others are aimed at treatment for NCDs 
9
and adherence to curative or palliative therapies. In many cases, older people suffer from multiple chronic conditions.  
This is a critical consideration for mHealth application developers; the complexity of using multiple apps for different 
diseases could inhibit uptake among older people (See Figure 4).  
Ease-of-use will be a critical factor in ensuring that mHealth solutions are successful in addressing chronic conditions in 
environments outside of the traditional healthcare system. Since it is difficult for many patients with chronic conditions to 
travel to health clinics, or for these patients to keep track of their health information and trends using paper-based 
logbooks, mHealth provides real-time, analyzable options that can both empower patients and feed statistics into provider 
information systems. 
15,16 
Figure 4: Prevention and control for non-communicable diseases
In developed countries, a great portion of mHealth interventions for NCDs 
involves wearable sensors that can monitor NCD-related measurements and 
informative vital signs, which will eventually become embedded sensors in the 
not-so-distant future. Although wearable sensors may not be as applicable in 
LMICs, the agility of mHealth technology is present in that it can help influence 
positive behavior changes over time for subtle nudges towards aging well, 
provide timely information and access to care, connect older persons in a 
larger health and social ecosystem, and inform health providers on aggregated 
population indicators and trends with location-based data. 
 
 
 
Sources: WHO 2012; WHO 2008. 
10 
 
 
 Existing mHealth Strategies and 
Opportunities for Healthier Aging 
 
Education 
To further address education and information dissemination, mHealth projects targeting cardiovascular health and 
d
prevention of cardiovascular diseases (CVDs) , such as the “Use of Mobile Technology to Prevent Progression of Pre-
17
Hypertension in Latin American Urban Settings” trial, are gaining momentum throughout the world.  This program is 
utilizing text messages and phone calls to promote lifestyle modification focused on reducing blood pressure in Argentina, 
Guatemala, and Peru.  
18
MediNet is another tool that is used to create personalized recommendations for individuals with high blood pressure.  In 
this system, the patient is hooked up to at-home glucose and blood pressure monitoring sensors that transmit readings to 
a mobile phone with a USB or Bluetooth connection custom built for the user’s phone. The patient is guided through a 
series of lifestyle and exercise questions, and both the individual’s responses and the sensor readings are analyzed in the 
system using electronic reasoning, returning a personalized response to the patient. MediNet’s effectiveness has not been 
reported, but the developers have mentioned their intentions to develop a low-cost version of the system for economically-
18
disadvantaged individuals living in countries in the Caribbean.  
Motivation 
Several mHealth applications focus on motivating individuals in terms of behaviors and patient self-management to 
improve health outcomes. One example is a mobile coaching option for individuals with type-2 diabetes, with which they 
are able to enter blood glucose values, carbohydrate intake, medication, and other information on their mobile handsets 
19
and then receive automated messages specific to their data.  Algorithms are used to send patients both educational and 
19
motivational messages, and patients are encouraged to communicate electronically with educators.  Type-2 diabetics 
can also benefit from a mobile phone application that allows patients to take pictures of their food consumption, as an 
20
alternative to the traditional strategy of food journaling with pen and paper. Other efforts to improve diabetes 
21
management have focused on reinforcing the provider-patient relationship with mobile phones.  
Connectivity 
The enhanced ability for older people and their caregivers to engage with healthcare professionals remotely addresses a 
key challenge for the aging population. The connectivity provided by some mHealth solutions allows health workers to visit 
older people in their home and conduct routine screening and other basic evaluative procedures. For example, OScan is 
22
an easy-to-use mobile device that enables community health workers to screen for oral cancer using camera phones.  
This technology was first tested in India, where there is one dentist for every 250,000 people. By taking pictures of 
suspected lesions, community health workers can quickly reach dentists and oral surgeons who are miles away for a 
diagnosis. Simple screening programs are particularly important in LMICs,where many cancer cases are presented to 
medical professionals at late stages because of a lack of prevention and treatment options. 
  
                                               
d
CVDs are the number one cause of death globally and will increasingly affect the world’s aging population (WHO 2008). 
11 
 
 
 Existing mHealth Strategies and 
Opportunities for Healthier Aging 
 
Because diabetic patients are sometimes required to take at-home vital and blood glucose level measurements, mobile 
23
phones offer the opportunity for the measurements to be collected and sent to a server via text messaging.  These data 
can then be monitored and the patient can either be sent a text message when they have forgotten to take measurements 
24
or if measurements are at risky levels.  Similar to diabetes, disease management for CVDs involves constant monitoring 
of pulse, blood pressure, and other vital information. Two solutions are a wearable sphygmomanometer and pulsimeter, 
whereby the former reminds an individual to measure his or her blood pressure and the latter to measure his or her 
25
pulse.  Both have wireless transmission abilities, which allow the information to be transmitted to servers accessible to 
25
doctors.  In all cases, these applications offer encouragement to patients to be more cognizant of their present health 
and provide opportunities to more quickly detect acute attacks or complications based on measurements as well as 
reaching out when help is needed with a simple phone call. 
However, connectivity does not always directly link to healthier behavior change. In response to the challenges of being 
able to continue monitoring patients after they have left the doctor’s office, a wireless monitoring system was developed in 
26, 27
Italy for patients to transmit information regarding symptoms and quality of life to medical professionals.  When piloted 
with 97 cancer patients, those who responded had very low levels of missing data; however, 42% of the individuals did not 
27
opt to take part, which suggests that adoption issues may hinder uptake of the system.  This is a reminder that mobile 
technology may not be familiar for everyone. 
Cognitive Decline and Mental Health 
Common cognitive decline and mental health disorders impacting aging populations include memory loss, depression, 
1,28
and dementia. None of these issues receive sufficient attention in LMICs, and co-morbidity is often poorly addressed.  
Social isolation is a significant challenge facing older people, particularly women who tend to live longer than men in most 
societies, since it can have negative effects on an individual’s overall health and wellbeing. Although there is a common 
belief that an increase in technology use could have an adverse effect on socialization, it has been found that there is a 
29
strong, positive relationship between the size and diversity of people’s closest social ties with the frequency of use.  
mHealth solutions in this context emphasize the basic ability of mobile phones to offer a way for humans to talk to each 
other. mHealth can alleviate pressures felt by patients and families when the need to seek care for mental disorders is 
necessary. Particularly in LMICs, mobile phones allow remote communication between patients and mental health 
professionals. 
12 
 
 
 
Putting an Aging Lens on mHealth 
Putting an Aging Lens on mHealth 
To better customize mobile phones and applications for older users, more research and innovation will be needed in 
design and manufacturing, as well as selecting handsets, features for use, and applications. For many older people, the 
1
biggest barrier to adoption of mobile phones is cost.  This is true in both LMICs and some developed countries that have 
high poverty rates among older age groups. According to a recent report published by the UNFPA and HelpAge 
1
International, income security is among the most urgent concerns of older people worldwide.  
Second, trust is a key barrier to adoption since a decision to continue using or to discard an mHealth application is easily 
30
influenced in the first few moments of an individual’s interaction with it.  For older populations, who may not have as 
much exposure or comfort with mobile phone applications, the trust hurdle may be higher than average. mHealth solutions 
designed with older people in mind will likely have a better chance of success and continued use than those aimed at the 
general population. 
Third, ergonomics play a pivotal role in individuals’ decisions whether to continue use of a technology. Special attention is  
required when considering mHealth ergonomics, for example, which handsets are better geared for use by aging 
populations. Large screens and large buttons that are easy to see and touch are better for older individuals with impaired 
vision and hearing. Additionally, cognitive decline can have an effect on how screen flow is perceived. Audio options 
should be predesigned and preset to allow older people to more easily hear conversations over a handheld phone and to 
notify them of incoming calls, text messages, or other alerts. 
The selection of a user communication type (i.e., voice vs. text vs. video) for a mHealth aging program should be based 
on the program’s objectives. Limitations of mobile technologies and communication strategies with older people as a 
target population should be thoroughly researched, as these limitations could have critical effects on the program’s 
success. Limitations affecting communication strategies such as illiteracy should be taken into consideration. Additionally, 
user population preferences, such as easily disabling auto-correct functions during text messaging and improving ease of 
use for voice-to-text features, are particularly important to account for when literacy rates are lower – usually in the LMIC 
context – or when eyesight capabilities decline among older individuals. 
The potential for mHealth to address the needs of aging populations on a deeper and broader scale is enhanced because, 
in some cases, existing applications aimed at children, adolescents, or young adults can be tailored with minimal effort. In 
other cases, motivations for behavior change may differ significantly between younger and older individuals. 
Evidence is growing on the benefits of mHealth in general; however, right now, there is not enough. As the field of 
5
mHealth grows in sophistication, it will likely be progressively easier to find appropriate “off-the-shelf” solutions.  For now, 
best practices regarding design principles for aging populations are emerging. These can go a long way to guide mHealth 
31
application developers. Some examples of best practices for design include : 
 Designs should not assume that all older users are impaired. Growing old does not necessarily result in 
impairment. In fact, variability in performance may actually increase among older people as they age, meaning that 
some older people may actually have better performance than some younger people 
 Designs should accommodate how aging results in changes to one’s senses (how we perceive), cognition 
(how we think), body (how we react), and social status (what we want). Suggested considerations include: 
  
13 
 
 
 
Putting an Aging Lens on mHealth 
 
– Ways to easily repeat commands since spoken commands may be easily forgotten (in comparison to text or icons 
that can be looked at again for reminding) 
– Ways to restart or start over when mistakes have been made 
– Icons that are intuitive and understood by older persons – especially across different cultures 
– Input buttons large enough to accommodate possible reduced fine-motor control 
– Information should be in a large, legible font 
– Inputs that provide a visual (lighting up) or auditory (beeping) input so the user has confirmation that their action 
was received 
– Speech not used for input (speech recognition) unless it is very fast and very reliable since mistakes and delays in 
speech recognition may be frustrating and confusing 
 Simple design can go further. Because cognition, or memory, changes with age, mHealth device designs should 
not require older users to retain information. Thus, the menu layout of an mHealth device should be simple.Older 
people may become confused and unable to comprehend or remember a complex menu structure provided by an 
application 
 Focus on the user experience. Older people may need more time to complete certain tasks, so there should be no 
actual or perceived sense of time urgency. The user may need very explicit indications from the system they have 
done it correctly and that the desired process is successfully underway 
 Make the user interface as easy as possible.  Women in Focus 
Some complex features could be preloaded by a 
The issue of women and aging deserves particular 
doctor or a mobile application developer so that 
attention from the design and policy perspectives. One 
older users only have a single “easy” button to 
subcategory is that which is directed at the asymmetry 
press. Basic medical information could be 
between populations of men and women in old age. 
automatically entered for an older user by knowing 
Although age discrimination occurs around the world for 
the individual’s medical needs. Additionally, some 
both men and women, women live longer than men and 
smart systems may anticipate user needs through 
are more likely to endure ill health for longer amounts of 
imputing their medical history in relation to the 
time. Illiteracy and low education levels, for which 
current date and time. For example, an older user 
women suffer disproportionately than men, have been 
could receive a prompt based on knowledge of 
associated with lower levels of seeking health services, 
current medications that states, “You appear to be 
for example, in cancer screening in Latin America and 
nearly out of your medicine; shall we reorder?”  
the Caribbean. Additionally, several factors specific to 
women (e.g., multiple pregnancies, fistula, heart 
Successful design is not just about products that are 
disease, certain types of cancer, the onset of 
practical or ergonomically functional. The design should 
menopause which increases the risks of osteoporosis 
allow the user to feel an emotional appeal or connection 
and bone fractures) are unique to women at later ages. 
to the device. For older adult users, that emotional 
Women are more likely than men to live alone, and this 
connection is more likely to exist if the mHealth 
5 increases the risk of poverty and isolation. The economic 
application appears as trustworthy, reliable, and kind.  In 
and mental burdens associated with aging women, 
other words, mHealth applications should be designed 
particularly widowed and single, can oftentimes 
with “emotional intelligence” for older people. 
overshadow the benefits of greater longevity as 
compared to men. In order to better respond to older 
women’s needs, mHealth aging applications should 
account for these issues. 
Source: WHO 2008; Reyes-Ortiz et al. 2007 
14 
 
 
 
mHealth and Aging Call to Action 
mHealth and Aging Call to Action 
While a movement to advance mHealth targeting maternal, newborn, and child health (MNCH) is well underway, a parallel 
effort to address the needs and opportunities of aging populations has yet to materialize. Policymakers and other 
stakeholders are increasingly aware of the promise of mHealth. Entrepreneurs are prolific in developing new applications 
targeting the needs of older people. How will these trends coalesce around the needs of rapidly aging populations and 
what is needed to ensure scalability and cost-effectiveness? A call-to-action is needed for project implementers, 
organizations, the private sector, and policymakers to help rapidly advance mHealth solutions for aging populations. 
What project implementers need to do… 
 Start small and expand. mHealth projects for aging should begin small before scaling-up. Many lessons have 
already been learned in mHealth from other health topic areas such as HIV/AIDS and MNCH. It is best to draw from 
the lessons learned in these applications as much as possible so that costs can be cut and quicker implementation 
can occur with the support of governments and public-private partnerships 
 Collaborate with other experts. Experts in the mobile technology field will need to engage with experts in aging to 
understand the nuances or major differences in the ways older people will benefit, how they will respond, and how to 
measure success 
 Focus on and empower the end user. Since older people will generally trail younger populations in uptake and 
5
comfort with new technologies, designs should emphasize simplicity.  Understanding end users and their needs and 
5
capabilities will ensure the sustainability of a program.  In order to do this, projects should consider several 
32
components.  These include: 
– Put the end users at the center of mHealth for aging design  
– Assess the needs and challenges of older users including knowledge, ability to recognize problems, ability to 
express their concerns, motivation, difficulty incorporating healthier behaviors into their schedule, access – or lack 
thereof – to transportation, and healthcare stigmas affecting older people  
– Incorporate positive and motivating strategies for the aging population 
– Provide critical information, support, and links to reputable resources that enable healthy aging 
What organizations need to do… 
 Create effective business models for sustainability. Effective business models coupled with monitoring and 
evaluation (M&E), as well as supportive policy, regulation, and mechanisms for more sustainable funding (e.g., payer 
commitments, subscriptions by patients or providers, insurance discounts), would enable meaningful scale-up and 
commercialization of mHealth 
 Integrate M&E from the beginning and generate evidence for identifying effective solutions. Although there is 
growing proof that mHealth programs and applications are being implemented worldwide, the evidence base of 
5,33
mHealth program and application effectiveness does not confirm what actually works, or does not, and why.  
Project managers and evaluation specialists should improve their use of real-time data and apply an aging lens in 
recommending improvements. M&E should be incorporated to help these projects evolve, increasing their usefulness 
and effectiveness over time. Since mobile technologies are electronic, data for M&E purposes can be extracted more 
easily than ever. However, the World Health Organization (WHO) 2009 Global eHealth survey stated that only 12% 
33
of United Nations Member States reported conducting evaluations of mHealth programs.  As adapted from Cash-
Gibson (2012), there are several suggestions for what to monitor and evaluate, specifically for programs focused on 
34
disease prevention and management.  An adaptation of these suggestions include the following: 
  
15 
 
 
 
mHealth and Aging Call to Action 
 
– Primary Outcomes 
• Quality of data recorded 
• Lifestyle modifications of relevance to the mHealth program (e.g., tobacco consumption, weight, dietary intake, 
physical activity levels) 
• Data disaggregated by age and gender 
– Secondary Outcomes 
• Response rates to invitations to assessments 
• Patient treatment compliance 
• Biomarker readings (e.g., blood cholesterol level changes, blood pressure readings, glycosylated  
hemoglobin levels) 
• Cost-effectiveness 
• Patient and provider satisfaction with methods 
• Adverse events (e.g., hospitalizations, morbidity, mortality) 
• Data disaggregated by age and gender 
 Address confidentiality, privacy, and security issues. Confidentiality, privacy, and security are all serious 
concerns in respecting and protecting individual health information. However, 56% of European member states and 
50% of member states in the Americas reported in the WHO 2009 Global eHealth survey that missing legal 
33,35
guidelines for privacy and confidentiality are the top two barriers to mHealth implementation.  Without regulations 
or set boundaries, health information sent via mobile phones across wireless networks can result in serious violations 
35
of patients’ rights.  Health professionals should be properly trained in informing patients about their rights in 
36
deciding who can access his or her patient information.  Interventions that use mobile phones as a communication 
gateway with patients can cause confidentiality and privacy concerns for individuals who share their mobile phones 
37
with friends or family members.  This has been expressed more frequently in mHealth interventions that focus on 
37,38
diseases that carry stigma and discrimination.  
What the private sector needs to do… 
 Participate in partnerships to create effective mHealth business models for sustainability. For the private 
sector, collaboration with project implementers and non-profit organizations will be key. Organizations that have 
expertise in aging populations as well as mobile phone network providers should collaborate with project 
implementers and organizations. These partnerships should devise mechanisms for more sustainable funding (e.g., 
payer commitments, subscriptions by patients or providers, insurance discounts), which will enable meaningful scale-
up and commercialization of mHealth for aging.  
16 
 
 
 
mHealth and Aging Call to Action 
 
What policymakers need to do… 
 Create an enabling environment to facilitate wide-scale use of mobile phones for aging. One of the often-cited 
reasons for successes achieved in mHealth interventions is strong commitment and support from local governments. 
Governments that have invested in mHealth or eHealth, which is electronic information transfer for health, have a 
solid understanding of the potential positive outcomes and advancements that mobile technologies can bring to their 
constituents. For example, the Government of Bangladesh has supported the development of an eHealth plan as 
well as text messaging services for health. The Government of Rwanda, as another example, has developed its own 
eHealth plan in addition to a nationwide interoperable electronic health information system, an electronic medical 
record system, a mobile phone-based system for community health worker communication responsibilities, and a 
33,39
new eHealth Center of Excellence.  However, in some countries, sending private patient information over mobile 
is limited by regulations and confidentiality laws. 
 Implement coordinated strategies that support program sustainability. Because mHealth is a new field, the 
landscape is saturated with pilot projects that have yet to be brought to scale. Only within the past few years have 
countries begun to incorporate mobile phone use in national plans and policies, creating an enabling environment for 
general acceptance and increased use. As aging and NCDs become integral pieces of national development plans, 
poverty reduction strategies, and stronger legislation, government use of mHealth for improving the health of older 
people can encourage and drive health systems and private marketplaces to adopt similar applications. 
17 
 
 
C onclusion: Advancing mHealth 
for Healthier Aging 
 
Conclusion: Advancing mHealth for Healthier Aging 
There are promising examples of how mHealth can successfully address the conditions that occur most frequently among 
older populations, including those, which if left untreated, result in disability. Wireless disease monitoring, health 
promotion, and self-management in non-communicable disease (NCD) interventions represent just a few mHealth 
applications addressed in this report. Increasingly, the information and data transferred via mobile devices is becoming 
27
more personal and tailored to end users – a promising sign and a critical success factor among older populations.  
On a more basic level, mHealth applications are enhancing a sense of social connectivity and cognitive stimulation, which 
is critical for older people facing isolation, depression, and fear of disability in their mature years. Not all older persons are 
able – due to disability, lack of transportation, or caregiving responsibilities – to join their friends in person for social 
stimulation. So far, not enough older individuals are enjoying the fruits of mHealth because of ongoing barriers to 
adoption, as addressed in this report. 
In fact, large strides still need to be made before mHealth reaches its full potential for healthier aging. In particular, these 
include tailoring mHealth applications focused on NCDs for use by older people and their families, friends, and caregivers; 
translating learned lessons from developed countries to LMIC contexts, and in some cases vice versa; and focusing more 
on the health needs of older women. These are all achievable if strategic efforts are coordinated amongst stakeholders 
across the mHealth, aging, and health systems fields. 
At the project level, rigorous evaluation is needed to determine how to best mitigate the factors hindering scale-up and 
commercialization of mHealth projects. Suggestions include creating effective business models for sustainable demand 
generation; establishing a long-term mission; filling research gaps in monitoring and evaluation for identifying effective 
solutions and guidance; focusing on the end user whether it be older individuals, caregivers, or health providers; obtaining 
and incorporating feedback from the end user; and addressing confidentiality, privacy, and security issues.  
At the policy level, top-down mechanisms can enable an environment in which mHealth aging projects can grow to be 
sustainable and scalable. Policies are needed to advance the integration of mobile phones and other information and 
communications technology into national health plans, chronic disease action plans, and socioeconomic support policies 
aimed at preventing poverty and disability in older populations. 
Healthy and active aging is a goal that most individuals hope to achieve. mHealth offers a unique and versatile platform to 
help people realize that goal. The rapid graying of populations, or expansion in the number of older people, in both 
developed and LMICs is certain. It is also clear, as the UNFPA and HelpAge International indicate, that “[t]he balance 
between the challenges and opportunities of population [aging] will in large part be determined by whether people age in 
1
good or in poor health” (p. 60). What remains to be seen is the extent to which mHealth will serve as a tool and resource 
to help aging populations remain healthy and productive for as long as possible. The first step in moving forward is to 
ensure that research and discussions about the mobile and demographic revolutions intersect. All stakeholders – project 
implementers, organizations, the private sector, policymakers, and individuals – must also work together to address the 
gaps and challenges described throughout this report and, in particular, in its call-to-action. Strategic planning and 
stronger coordination across the fields of health, information technologies, and aging are necessary to ensure that the full 
potential of mobile and wireless technology to improve preventive and supportive care for conditions associated with 
aging can be realized for older people, the fastest growing segment of the population worldwide. 
18 
 
 
 
References 
References 
1. United Nations Population Fund, HelpAge International. Ageing in the Twenty-First Century: A Celebration and A Challenge. New 
York and London: UNFPA and HelpAge International; 2012. 
2. National Institute on Aging National Institutes of Health U.S. Department of Health and Human Services, World Health 
Organization. Global Health and Aging; 2011. 
3. World Bank. Information and Communications for Development 2012: Maximizing Mobile. Washington, DC: World Bank; 2012. 
4. McKinsey & Company, The GSM Association. mHealth: A new vision for healthcare; 2010. 
5. Mechael P, Batavia H, Kaonga N, Searle S, Kwan A, Goldberger A, et al. Barriers and gaps affecting mHealth in low and middle 
income countries: Policy white paper: The Earth Institute Columbia University and the mHealth Alliance,; 2010. 
6. van Heerden A, Tomlinson M, Swartz L. Point of care in your pocket: a research agenda for the field of m-health. Bulletin of the 
World Health Organization. 2012; 90: 393-4. 
th 
7. Zadek S, Merme M, Forstater M, Yu K. Sustaining the Golden Thread: The economic opportunity of aging for China. 8
International Forum on Social Policy: New Thinking for an Aging Society. Beijing; 2012. 
8. Cole-Lewis H, Kershaw T. Text messaging as a tool for behavior change in disease prevention and management. Epidemiol Rev. 
2010; 32: 56-69. 
9. AARP Public Policy Institute. Chronic Care: A call to action for health reform: AARP; 2009. 
10. Bramley D, Riddell T, Whittaker R, Corbett T, Lin RB, Wills M, et al. Smoking cessation using mobile phone text messaging is as 
effective in Maori as non-Maori. NZMJ. 2005; 118(1216). 
11. Severi E, Free C, Knight R, Robertson S, Edwards P, Hoile E. Two controlled trials to increase participant retention in a 
randomized controlled trial of mobile phone based smoking cessation support in the United Kingdom. Clin Trials. 2011; 8: 654-60. 
12. Brendryen H, Kraft P. Happy Ending: a randomized controlled trial of a digital multi-media smoking cessation intervention. 
Addiction. 2008; 103: 478-84. 
13. Rodgers A, Corbett T, Bramley D, Riddell T, Wills M, Lin RB, et al. Do u smoke after txt? Results of a randomised trial of smoking 
cessation using mobile phone text messaging. Tobacco Control. 2005; 14: 255-61. 
14. Free C, Knight R, Robertson S, Whittaker R, Edwards P, Zhou W, et al. Smoking cessation support delivered via mobile phone text 
messaging (txt2stop): a single-blind, randomised trial. The Lancet. 2011; 378(9785): 49-55. 
15. World Health Organization. 2008-2013 Action Plan for the Global Strategy for the Prevention and Control of Noncommunicable 
Diseases. Geneva, Switzerland: World Health Organization; 2008. 
16. World Health Organization. Development of an updated Action Plan for the Global Strategy for the Prevention and Control of 
Noncommunicable Diseases covering the period 2013 to 2020: World Health Organization,; 2012. 
17. ClinicalTrials.gov. Use of Mobile Technology to Prevent Progression of Pre-hypertension in Latin American Urban Settings. 
2011[cited 11/14/2012]; Available from: http://clinicaltrials.gov/ct2/show/NCT01295216 
18. Mohan P, Marin D, Sultan S, Deen A. MediNet: Personalizing the self-care process for patients with diabetes and cardiovascular 
disease using mobile telephony.IEEE eng med biol soc; 2008; 2008. p. 755-8. 
19. Quinn CC, Shardell MD, Terrin ML, Barr EA, Ballew SH, Gruber-Baldini AL. Cluster-randomized trial of a mobile phone 
personalized behavioral intervention for blood glucose control. Diabetes Care. 2011; 34: 1934-42. 
20. Rollo ME, Ash S, Lyons-Wall P, Russell A. Trial of a mobile phone method for recording dietary intake in adults with type 2 
diabetes: evaluation and implications for future applications. Journal of Telemedicine and Telecare. 2011; 17(318-323). 
21. Lyles CR, Harris LT, Le T, Flowers J, Tufano J, Britt D, et al. Qualitative evaluation of a mobile phone and web-based collaborative 
care intervention for patients with type 2 diabetes. Diabetes Technology & Therapeutics. 2011; 13(5). 
22. PraKash Lab at Stanford University. OScan: Screening tool for oral lesions.2012[cited 11/14/2012]; Available from: 
http://www.stanford.edu/~manup/Oscan/ 
23. Cole-Lewis H, Kershaw T. Text messaging as a tool for behavior change in disease prevention and management. Epidemiologic 
Reviews. 2010; 32(1): 56-69. 
24. Bäck I, Mäkelä K. Mobile phone messaging in health care- Where are we now? J Inform Tech Soft Eng. 2012; 2(1): 1-6. 
25. Wang CS. Mobile and wireless technologies applying on sphygmonameter and pulsimeter for patients with pacemaker 
implementation and other cardiovascular complications. J Biomedical Science and Engineering. 2010; 3: 47-51. 
26. Bielli E, Carminati F, La Capra S, Lina M, Brunelli C, Tamburini M. A wireless health outcomes monitoring system (WHOMS): 
development and field testing with cancer patients using mobile phones. BMC Medical Informatics and Decision Making. 2004; 
4(7). 
19 
 
 
 
References 
 
27. Blake H. Mobile phone technology in chronic disease management. Nursing Standard. 2008; 23(12): 43-6. 
28. Bass JK, Bornemann TH, Burkey M, Chehil S, Chen L, Copeland JRM, et al. A United Nations General Assembly Special Session 
for Mental, Neurological, and Substance Use Disorders: The Time Has Come. PLoS Med. 2012; 9(1): e1001159. 
29. Olsen S. Does technology reduce social isolation? New York Times. 2009. 
30. GSM Association, PricewaterhouseCoopers Private Limited. Touching lives through mobile health: Assessment of the global 
market opportunity; 2012. 
31. Ward N. Best practices regarding design principles for aging populations. 2012. 
32. Kamani P, Mehta R. Taking charge of your own wellness: Embracing the philosophy of individual wellness empowerment to 
develop and maintain your own personal wellness ecosystem: Zume Life, Inc; 2008. 
33. World Health Organization. mHealth: New horizons for health through mobile technologies. Geneva, Switzerland: World Health 
Organization,; 2011. 
34. Cash-Gibson L, Pappas Y, Car J. Computer-assisted versus oral-and-written history taking for the management of cardiovascular 
disease (Protocol): The Cochrane Collaboration,; 2012. 
th
35. Wickramasinghe N, Goldberg S. A framework for delivering mHealth excellence.18  Bled eConference, eIntegration in Action. 
Bled, Slovenia; 2005. 
36. World Health Organization. Legal frameworks for eHealth. Geneva, Switzerland: World Health Organization,; 2012. 
37. Chang LW, Kagaayi J, Arem H, Nakigozi G, Ssempijja V, Serwadda D, et al. Impact of a mHealth intervention for peer health 
workers on AIDS care in rural Uganda: A mixed methods evaluation of a cluster-randomized trial. AIDS Behav. 2011; 15: 1776-84. 
38. Mechael P, The Dodowa Health Research Center, For the Grameen Technology Foundation. MoTECH: mHealth Ethnography 
Report; 2009. 
39. Gerber T, Olazabal V, Brown K, Pablos-Mendez A. An agenda for action on global e-health. Health Affairs. 2010; 29(2): 235-8. 
40. Waggener Edstrom Worldwide, AARP, The GSM Association. Mobile health for independent living: Landscape report; 2011. 
41. Coalition to Transform Advanced Care. Call to Action: Transforming Advanced Illness Care; 2012. 
 
 
 
20 
 
 
 Appendix A: Individual and 
Population Aging Frameworks 
 
Appendix A. Individual and Population Aging Frameworks 
Making aging healthier is challenging. One of the most challenging parts of improving aging is agreeing on the problem. 
This section describes two frameworks that this call-to-action aims to advance regarding new perspectives on aging and 
the role innovative technology can play as a solution. Drawing from recent academic literature and civil society thought 
leadership, both of these frameworks fundamentally support the fact that aging does not begin at a specific age but 
instead is a lifelong process where, in general, healthy behaviors can promote wellbeing. 
Framework 1: The Vicious and Virtuous Cycles of Physical Wellness and Cognition Among the Elderly 
The first framework, drawn from a discussion paper entitled “Sustaining the Golden Thread: The Economic Opportunity of 
7
Aging for China,”  visually represents two ways particular attitudes and behaviors can either accelerate or delay physical 
and cognitive decline among older people (See Figure 5). The vicious cycle emphasizes that excluding elderly 
populations can isolate and marginalize them, as well as limit how much they can – and feel they can – contribute, all 
while increasing the stereotype that older people are a burden. All of these events can fuel certain behaviors and 
attitudes, resulting in accelerated physical and cognitive decline among the elderly. Removing these perceptions among 
both the elderly and other segments of the population is a critical element of healthier aging around the world. 
By reversing the vicious cycle, the virtuous cycle capitalizes on the knowledge and productive roles older people already 
have in society. With a well-thought-out strategy that considers molding positive changes in attitudes, practices, and 
policy, society will be better able to benefit from a lifetime wealth of knowledge and experiences of older generations; 
aging individuals will feel and see themselves as contributors. With stronger physical and cognitive capacities, which can 
imply healthier aging, reductions can be expected in costs placed on older people, their families, and their health systems 
from age-related illnesses. 
Figure 5: Two ways particular attitudes and behaviors can accelerate or delay physical and cognitive decline 
among elderly 
 
Source: Adapted from Zadek 2012 
Mobile technologies can help catalyze the movement toward a more virtuous cycle, particularly for NCDs, as well as 
cognitive acuity and mental health. When designed appropriately and through targeted programs, mHealth can empower 
older people and their caregivers in such a way as to delay physical and cognitive declines, at the same time allowing 
improved quality of life through better disease management. 
 
21 
 
 
A ppendix A: Individual and 
Population Aging Frameworks 
 
 
Framework 2: Aging on the Health Continuum 
With age comes increased susceptibility to developing a chronic disease and developing co-morbidity from more than one 
chronic disease.40 Developed by the Coalition to Transform Advanced Care (C-TAC), the second framework 
contextualizes the health continuum of older individuals by illustrating how illnesses can advance (See Figure 6). As 
shown, individuals, regardless of age, may endure illnesses that can develop into chronic conditions, which can then 
worsen and limit daily activities such as getting out of bed, getting dressed, using the toilet, bathing, eating, and taking 
medicine. Ideally, care for chronically ill people, including those at advanced stages, is appropriate, seamless, and 
individually-tailored so that they can live with security and dignity. Needless to say, older people are more likely to suffer 
from co-morbidity.  
Figure 6: Development of Advanced Illness on the Health Continuum. (Figure from Coalition to Transform 
41
Advanced Care (C-TAC). Call to Action: Transforming Advanced Illness Care. ) 
 
Source: C-TAC, 2012. 
22 
 
