Subscribe
Continental	disconnect
Mobile	phones	are	transforming	Africa
Mobile	phones	are	transforming	Africa,	where	they	can	get	a	signal
Print	edition	|	Middle	East	and	Africa
Dec	10th	2016 |	ACCRA	AND	CAPE	TOWN
DRIVE	a	few	miles	from	the	centre	of	Accra,	the	capital	of	Ghana,	into	the	neat	rows	of	houses	that	surround	it	and	the	paved	roads	disappear
almost	as	quickly	as	the	phone	lines.	Yet	this	has	not	dented	the	ambitions	of	Kwami	Williams,	a	graduate	of	the	Massachusetts	Institute	of
Technology	(MIT)	who	is	building	a	business	processing	moringa	trees	and	exporting	the	resulting	tea	and	cosmetic	oils.	Before	mobile-phone
usage	exploded	across	Africa,	starting	a	venture	such	as	this	on	a	shoestring	would	have	been	impossible—the	costs	of	communicating	with	the
thousands	of	smallholders	who	grow	the	trees	would	have	been	prohibitive.	Now	this	business	supports	some	1,500	farmers.
Across	Africa,	similar	magic	is	being	wrought	as	phones	spur	innovation	and	boost	incomes:	farmers	use	them	to	check	market	prices	before
selling	to	middlemen,	and	market	traders	can	accept	payments	in	mobile	money.	A	study	by	academics	from	MIT,	published	this	week,	found
that	simply	by	gaining	access	to	M-Pesa,	Kenya’s	mobile-money	service,	2%	of	Kenyan	households	were	lifted	out	of	poverty	between	2008	and
2014.
Get	our	daily	newsletter
Upgrade	your	inbox	and	get	our	Daily	Dispatch	and	Editor's	Picks.
Email	address Sign	up	now
The	precise	impact	of	phones	on	economic	growth	is	notoriously	difficult	to	measure	(although	that	does	not	stop	trade	bodies	and	consultants
from	issuing	gushing	reports	filled	with	unnervingly	exact	numbers).	The	GSMA,	an	international	trade	body,	argues	that	for	every	10%
increase	in	phone	penetration	in	poor	countries,	productivity	improves	by	more	than	four	percentage	points,	and	that	a	doubling	in	mobile-
data	usage	increases	annual	growth	in	GDP	per	person	by	half	a	percentage	point.	Yet	more	may	be	in	store	as	Africa	stands	on	the	cusp	of	a
second	mobile-phone	revolution.
A	decade	ago	there	were	only	129m	mobile-phone	subscriptions	in	the	whole	of	Africa,	though	even	that	was	already	ten	times	more	than	the
number	of	fixed-line	phones.	But	since	then	the	number	of	active	subscriptions	has	jumped	to	almost	1bn.	At	first	blush	that	would	suggest	that
just	about	every	African	(there	are	1.2bn	of	them,	with	north	Africa	included)	now	has	a	phone.	In	fact,	a	large	number	of	Africans	have	are
consummate	arbitrageurs	of	tariffs,	switching	SIM	cards	in	and	out	of	their	phones	depending	on	whom	they	are	calling.	Dig	a	little	deeper	into
the	data	and	it	turns	out	that	fewer	than	half	of	Africans	have	phones.	Those	who	do	tend	to	live	in	cities	and	are	richer	and	better	educated
than	the	half	who	do	not.	The	latter	risk	being	left	even	further	behind.
This	divide	is	even	more	extreme	when	it	comes	to	gaining	access	to	the	internet.	Although	mobile	phones	have	revolutionised	the	way
Africans	get	online—most	have	jumped	to	cyberspace	directly	on	their	phones	rather	than	on	computers	connected	through	fixed	lines—many
are	still	not	connected	to	the	world.	The	International	Telecommunication	Union	(ITU)	reckons	that	three-quarters	of	Africans	do	not	use	the
internet,	compared	with	just	21%	of	Europeans	(see	map).
There	are	two	main	reasons	why	so	many	Africans	lack	even	simple	phones.	The	first	is	that	Africa	is	a	very	large	continent	in	which	the
majority	of	people	are	scattered	among	farms	and	small	villages.	Powering	phone	masts	in	remote	areas	is	a	challenge:	phone	companies
typically	rely	on	expensive	diesel	generators	that	need	regular	refuelling.	And	the	masts	also	need	a	way	to	transmit	calls	and	data	to	and	from
the	broader	network,	so	phone	companies	spend	another	fortune	laying	cables	or	buying	bandwidth	on	satellites	to	do	so.	Little	wonder,	then,
that	only	around	43%	of	Africans	can	get	a	3G	data	signal,	and	just	16%	can	get	one	offering	fast	(4G)	mobile	broadband.
The	costs	of	downloading	data	are	also	higher	in	Africa	than	in	most	other	parts	of	the	world,	in	part	because	the	bytes	have	to	get	there	on	long
submarine	cables	and	then	snake	their	way	inland	over	thousands	of	miles	of	rough	terrain.	Of	the	ten	countries	with	the	highest	fixed-
broadband	costs	in	the	world,	seven	are	in	Africa.	They	include	landlocked	Uganda,	Rwanda	and	Burundi;	Chad	tops	the	list	at	$501	a	month	for
a	connection.	Poverty	compounds	the	problem,	particularly	in	sub-Saharan	Africa	where	about	40%	of	people	live	on	less	than	$1.90	a	day.
Phone	companies	have	little	reason	to	expand	their	coverage	into	villages	if	people	there	cannot	pay	enough	to	make	it	profitable.
Yet	several	technological	changes	may	soon	lead	to	another	sudden	shift	in	phone	and	internet	use	in	Africa.	The	first	is	a	rapid	fall	in	the	cost
of	connecting	Africa	to	the	rest	of	the	internet.	New	cables	gird	the	continent	and	reach	inland,	increasing	competition	and	driving	down	costs.
Firms	such	as	Google	are	installing	fibre	networks	in	cities	such	as	Accra	and	Kampala	in	a	bid	to	drive	down	the	costs	of	data.	Satellites	are
improving,	too.	Michel	Azibert	of	Eutelsat,	a	satellite	firm,	says	advances	in	technology	mean	that	the	cost	of	transmission	capacity	will	fall	to	a
fiftieth	(about	$1m	per	gigabyte)	by	2020	compared	with	older	satellites.
The	last,	and	perhaps	most	important,	changes	include	innovations	that	dramatically	lower	the	cost	of	serving	remote	villages.	Firms	such	as
Nuran	Wireless	and	Vanu	are	working	on	small,	solar-powered	mobile	masts,	which	can	be	erected	and	operated	for	less	than	a	quarter	of	the
cost	of	conventional	ones.	The	masts	beam	low-power	signals	that	do	not	travel	far,	but	they	do	away	with	the	need	for	a	generator.	Such
improvements	may	allow	firms	to	make	a	profit	from	villagers	spending	as	little	as	$2	a	month	to	talk	on	their	phones.	Others,	including
Eutelsat,	are	looking	at	ways	of	beaming	satellite	internet	down	to	base	stations	that	then	distribute	it	across	a	village	using	cheap	Wi-Fi
equipment.
Unfortunately,	in	many	countries	mobile-phone	companies	are	an	easy	source	of	tax.	In	Tanzania,	for	instance,	phone	companies	pay	almost
half	their	revenues	to	the	government.	In	Ghana	the	cost	of	handsets	is	inflated	by	taxes	of	almost	38%.	A	second	mobile-phone	revolution	in
Africa	would	do	much	to	boost	its	economies	and	transform	the	lives	of	its	people.	But	it	will	not	happen	if	governments	keep	standing	in	its
way.
This	article	appeared	in	the	Middle	East	and	Africa	section	of	the	print	edition	under	the	headline	"Continental	disconnect"
Print	edition	|	Middle	East	and	Africa
Dec	10th	2016 |	ACCRA	AND	CAPE	TOWN
Reuse	this	content
About	The	Economist
Second	time	unlucky
Israel’s	prime	minister	will	desperately	struggle	to	stay	in	office
Binyamin	Netanyahu	is	down	but	not	out
Subscribe Group	subscriptions Contact	us
Help
Keep	updated
Sign	up	to	get	more	from	The	Economist
Get	5	free	articles	per	month,	daily	newsletters	and	more.
Email	address Sign	up
About	The	Economist
Advertise Reprints
Careers Media	Centre
Terms	of	Use Privacy
Cookie	Policy Manage	Cookies
Accessibility Modern	Slavery	Statement
Copyright	©	The	Economist	Newspaper	Limited2	 019.	All	rights	reserved.
