Home About	Us Subscribe	Now Find	Funding Our	Topics Follow	us:	Facebook,	Twitter,	RSS	Feed
THE	LATEST
Type	search	text	and	press	enter...
Get	ICTworks	3x	a	Week!
email	address Subscribe
Do	We	Have	Too	Many	Theories	in	Digital	Development?
Published	on:	Sep	19	2019	by	Guest	Writer	-	Leave	a	Comment
Like	Us	on	Facebook
Theory	of	this,	theory	of	that.	It	often	feels	as	if	we	have	a	theory	for	everything	in	international
development,	and	in	ICT4D	as	a	subset	of	overall	development	activity.	Are	these	theories	for
business	development,	M&E,...
Follow	Us	on	Twitter
Tweets	by	@ICT_Works
Help	Bridge	the	Language	Translation
Technology	Digital	Divide Hot	Right	Now
Published	on:	Sep	18	2019	by	Guest	Writer	-	3	Comments
In	the	digital	age,	when	we	face	a	language	barrier,	there	are	a	host	of
internet	resources	to	overcome	it.	We	often	rely	on	translation	platforms,
dictionary	apps,	Wikipedia	in	other	languages,	or	the	simple	“click	to...
What	Impact	Will	Facebook	Libra 1
Blockchain	Have	on	International
Development?
How	Engineers	Can	Leverage	Internet	of
Things	for	Better	Development
Interventions
Published	on:	Sep	16	2019	by	Guest	Writer	-	1	Comment
Typically,	an	engineer’s	role	in	addressing	global	poverty	challenges	has
often	been	confined	to	the	engineering	problem	facing	community, Please	Do	Not	Create	Yet	Another
regional	or	national	scale	service	interventions.	Engineers	focused	on Development	Knowledge	Portal
product...
Please	Register	Now:	2019	CGIAR	Big
Data	in	Agriculture	Convention
Published	on:	Sep	12	2019	by	Wayan	Vota	-	2	Comments Want	DFID	Grant	Funding?	Then 5
The	CGIAR	Big	Data	in	Agriculture	platform	is	where	information Use	Digital	Principles	in	Your
becomes	power	to	predict,	prescribe,	and	produce	more	food,	more Proposals
sustainably.	It	democratizes	decades	of	agricultural	data	empowering	us
to	mine	information...
Recent	Comments
3	Reasons	Why	We	Need	Human	Rights- Grace	on	Help	Bridge	the	Language	Translation
Based	Approach	to	Digital	Media Technology	Digital	Divide
Marga	Eichleay	on	Help	Bridge	the	Language
Published	on:	Sep	11	2019	by	Guest	Writer	-	Leave	a	Comment Translation	Technology	Digital	Divide
Citizen	engagement	and	participation	through	the	use	of	digital	media	is Cavin	Mugarura	on	Help	Bridge	the	Language
a	crucial	area	of	work	at	this	point	in	history	and	is	now	being	recognized Translation	Technology	Digital	Divide
in	regulatory	provisions.	In	July	2016	the	United	Nations	passed	a
resolution... Bashir	Quadri	on	Please	Register	Now:	2019CGIAR	Big	Data	in	Agriculture	Convention
William	Otto	Okumu	on	How	Engineers	Can
Leverage	Internet	of	Things	for	Better
Development	Interventions
Current	Themes
Africa	Digital	Development	Digital	Financial
Can	Bitcoin	or	Ethereum	Cryptocurrency Services	Digital	Health	Digital	Principles	Donor
Funding	Drones	Facebook	Failure	FHI	360
Fund	Your	Next	ICT4D	Project? Funding	Gender	Ghana	Grant	Funding
Published	on:	Sep	09	2019	by	Guest	Writer	-	6	Comments GSMA	How	To	Guide	ICT4AgICT4D	ICT4Edu	ICTforAg	India
While	cryptocurrency	is	starting	to	become	a	hot	topic	among	some	non-
profits,	it	is	estimated	that	only	1%	of	non-profits	are	currently	accepting Internet	Access	inveneo	Kenya
cryptocurrency	as	part	of	their	fundraising	efforts.	Since	2010,	Kopernik... Lessons	Learned	M&E	M4D	MERL	TechmHealth	Mobile	Data	Collection	Mobile	Money
Mobile	Phones	Monitoring	and
Evaluation	Nigeria	Open	Data	Open	Source
Project	Funding	Research	Report
Caution!	Data	Quantity	Does	NOT	Equal Smallholder	Farmers	SMS	Tanzania
Data	Quality Technology	Salon	UAV	UgandaUSAID
Published	on:	Sep	05	2019	by	Guest	Writer	-	Leave	a	Comment
Revenue	administrations	collect	large	amounts	of	data	on	individuals	and
firms	in	the	course	of	their	work.	Increasingly,	this	data	is	digitised.	The
use	of	digital	technologies	has	the	potential	to	greatly	improve	the
efficiency...
5	Ways	to	Improve	Data	Use	by
Government	Health	Ministries
Published	on:	Sep	04	2019	by	Guest	Writer	-	Leave	a	Comment
Despite	the	growing	recognition	that	quality,	timely,	and	accessible	data
are	essential	to	every	country’s	ability	to	deliver	vaccines	effectively	to	its
population,	few	data	use	interventions	have	been	rigorously	studied...
Apply	Now:	Paid	African	Presidential
Scholars	for	STEM	and	Social	Research
Published	on:	Sep	03	2019	by	Wayan	Vota	-	2	Comments
Are	you	an	early	career	faculty	member	in	a	college	or	university	in
Africa?	Is	your	academic	research	related	to	STEM	or	social	research?
Do	you	want	to	work	at	the	University	of	Michigan	for	five	months?	Then
apply	now...
What	Impact	Will	Facebook	Libra
Blockchain	Have	on	International
Development?
Published	on:	Aug	29	2019	by	Tech	Change	-	1	Comment
Libra	is	a	digital	currency	proposed	by	Facebook	and	intended	to	be
managed	by	the	Libra	Association,	a	membership	organization	with	27
payment,	technology,	and	nonprofit	members.	Libra	will	be	based	on
permissioned	blockchain...
Older	Posts	»
About	Us Latest	Tweets Subscribe	to	our	Newsletter
Tweets	by	@ICT_Works
Enter	your	e-mail	to	get	ICTworks	3x	a	week!:
email	address 	 Subscribe
Become	an	ICTworks	Writer
Our	team	gladly	accepts	outside	contributors	for
ICTworks	articles.	If	you	would	like	to	publish	an
article	on	our	website,	please	see	our	Guest	Post
Guidelines
	This	work	is	licensed	under	a	Creative	Commons	Attribution-NonCommercial-ShareAlike	4.0	International
License.
