ANANYA 
Shaping life-saving reproductive, maternal, newborn and child health practices 
and behaviors in India 
BEHAVIOR CHANGE COMMUNICATION 
Implementation date: April 2011 to December 2015  
Despite increased investment and programmatic efforts in recent years, India’s maternal, infant, and child mortality 
rates remain below that of the Millennium Development Goal (MDG) targets. A key approach to the Government of 
India’s strategy for the reduction of child and maternal mortality is the use of community health workers (CHWs), who 
provide community-based services and help influence both the drivers and barriers to the adoption of reproductive, 
maternal, newborn, and child health (RMNCH) behaviors.  The level of mobile phone ownership among CHWs, which 
is 85 percent in Bihar State, demonstrates the potential for reaching rural populations through mobile phones with key 
messages related to RMNCH.  
About Ananya 
Ananya is a five-year (2010-2015) program funded by the Bill lessons, and quizzes with a cumulative pass/fail score. Mobile 
& Melinda Gates Foundation with the goal of accelerating Academy can train thousands of CHWs simultaneously, at a 
i mprovement of health outcomes linked to MDGs 4, 5, and fraction of the costs of face-to-face training.  
6. The program works in partnership with the State 
Government of Bihar and ten other implementing Also launched in May 2012, Mobile Kunji is a multimedia 
 
organizations including BBC Media Action, which leads the service designed to enhance the immediate impact of CHWs 
Shaping Behaviors and Practices Project. The project aims to during their counseling sessions with families and seeks to 
i ncrease knowledge and change attitudes and practices 
build support for healthy behaviors. Mobile Kunji arms 
related to RMNCH amongst a population of 104 million CHWs with an audio-visual job aid that is lightweight and 
people, including 27 million women of reproductive age, makes use of the technology they already own. This job aid 
through two mobile health technologies called Mobile includes both an IVR-based mobile service and a printed  
Academy and Mobile Kunji.  deck of 40 illustrated cards on a ring, which together 
communicate essential information on pregnancy and 
L aunched in Bihar in May 2012, Mobile Academy is an newborn health. A unique short-code at the bottom of each 
Interactive Voice Response (IVR) mobile training course on card allows the CHW to play audio content linked to the  
RMNCH for CHWs, designed to expand their knowledge of information on the card, directly to families. The content is 
l ife-saving preventative health interventions and behaviors delivered in the authoritative yet sympathetic voice of a 
and enhance their capacity to communicate and engage women doctor character (‘Dr. Anita’) and is deliberately 
effectively with families. CHWs can access the 190 minute designed to be both engaging and conversational, and to 
course from any phone, and complete it at their rein force the health message illustrated on the card.  
convenience. The curriculum is divided into chapters, 
14  |  mHealth Compendium Volume 4 
` Evaluation and Results 
As of June 2014, 63 percent of all CHWs trained 
(38,512) in Mobile Academy and Mobile Kunji had 
successfully completed the Mobile Academy course. 
More than 6.9 million minutes of Mobile Academy 
content were played in Bihar between May 2012 and July 
2014, while 9,303,408 minutes of Mobile Kunji content 
were played between May 2012 and July 2014. As of July 
2014, 38,000 unique users, including more than 26,000 
CHWs, were calling Mobile Kunji every month. 
Carried out by Mathematica Policy Research in 2014, the 
population-based survey of the Ananya midline evaluation 
addressed several elements of the Ananya theory of 
change. It sought to understand changes in women’s 
RMNCH+A practices and their contacts with CHWs (quantity and quality, including use of job aids like Mobile Kunji) and 
the health system. The results of the survey are in the process of being analyzed. Early analysis concludes that exposure to 
Mobile Kunji adds substantial value in predicting behavior; is strongly correlated with delivery preparation and 
complimentary feeding; and serves as a good complement to other job aids and tools used by frontline workers.  
Lessons Learned 
 Use handset independent technology to make audio services accessible to people’s existing phones, on the majority of 
networks, via a simple voice call.  
 Involve State Government in designing the services from the outset. 
 Develop content and functionality in collaboration with the target audiences and test, test, test.  
 Negotiate sustainable partnerships with all the biggest mobile operators, ensuring common short codes and a 90 percent 
reduction in commercial tariffs.   
Conclusion Geographic Coverage: Bihar and Odisha States, 
BBC Media Action’s experience in Bihar State has shown that the India 
Mobile Academy and Mobile Kunji tools have given CHWs credibility Implementation Partners: BBC Media Action  
in their communities and empowered them to effectively promote 
Funder: Bill & Melinda Gates Foundation  
and deliver life-saving information. In acquiring knowledge and skills, 
CHWs status is elevated in the community and they are increasingly Contact Information: 
seen as respected and knowledgeable professionals. The success of BBC Media Action | Sara Chamberlain 
the Shaping Behaviors and Practices Project has led to a planned (sara.chamberlain@in.bbcmediaaction.org) 
launch in Uttar Pradesh State, and to the decision of the Ministry of 
Bill & Melinda Gates Foundation | Rahul Mullick, 
Health and Family Welfare to scale-up these two mobile health 
(Rahul.mullick@gatesfoundation.org) 
technologies nation-wide.  
 
mHealth Compendium Volume 4  |  15 
