 
SKY SOCIAL FRANCHISE NETWORK 
Using mobile technology to improve a multi-tiered health and family planning  
telemedicine network 
In India, one in 170 women die from pregnancy- Each village’s mobile-based SkyCare Provider diagnoses 
related complications and 47 out of 1,000 infants die and treats minor ailments, initiates tele-consultations  
within the first five years of life. Over 85% of these for more complex cases, and refers the most difficult 
women and children live in remote locations and do cases to entrepreneur-run telemedicine SkyHealth 
not travel far outside of their village, making access to Health Centers equipped with additional telediagnostic 
quality health services and essential medicines a technologies for measuring vital signs. A last-mile supply 
challenge. While only 32% of women own mobile chain delivers a range of medicines and family planning 
phones, 83% have access to one. Mobile phones are products, and collects lab samples, all the way down to 
also ubiquitous among healthcare providers, including the village level.  If needed, patients may be referred to 
the 200,000 informally trained first-line providers that WHP-approved urban clinics for further examination by 
serve people in rural areas.  doctors. The costs of tele-consultations vary from 
USD$0.20 for patients below the poverty line to 
World Health Partners (WHP) launched a multi-tiered USD$2.00. 
telemedicine network of mutually beneficial franchise 
providers drawing on private sector capacity through Providers and the community are supported by various 
social franchising, innovations in labor management, and IVR and SMS-based mobile applications that enable 
low-cost technologies to develop a scalable and efficient data collection, helplines for franchisees, and 
sustainable health care service delivery model that health information lines for the community. mHealth 
includes reproductive health, family planning, maternal tools are also used for franchise management – field staff 
health, childhood diseases and TB care. WHP began are equipped with tablets loaded with simple 
incorporating the use of simple voice and text-based applications for survey data collection, lab sample 
functions to extend the reach of their services and have tracking, and product inventory management. Most of 
made these mobile tools an essential component of their these tools are IVR-based, with the program returning 
rural health infrastructure. calls after a missed call is registered.  
WHP currently operates its telemedicine-enabled 
franchise in eight districts of Uttar Pradesh, focused on Evaluation and Results 
demand generation and service provision of family 
As of October 2013, the service has provided over 
planning and maternal health services.  A larger scale 
93,000 telemedicine consultations. Most consultations 
program operates in 13 districts of Bihar and is geared 
focus on common ailments such as fever, gastroenteritis, 
towards improving the detection and treatment of four 
infections and various reproductive health issues.  
diseases: tuberculosis, visceral leishmaniasis, childhood 
Electronic data collection by field staff improved data 
pneumonia, and diarrhea.  
integrity.  A newly launched community health line that 
Implementation date: 2011 provides basic health information aimed at client 
empowerment received over 11,000 authentic calls in its 
first two months.   
About  Sky Social Franchise Network 
Sky Health Centers are able to provide care at more 
The social franchise consists of a tiered health and family affordable rates. For example, IUD insertion costs 
planning service delivery network, bringing together USD$2.40 compared to USD$10 to $18 at an urban 
trained urban doctors and informally trained rural clinic. Unit costs of WHP’s mHealth tools are decreasing 
private providers, all earning revenue for providing with an increase in number of applications being hosted 
patient services. Mobile devices are used for multiple on the same platform.  WHP’s programs in UP and 
functions allowing increased value and cost-effectiveness Bihar are making close to 45,000 calls per month at less 
for both WHP programs and network providers. than USD$0.20 per call to WHP.  
 
64 mHEALTH COMPENDIUM   |   VOLUME 3 
 
SKY SOCIAL FRANCHISE NETWORK 
Using mobile technology to improve a multi-tiered health and family planning  
telemedicine network  SERVICE DELIVERY 
technology platforms, there are fewer challenges 
with videoconferencing and other technical issues  
Conclusion 
Patients are connected with remote, qualified doctors 
through internet and mobile-based consultation and 
diagnostic systems. Using simple forms and interactive 
voice response application improve patient tracking, 
provide alerts and reminders, and improve data 
integrity. WHP will continue to develop appropriate 
mobile phone-based solutions to bring telemedicine 
services to even lower level providers/remote areas and 
to improve provider capabilities, monitoring and data 
collection.  
-------------------------------------------------------- 
Geographic Coverage: India 
Implementation Partners: World Health Partners, 
Partners Consulting (communications), Government of 
Lessons Learned Bihar, WayGeNext, MOTECH 
 In Uttar Pradesh, rural clients are willing to adopt Funder: Bill and Melinda Gates Foundation, anonymous 
family planning if quality services are provided close donor 
to home 
Contact Information:  
 In Bihar, there is a need for mobile phone-based World Health Partners: Gobi Gopalakrishnan, 
applications (IVR preferred over SMS) for data President & Founder (gopi@worldhealthpartners) 
collection to monitor patient adherence, alerts and Bill and Melinda Gates Foundation: Tim Wood, Senior 
reminders, and mobile training.  Program Officer (tim.wood@gatesfoundation.org) 
   A large set of mHealth applications that leverages 
References: 
the same platform can reduce per call costs greatly 
1. Center for Health Market Innovations. World Health Partners 
and enable quicker addition of new tools.   
(WHP). 2012. Web. 
 WHP is piloting the use of simple mobile and web 2. Gopi Gopalakrishnan, Karen Pak Oppenheimer, & Prachi Shukla. 
communications and applications to boost client mHealth: Not a Standalone Solution. Stanford Social Innovation 
awareness of quality standards – the demand is Review. 20 February 2013. Web. 
strong with over 11,000 calls received in the first 3. The World Bank. Data: Mortality rate, infant (per 1,000 live 
two months.  births). 2013. Web. 
4. World Health Partners. Bihar Infectious Diseases Program. July 
 Additional efforts must be put towards recruiting 2012. Print. 
enough medical specialists to see patients in remote 5. World Health Partners. UP Family Planning Program. July 2012. 
locations and having patients trust the opinion of Print. 
virtual doctors 6. World Health Partners. The World Health Model. July 2012. 
 Print.   With the addition and stabilization of various 
  mHEALTH COMPENDIUM   |   VOLUME 3 65 
