Digital  Technology 
i n  t he  Ebo la Response  
and  Recove ry  E f f o r t s
1
About the 
Global Development Lab
Mandate: 
• Integrating Science, Technology, Innovation, and Partnerships 
(STIP) Agency-wide
– Institutionalize within USAID the ability to harness science and 
technology
Dual Mission: 
–Support breakthrough innovation
–Transform development
Digital Development
Work streams
Digital Finance Digital Inclusion Real-time Data 
Leveraging the growing Addressing the gaps in Systems
digital infrastructure to access to digital Facilitating the use of 
extend financial technologies, products, mobile-enabled real-
services to the very and services time data for adaptive 
poor program delivery that is 
sensitive to performance 
metrics and citizen 
• Better than Cash Alliance • Alliance for Affordable feedback
Internet (A4AI)
• Digital Finance Handbook
• Global Broadband and • mSTAR and Mobile Hub
Innovation (GBI) initiative
• Principles for Digital 
• Connected Women Development
• Mobile Data Toolkit
Real-time Data Systems
Strategy: 3 Pillars
1. Co-investments in 2. In-country partnerships 3. Catalyze behavior 
global ‘building blocks that use ‘building blocks’ change toward adaptive 
Co-investments in the global Facilitate multi-stakeholder management
‘building blocks’ of partnerships that use these Catalyze internal (USAID) 
compatible platforms and the building blocks to enable and external behavior 
integration of these building- large-scale deployments change (e.g. donor 
blocks with other critical through national community) toward adoption 
systems. governments and/or stitch of RTD systems and 
together a patchwork of sub- adaptive program 
national programs. management
Why USAID?
• As a donor, USAID has the interest and ability to fund the technology ‘building blocks’ that no one institution has 
the economic incentive to fund but that can be combined and recombined to transform service delivery.
• As the development policy arm of the USG, USAID can engage with policymakers to construct national ICT 
strategies that ensure interoperability, privacy, security, and best practice design of RTD systems. 
• As a convener, USAID can facilitate the multi-stakeholder partnerships required in-country to scale RTD systems. 
• As a leading development agency, 4USAID can model the importance and impact of adaptive programming. 
Digital  Technology 
i n  t he  Ebo la Response  
and  Recove ry  E f f o r t s
U.S. Government Strategy: Legend
Pillar 1:  Control the Outbreak
Leadership Acting Administrator Pillar 2:  Mitigate Second Order Impacts Pillar Goals OperationsPillar 3:  Coherent Leadership & 
Experts Group Operations Pillar 4:  Global Health Objectives Support
Coordinator Security
Field Operations
DART coordinates these 
Secretariat
Budget Media & Legislative GH
primary lines of effort for
Public Affairs Affairs Lead controlling the outbreak Incident Management 
System (IMS) & 
Support Coordination
DART, CDC
Private Joint 
Sector Grand Medical Logistics Forces 
Coordinator Challenge Response Command
Response:
Control CDC, DART DART, CDC, DoD
Outbreak Disaster 
Assistance Community Safe
Response Management Team (RMT) Response Team Care Burials
(DART) DART DART
Strengthen 
GHSA Health Preparedness Social Health Other basic Innovation
Health Systems Mobilization System needs Cell
& Comms Infection 
DART, CDC, DCARoTn, tCrDoCl , DART, DART
Mission Mission Mission Mission
Mitigate 
Secondary Economic Food Governance
Impacts Stability Security & Stability
Steve AFR/DRG/ 
O'Connell FFP/BFS CMM
Africa Outbreak 
Ebola Unit USAID Missions Preparedness & 
Training
For Pillar II – IV stel and team is primary point of Less Affected & 
coordination and support for Missions Unaffected Countries CDC, Missions
Helps identify innovative approaches and 
Data/ efficiencies in support of pillars and field.  Works closely with Private Sector Coordinator and 
Innovation Grand Challenge Coordinator.
Draft 03/19/2015
Lab Contributions to the 
Ebola Response 
Real‐time Data ICT Partnerships and 
Systems Innovation
✓ Led USG/partner data coordination ✓ Completed a rapid ICT/data 
assessment in Liberia, which laid  ✓ Helped stand up GCD in weeks, 
✓ Mapping of major HIS investments in  out a strategic course for Liberian  soliciting and reviewing 1,500 
West Africa government ideas from around the world
✓ Established a National HIS Technical  ✓ Draft Digital Infrastructure PPP  ✓ Managed 100+ inquiries from 
Working Group in  Liberia MoHSW fund concept note and SOW private sector 
✓ Detailed a data expert to the DART to  ✓ Communication and coordination  ✓ Collaborated with the inter‐
improve systems for: lab diagnostics,  with multiple partners within and  Agency to mobilize  private sector 
food distribution, social mobilization,  outside the USG regarding ICT  through a White House event
and cross border epi‐surveillance connectivity
✓ Drafted InterAgency private sector 
✓ Worked with UNICEF to broker short  ✓ Appreciation from GOL Minister of  fact sheet, and distributed to 
codes from MNO for two‐way  Finance and Development  100K+ individuals/companies
communications for Health Care  Planning for ICT Assessment
Workers
✓ Regional consensus around eHealth 
architecture—draft common standard 
for interoperability
Lab Contributions to the 
Ebola Response 
Timeline!
September 2014!
!
Asked to look into data 
coordination/quality!
!
Started 2x weekly data 
coordination calls with 
colleagues in the field!
Lab Contributions to the 
Ebola Response 
Timeline!
October 2014!
!
Published “Information 
Communications 
Technology Assessment” 
with NetHope!
!
Lab Contributions to the 
Ebola Response 
Timeline!
November 2014!
!
Data and 
telecommunications TDY to 
Liberia Mission!
!
Lab Contributions to the 
Ebola Response 
Timeline!
November 2014!
!
Data and 
telecommunications TDY to 
Liberia Mission!
!
Lab Contributions to the 
Ebola Response 
November 2014: 
Mapping the Flow of 
Information!
!
!
Epi-surveillance team!
Ministry of Health! 10 
Liberia 
DRAFT: For Discussion
How did this work in Liberia? 
Lab Contributions to the 
Ebola Response 
Timeline!
February 2015!
!
Data detail to DART!
!
Less about volume and 
speed, more about smart 
data coordination!
!
3 Areas of Focus for STIP 
Ebola Efforts
ICT Innovation & 
Data Systems Partnerships
Connectivity, e-
Real-time Data Payments, Grand Challenge & 
Systems for health Connections to Data Additional Innovation 
and other sectors Platforms, Human Approaches, Private 
Capacity Sector, University & 
Scientific 
Partnerships
Pillar 1
working with 
RMT/DART/GH
Pillar 2 & 4
working with GH, AFR, Missions, FFP, E3, CDC, private sector, and others 
Results Framework – Ebola Tech Response Team
Development Objective: Faster, more reliable access to health 
information and financial services for health workers and rural 
communities in the West Africa region
IR 1. Enhanced use of data for disease  IR 2. Improved payment systems  IR 3. Increased coverage of mobile 
surveillance and health service delivery  through mobile money (for health  networks to hard‐to‐reach health 
through real‐time data systems to of the  worker compensation and to facilities and rural communities areas 
West Africa region  support social mobilization) in the  in the Ebola affected countries 
Ebola affected countries 
Key Outputs Key Outputs Key Outputs
1. Regional consensus on cross‐border  1. Frontline health workers are paid  1. Appropriate microwave and fiber 
health information systems, data  their salaries, supplements and  backhaul linkages are installed to 
coordination, standards and  benefits on time and in a manner  ensure sufficient connectivity for EVD most‐convenient to them response and recovery
interoperability 
2. Institutional and human capacity of  1. Social protection payments to EVD  2. Critical infrastructure established to ensure the efficient use of existing 
health workers and managers in HIS  affected households and communities  broadband and telecommunications 
governance, leadership, and data‐ through Internet Exchange Points (IXP) 
driven management is strengthened 1. Full transparency and accountability  and multiplexor equipment
3. Key open source real‐time data  in payments to health workers and social protection beneficiaries;  3. Existing broadband and cellular
software platforms for routine health  networks are extended through local 
services (HMIS), disease surveillance  2. Foundation for a national digital  MESH network distribution
(IDSR), and health workers (HRIS) are  payments ecosystem is established 
interoperable to drive economic recovery and  1. Human resource capacity is 
integration across rural and urban  strengthened to manage public good 
4. Systems processes for gathering,  zones. investments and physical ICT 
analyzing, and sharing critical disease  infrastructure through short courses 
surveillance information (e.g., case  and longer term support to local 
tracking, lab results, contact tracing)  university‐based ICT departments
through the central MOH is improved
Guinea HIS/eHealth Stakeholder Mapping 
Government Donors
Bureau of 
Statistics USAID
Min. of Post MOHDept. of Dept. of 
Planning Human UNICEF& Telecom and ResourcesStatistics WHO CDC
CNDTI DNTIC Nat’l Malaria Control World Bank Global Fund
Program
ARTP Nat’l AIDS 
Regulator Control Dept of European 
Program Pharmacy UNFPA
and Lab Union
(DNPL)
GuiLab GAVI
CellCom ECOWAS/WAHO
Rio Tinto JHPIEGO
Orange BCG RTI
AngloGold 
Ashanti MSH
MTN Rusal CRS
Huawei Total Plan 
Ericsson Shell International
Samsung Hyperdynamics IntraHealth
ICT – Private Sector CSR (potential) NGOs
Mapping HIS/eHealth Platforms in West Africa
Mapping HIS/eHealth Platforms in Guinea
Platform Primary Purpose Lead Implementer
iHRIS health workforce IntraHealth
RapidPro social mobilization/youth engagement UNICEF
SMS communication between MOH and health IntraHealth, 
mHero workers UNICEF
Ramis HMIS aggregate service delivery data
for contact tracing during Viral Hemorrhagic 
EpiInfo7/VHF Fever CDC
Dimagi, Earth 
CommCare patient/individual data, contact tracing Institute
CommCare patient/individual data, community leader id Dimagi, UNMEER
Chanel supply chain logistics UNFPA
Call Center collect Ebola / dispatch center data eHealth Africa
Guinea HIS Architecture (Draft)
DHIS2 Aggregate
Interlinked Health Services Data Warehouse
Health Health Facility Terminology Management Client Shared Worker Service
Registry Registry Information Registry
Health 
System Record
DHIS2 OrgUnits
Interoperability Layer mSync Coordinator Messaging / Alerts 
RapidPRO
Laboratory LMIS mHero CommCare MELS U-Report
Information Pharmacy Health HR Point Of Care 
System System Information
Citizen Citizen 
Systems CHW System Access Access
Point of Service Applications
Guinea HIS Architecture (Draft)
MEASURE + GF/CRS + 
Interlinked Health Services PMI/Stop Palu
Health Facility Terminology DHIS2 Shared Worker Client Registry Service HMIS Aggregate Health Registry RegistryData Warehouse Record
DHIS2 OrgUnits
Interoperability Layer mSync Coordinator Messaging / Alerts 
RapidPRO
Laboratory LMIS mHero CommCare MELS U-Report
Information Pharmacy Health HR Information Point Of Care Citizen Citizen System System Systems CHW System Access Access
SIAPS/MSH GC/IntraHealth GC/Dimagi HC3/MercyCorps
Point of Service Applications
Early Lessons Learned
Data
• The overall response was handicapped by ICT Infrastructure
lack of reliable and comparable data with • Exclusion of the digital 
necessary geographic specificity infrastructure and systems 
harmonization as critical assets in the 
• Need to integrate different data systems emergency impeded coordination and 
for humanitarian operations in the effectiveness of the response
response with epi-data systems
• MNOs negatively affected by the 
• Importance of pre-existing networks and withdrawal of technical staff, and the 
relationships in the response, as crucial in rapid ramp up of the international 
moving quickly and getting a clear picture of response efforts (e.g., loss of revenue 
what programs are actually being due to economic slowdown and 
implemented on the ground increased operating costs)
Internal to USAID • Short-term connectivity fixes (e.g., 
• Duplication of efforts across external VSATs and BGANs in the ETUs and 
partners and within USG InterAgency can care centers) are at odds with long-
be managed,  coordinated or mitigated term government connectivity plans 
• Interface with OFDA given the newness of and strategies
the Lab and the lack of pre-existing 
formal institutional connections or 
relationships between the two entities
Next Steps in Ebola Recovery
Data e-Payments
• Facilitate the development and adoption of • Increase continuity of operations and 
common standards for software efficiency and reduce corruption and leakage 
interoperability to improve HIS data quality by deploying and expanding mobile 
and cost effectiveness by enabling increased, payments/ vouchers for HCW 
more rapid information sharing compensation and social protection in the 
Ebola affected countries 
• In a select number of West African Countries,
accelerate the integration and scaling of: real- Innovation & Partnerships
time SMS disease surveillance as routine • Measurably increase sustainability & post 
HIS reporting,  logistics data systems for key 2016 continued impact of Ebola programs
health commodities and two-way through private sector partnerships
communication for health workers
• Support Agency’s ability to deploy rapid 
ICT connectivity innovation approaches to improve programs 
• Increased last-mile connectivity in highly and solutions, and effectively collaborate with 
populous rural areas, health clinics and private sector and scientific/ university 
schools for improved ability to prevent, detect partners in our Ebola response, recovery and 
and respond to future epidemics resilience work
Digital Development 
Opportunities and Resources
Opportunities
• GDA Ebola Addendum – Annual Program Statement
• Paul Allen Foundation – Call for Proposals on Ebola Innovation
• Real-time Data Coordination Call (weekly)
Resources
• USAID Mobile Data Toolkit
• USAID Digital Financial Services Handbook
• USAID Mobile Data Course
• ICT4D Principles
