Five Years of 
Mobilizing 
for Health 
Impact
KEY ACHIEVEMENTS & 
FUTURE OPPORTUNITIES 
1
ABOUT THE mHEALTH ALLIANCE Since its creation five years ago, the mHealth Alliance has been uniquely positioned to  
play a catalytic role in the mHealth community. By forging cross-sector partnerships  
The mHealth Alliance leverages the game-changing potential of mobile technology in 
to spark innovation and collective action, the mHealth Alliance has helped to improve 
pursuit of transformed health outcomes for billions of the world’s most vulnerable people. 
health outcomes in low- and middle-income countries through the mainstreaming of 
To this end, the mHealth Alliance brings together experts from every sector — health, 
mobile health. 
government, technology, development — to spark new connections and drive collective 
action for mainstreaming mHealth. Hosted by the United Nations Foundation, the mHealth mHealth, perhaps the most evolved of the mobile or “m” services, has benefited from the 
Alliance’s founding partners include Norad, Rockefeller Foundation, Vodafone Foundation, efforts and investments of a broad array of players. From established technology, telecom 
HP and the GSM Association. The Alliance also powers Health Unbound (HUB), a global and medical companies, to start-up social enterprises, governments, multilateral agencies, 
online interactive network and knowledge resource center, and serves as a strategic partner A WELCOME and civil society groups, there have been countless individuals and institutions whose 
to the Mobile Alliance for Maternal Action (MAMA) and mPowering Frontline Health efforts have contributed to the rapid growth that has occurred in the past five years.
Workers. For more information, please visit www.mHealthAlliance.org. FROM THE 
As a coordinating body for the mHealth ecosystem, the mHealth Alliance has had the 
EXECUTIVE pleasure of partnering with and working alongside a vast number of these stakeholders. 
DIRECTOR We count nearly 300 organizations from 59 countries among our members, and our 
PHOTOGRAPHY CREDITS catalytic grants mechanism has delivered 26 grants to organizations whose work in 14 
Unless otherwise noted, all photos are countries aims to reach 31 million people. Alongside these community building and 
by mHealth Alliance. strategic funding activities, the Alliance has supported the mHealth field through capacity 
building initiatives, country-level engagements, strategic partnerships, and a robust 
p. 9: UN Photo Andrea Brizzi
thought leadership series. 
p. 14: UNICEF-Uganda
As we pause to reflect on the outcomes of the past five years, I am grateful for the 
p. 15: Interactive Research and opportunity that the mHealth Alliance has had to convene and help lead this impressive 
Development (IRD)
community, and I am proud of what we’ve achieved together. The stories you will read 
p. 24: MAMA
2 3
in the pages ahead are just a small sampling of some of the wonderful outcomes this 
collaboration has yielded.
While there is certainly a place for competition in any successful market, I believe that 
the progress in recent years has demonstrated the critical importance of collaboration 
and collective action—particularly across diverse sectors—in successfully and sustainably 
The progress in 
advancing an emergent field. 
recent years has 
demonstrated the As mHealth evolves, this spirit of collaboration must continue. This is true at the global 
level, where efforts to build the evidence base, establish standards, and develop enabling 
critical importance policy guidelines remain critical. This is increasingly true at the country and institutional 
of collaboration and levels, where a growing number of mHealth projects and programs are gaining traction 
collective action— and moving toward scale.
particularly across We truly have come a long way. We must now continue to work together to fully realize 
diverse sectors. the transformative impact that mobile technology can have on strengthening health 
delivery systems and increasing access to lifesaving health information and services for 
families around the world. 
Patricia N. Mechael
4 5
Today, through innovation and strategic investments, the 
Driving mHealth field of mHealth has grown into a mature environment 
where the benefits of using mobile technologies for the 
Toward Scale  delivery of health information and services are clear. Yet, there is much work to be done in order to fully extend access to health information for the many 
health workers and health facilities that provide services to the four billion people who 
WHERE WE ARE TODAY live at the base of the economic pyramid. The community must now focus on how to take 
mHealth to scale, both within institutions and at the country level.
Since its creation, the mHealth Alliance has spearheaded a number of projects, partnerships 
and initiatives designed to strengthen the enabling environment for mHealth in low- and 
middle-income countries. In a growing number of countries, once-fledgling mHealth 
projects are beginning to take root and achieve scale, thanks in part to mHealth Alliance 
funding, coordination, technical assistance and partnership support. Examples from 
Nigeria, Tanzania, and the UN Commission on Life-Saving Commodities for Women and 
Children demonstrate how the Alliance is helping to power this transformation.
SAVING ONE MILLION LIVES IN NIGERIA 
In 2012, Nigerian President Goodluck Jonathan launched the ambitious Saving One 
Million Lives initiative that aims to scale up access to essential primary health services 
and commodities for women and children throughout Nigeria.  The Government of 
Nigeria invited the mHealth Alliance and other strategic partners to work with its Federal 
6 7
Ministry of Health to integrate the strategic use of information and communications ENSURING GLOBAL ACCESS TO ESSENTIAL  
technologies (ICTs) into the ambitious effort to save the lives of one million women and HEALTH COMMODITIES 
children by 2015. Together with partners, including GSMA and Intel, efforts are already It happens all over the world and, sadly, it’s not uncommon. A nurse lacks access to an 
underway to develop an ICT framework to guide the use of ICTs in Nigeria’s health system. updated checklist for the use of resuscitation equipment, making it challenging to properly 
In the shorter term, the Alliance is providing coordination and technical assistance to a resuscitate a newborn. A community health worker lacks job-aids that would assist him 
broad range of implementation partners in three key areas for scale-up: increasing quality or her in diagnosing a child with pneumonia, making it difficult to achieve the correct 
and quantity of reporting by health care facilities through the increased use of ICTs; diagnosis and then provide the appropriate antibiotic treatment. In these cases, and many 
integrating mobile technologies into a conditional cash transfer program to improve the others like them, the delivery of life-saving commodities is stymied by a lack of adequate 
health of pregnant women; and harnessing mobile phones to improve the management of support tools for health workers to guide their use. 
supply chains for essential commodities. 
The UN Commission for Life Saving Commodities for Women and Children has identified 
ELIMINATING MOTHER-TO-CHILD TRANSMISSION OF this as a priority for improving the effective use of 13 essential life-saving commodities, 
HIV/AIDS IN TANZANIA particularly as it relates to reproductive, maternal, and child health.  The Commission’s  
overarching goal is to increase access to these 13 essential commodities for women and 
In Tanzania, with generous support from Johnson & Johnson, the mHealth Alliance is 
children in 50 of the world’s poorest countries.  The mHealth Alliance participates in the 
partnering with the Elizabeth Glaser Pediatric AIDS Foundation to provide technical 
Commission as a co-convener for Recommendation 9, along with the African Medical 
assistance that will establish a decision support and registration system designed to 
and Research Foundation (AMREF), with a focus on using mobile technology to improve 
decrease the incidence of mother to child transmission of HIV. The system addresses three 
health worker performance and accountability. The Alliance is also a working group 
key goals: to improve the quality of care provided to women and infants at reproductive 
member for Recommendation 6, related specifically to the use of ICTs for supply chain 
and child health clinics, including the elimination of mother to child transmission of HIV/
management, and is leading ICT-related activities as a member of the working group for 
AIDS; to enhance data collection for patient records, as well as monitoring and evaluation; 
Neonatal Resuscitation Commodities. 
and to provide supportive clinical care messaging directly to women, helping to reduce loss 
to follow-up.  
8 9
Global health challenges were formidable. Of the 
The mHealth eight Millennium Development Goals (MDGs) MOBILE PHONE UPTAKE RELATIVE TO THE GLOBAL POPULATION established in 2000, the two for which progress 
Opportunity   lagged the furthest behind were MDG 4, which 8 7.1 addressed reducing child mortality, and MDG 5, Population
7 which aimed to improve maternal health. 
WHERE WE BEGAN 6 6.85 Yet, at the same time the tremendous rise in mobile 
4 network coverage, coupled with falling hardware 
3
prices, was creating a unique opportunity for 
2
1 Mobile-cellular subscriptions technology-enabled health information and service 
0 delivery in communities that were traditionally 
2005 2006 2007 2008 2009 2010 2011 2012 2013*
Many of the activities that have occurred throughout the beyond the periphery of formal health systems.
past few years would have seemed like a distant dream SOURCE:  ITU World Telecommunication / ICT Indicators databaseNote: *Estimate To maximize this opportunity, the participants 
when the Alliance was first conceptualized in 2008. At the time, 
of the Bellagio conference agreed on the need 
the field was comprised of a few players who were fragmented and operating small-scale 
for a neutral umbrella organization to catalyze 
pilot projects. Knowledge sharing, an understanding of the value proposition of mHealth, 
collaboration and advance the use of mobile technologies to promote better health and 
and integration of mHealth with eHealth and other mServices was limited at best. 
wellbeing for the most vulnerable populations.  A year later, with seed funding from the 
At a Rockefeller Foundation retreat in Bellagio, Italy, during the summer of 2008, a group Rockefeller Foundation, the United Nations Foundation and Vodafone Foundation, the 
of global health and technology visionaries gathered to discuss how the exponential growth mHealth Alliance was born. 
in mobile phone uptake, including in some of the world’s most remote and underserved 
areas, could change the way health care is delivered. 
Graphic facilitation of the 2008 
Bellagio retreat.
1 0 1 1
Billions
Today, the mHealth Alliance counts nearly 300 member 
Transforming organizations, representing nearly 60 countries. Through its 
catalytic grants mechanism, the Alliance has supported 26 grantees whose projects aim to 
mHealth reach roughly 31 million people in 14 countries. 
To keep pace with the rapidly changing environment, the Alliance has adjusted its strategic 
Potential focus over the years. Its initial focus on knowledge transfer, open standards, collaboration, and best practices shifted, in later years, to advocating for and addressing specific gaps 
in the mHealth landscape, namely in capacity building, evidence, policy, standards and 
into mHealth interoperability, and sustainable financing. 
Alongside the focus on addressing gaps, the mHealth Alliance deepened its technical, grant-
Impact  making, partnership-incubation, community building, and knowledge base support. The following examples provide snapshots of Alliance activities with partners in some of  
these areas.
WHAT WE HAVE ACHIEVED
ACCELERATING CHANGE THROUGH  
CATALYTIC GRANTS  
To address the two health-related MDGs that lagged the furthest behind, namely those 
related to maternal and child health, the mHealth Alliance launched the Maternal mHealth 
Initiative. This program sought to unite ICT, especially mobile, with the expertise of 
maternal, newborn and child health practitioners. The ultimate goal was to reduce maternal 
and infant mortality while improving the health of mothers and newborn children.
1 2 1 3
As part of this work a groundbreaking partnership, cemented in 2011 with the A recent randomized study in Uganda 
Government of Norway, enabled the mHealth Alliance to host and manage a catalytic showed that strengthening accountability 
mechanisms can lead to dramatic 
grants mechanism supporting the scale-up of innovative uses of mobile technology to improvements in health indicators. The 
advance maternal and child health. study found that engaging citizens in 
the planning and supervision of health 
services, and empowering communities 
In addition to providing funding, the grants mechanism, which operates as part of the CASE STUDY 
to report on the quality of health services 
United Nations Secretary-General’s Innovation Working Group (IWG), supports grantees Empowering Citizens in their communities led to a 33% 
with networking and technical support from the mHealth Alliance and the World Health to Strengthen Health reduction in under-five mortality, a 20% 
increase in the use of outpatient services, 
Organization. The support is designed to help grantees expand their projects to wide- Outcomes in Uganda CASE STUDY data are available on age-appropriate and improvements in the quality of care 
immunization coverage, which assesses 
scale implementation, build their evidence base, grow partnerships, and transition to a Child and infant mortality rates are delivered after one year. Countering Vaccine- whether these critical vaccines have  
sustainable business model. Grantee workshops providing dedicated technical assistance improving in Uganda. Death rates of Preventable Deaths been administered at the right With funding from the IWG catalytic 
children under five fell from 152:1,000 
have been held in Ghana, India, Malawi, South Africa, and the United States. in Pakistan points during infancy.grant program for MNCH managed by in 2000 to 90:1,000 by 2011 and infant 
the mHealth Alliance, UNICEF-Uganda 
mortality rates declined to 54 per 1,000 With funding from the IWG catalytic 
is empowering citizens to strengthen Every year, 8.8 million children under 
live births in 2011 from 88 in 2000.
MNCH outcomes with two mobile-based five die – an estimated 17% of them 
grant program for MNCH, managed 
Despite these hard-earned steps forward, 
tools: U-report and mTrac. The U-report due to illness triggered by a vaccine-
by the mHealth Alliance, Interactive 
however, overall Uganda is not “on track” Research & Development (IRD) in 
system, which already has over 200,000 preventable disease. That’s almost 
to achieve the health-related MDGs. 1.5 million children who die each Pakistan is using mobile to deliver users in Uganda, equips mobile phone 
Key maternal, newborn and child health year from preventable disease. information and small incentives that can users with the tools to establish and 
(MNCH) goals remain unattained, with make a huge difference. Through SMS 
enforce new standards of transparency 
maternal mortality rates hovering at a In Pakistan, despite major efforts reminders and a lottery system with cash 
and accountability. The integration of 
near constant rate over the past five to improve immunization coverage, prizes for participants, IRD is seeking to 
mTrac, a data management system, 
years. low vaccination uptake and delayed eliminate vaccine-preventable illnesses by 
allows data submitted by individuals 
immunization delivery leave many increasing the full and timely completion 
Low transparency and poor to be delivered back to health facilities children vulnerable. Full immunization of the vaccine delivery schedules 
accountability are major factors that and health professionals using mobile coverage remains modest, varying among children throughout Pakistan.
contribute to poor health system phones. It also is helping to measure by province from below 40% to up to 
MAP OF IWG PROJECT REACH performance in developing countries. 
improvements in health service delivery.  
80%. In addition, limited programmatic 
1 4 1 5
BRINGING PROJECTS TO SCALE BY INCUBATING CASE STUDY  
INNOVATIVE PARTNERSHIPS  Promoting Healthy 
The mHealth Alliance has served as partnership secretariat to two major public-private Behavior Change through 
partnerships seeking to improve maternal and child health through community health MAMA Text Messages
worker support and direct citizen engagement. In this role, the mHealth Alliance has In less than two years, over 230 
provided strategic guidance, communications and partnership support to the Mobile non-profits, social enterprises, and 
governments in almost 60 countries 
Alliance for Maternal Action and the mPowering Frontline Health Workers Initiative. around the world have joined the Mobile 
Alliance for Maternal Action (MAMA) 
community by downloading and using 
the evidence-based, mobile-formatted 
The Mobile Alliance for Maternal Action (MAMA) MAMA messages. The messages currently  
reach more than 565,000 new and 
MAMA is an innovative public-private partnership that supports programs delivering expectant mothers globally.
vital health information through mobile phones to mothers in resource-constrained 
The MAMA messaging program 
settings in low- and middle-income countries. Founded by USAID, Johnson & Johnson, accompanies each mother on her 
the mHealth Alliance, the United Nations Foundation and BabyCenter, MAMA converts journey of learning and discovery and 
many of the simple health interventions that have been proven to reduce maternal and acts as a step-by-step guide to a healthy 
pregnancy and healthy baby. Mobile 
child deaths into informational text messages for expectant moms. Messages concerning Messages can be targeted to a woman’s phone-based health messages are stage of pregnancy or the age of her child 
birth spacing, regular antenatal care, exclusive breastfeeding, hand washing, and use portable, accessible, discreet and can so that the information reflects exactly 
be saved or shared. They can provide 
of insecticide-treated bed nets to prevent malaria are all behaviors that require the what she is experiencing at a particular information, offer support, dispel myths, time. This helps to build an emotional 
knowledge and willing participation of the mother, as well as other household and highlight warning signs and connect connection with the mother and a sense 
community decision-makers. Since its launch in 2011, MAMA has worked with local pregnant women and new moms with of trust, making it more likely that she will 
local health services. 
partners to implement programs in Bangladesh and South Africa, with plans for a third be receptive to messages that encourage 
changes in behavior. 
country program in India underway.
1 6 1 7
mPowering Frontline Health Workers  
A key barrier to achieving MDGs 4 and 5 is the severe shortage of trained frontline health workers 
and, thus, their lack of ability to provide quality and timely services to women and children. 
mPowering Frontline Health Workers, created by USAID, the mHealth Alliance, and a consortium 
of nine other public and private sector partners, was launched in 2012 to address this gap.  For 
an early example of the mPowering initiative’s work, we turn to India, where frontline health 
workers form the backbone of the public health system, but face significant challenges, including 
inadequate training, weak performance incentives, and inefficient data for decision-making. 
CASE STUDY bridge the gap in training and resources opportunities emerged for consideration 
available to frontline health workers. that map well to trends in other areas 
Assessing Health Worker 
of mHealth. These recommendations 
Readiness for Mobile  The delegation assessed what content included: 1) developing a standardized 
in India and mobile tools are being used process for the Indian government to 
to support health workers in low- evaluate and integrate existing mHealth 
In India, as in other parts of the world, resource settings; identified gaps and patient registration and monitoring 
mobile technology offers a revolutionary opportunities to support the scale- solutions into its national health 
opportunity to strengthen the capacity up of mHealth solutions; met with information databases; 2) establishing 
of health workers and improve the quality key government, public and private a pan-India platform that delivers 
of critical maternal and child health stakeholders; and investigated how to accessible, relevant and high quality 
interventions. In September 2013, team align mPowering’s strategy with national mobile content to health workers 
members from the mHealth Alliance, the and local priorities, needs and programs. for refresher training and continuing 
mPowering Frontline Health Workers education; and 3) supporting an existing, 
global staff, and Qualcomm Wireless Based on this work and stakeholder proven mHealth solution launch at scale 
Reach led a delegation to New Delhi, interviews with representatives in one or more states in India. 
India to explore how mobile could help from multiple sectors in India, three 
1 8 1 9
BUILDING COMMUNITY THROUGH MEMBERSHIP in Twitter conversations such as #MDGMomentum, an online effort to rally the global 
AND SOCIAL MEDIA  community in the final 1,000 days leading up to the MDG target date, and the online 
In 2012 the Alliance opened its door to membership, rallying a growing number of dialogue surrounding the Social Good Summit. The Alliance has also created communities 
stakeholders in the mHealth community together around the ‘Greentree Principles,’ a core on Facebook, YouTube, LinkedIn and Google+.
set of guiding principles designed to make the growth of the field as ethical, sustainable, Through new media, and through its efforts to engage traditional media outlets, the 
and equitable as possible. In joining the mHealth Alliance, member organizations agreed Alliance has contributed to a heightened awareness of mHealth and its benefits. The fact 
to principles that include: developing the mHealth commons through collective action and that three articles about global mHealth appeared in the New York Times in 2013 offers  
collaboration, openly sharing information and knowledge to promote mHealth, supporting one simple indicator of just how much more visible the field has become. The mHealth 
the collection of evidence, designing mHealth products with the end user in mind, and Alliance was quoted in or provided background information for two of the three New York 
promoting equity, transparency, and ethical conduct.  Today, the nearly 300 mHealth Times articles. 
Alliance members represent a diverse cross-section of sectors and geographies. 
The Alliance has also played a critical role in bringing the global mHealth community INCREASING THE KNOWLEDGE BASE THROUGH 
together through online channels. The Alliance powers Health Unbound (HUB), an RESEARCH AND EVENTS  
interactive network and online knowledge and resource-sharing center, which has more The mHealth Alliance identified the need to expand the mHealth knowledge base  
than 8,500 members. HUB offers its users access to 2,300+ available resources and, through early on. Since its creation, the Alliance has provided thought leadership for the field 
a partnership with K4Health’s PhotoShare, more than 18,000 photos. The Alliance has also through original research and analysis, by convening workshops, and by speaking at and 
initiated and led thoughtful discussions about key mHealth topics through its Communities organizing events.
of Practice, hosted on HUB.
The mHealth Alliance has played an important role in advancing dialogue and knowledge 
Additionally, in recent years the Alliance has promoted knowledge sharing and promotion sharing as an organizing partner of the annual mHealth Summit, the world’s largest 
of mHealth news, projects and research by expanding its social media channels. From 2012 mHealth event, in collaboration with HIMSS Media, the National Institutes of Health and 
to the end of 2013, the mHealth Alliance Twitter channel expanded from less than 4,000 the Foundation of the National Institutes of Health. This event has grown from a gathering 
to nearly 12,000 followers. During this time, @mHealthAlliance played an important role of 500 to more than 5,000 in only 5 years. In 2012, the Alliance founded the Global Health 
2 0 2 1
Track to incorporate a stronger focus on issues related to mobile health for low- and 
middle-income countries. The Alliance has also worked to include keynote speakers with a 
focus on global development issues.
The Alliance has produced more than 20 publications since its establishment in 2008. The 
reports profiled below are just a sampling of the deep research: 
Through new media, 
• An 8-part series on mHealth for maternal, newborn and child health (MNCH), including 
a Gender Analytical Framework and through its 
• A 4-part white paper series on mHealth for healthy aging, produced in partnership  efforts to engage 
with Pfizer traditional media 
• Baseline evaluation of the mHealth Ecosystem
• Sustainable Financing for mHealth, produced in partnership with Vital  outlets, the Alliance 
Wave Consulting has contributed 
• The State of Standards and Interoperability to a heightened 
• Patient Privacy in a Mobile World – a framework to address privacy law issues in mobile awareness of 
health, produced in collaboration with the Thomson Reuters Foundation, Baker & 
McKenzie, and Merck mHealth and  
• The Role of mHealth in the Fight Against Tuberculosis its benefits. 
• Preparing the Next Generation of Community Health Workers
• Barriers and Gaps Affecting mHealth in Low and Middle Income Countries, produced in 
partnership with the Earth Institute, Columbia University
• mHealth: New Horizons for Health through Mobile Technologies, first ever global 
survey on mHealth, produced in collaboration with WHO
2 2 2 3
Now that a number of key barriers that faced the field of mHealth at the time of the 
Closing the Gap Alliance’s creation in 2008 have been surmounted, the road ahead should see more focused, country-level efforts to take mHealth projects to scale in a strategic, impactful 
and sustainable way. The Alliance has already begun this work directly in countries like 
WHERE WE ARE HEADED Nigeria and India, and indirectly through the research, catalytic funding and community 
building activities described in this report. Increasingly, the Alliance will support mHealth 
at the country-level through its new mHealth Expert Learning Program (mHELP), which, 
with support from Johnson & Johnson, is providing active technical assistance in countries 
including South Africa and Tanzania. 
The innovation, strategic investments, market research, and tailored local development of 
mHealth projects must continue in the spirit of the Greentree Principles in order for the 
In the past five years we, as a community, have taken field to reach its full potential. The convergence of the mobile technology and global health 
tremendous steps toward realizing the potential of mobile fields has spurred considerable advances in efforts to achieve the MDGs by 2015. mHealth 
health to make much-needed health information and should be actively leveraged in the days remaining until the MDG deadline. It also should 
services available to people beyond the reach of formal be a major strategic pillar of the post-2015 global development agenda.
health systems. 
Looking back at five years, there have been challenges and learning experiences along the 
Mobile phones are delivering lifesaving health information to pregnant mothers, training way, but also key successes that merit reflection and celebration. The mHealth Alliance 
frontline health workers, enabling improved data collection and management, amplifying looks forward to carrying this momentum forward in collaboration with many of you who 
citizens’ voices in providing feedback on public health service delivery, and providing have helped pave the way for the future of health information and service delivery for some 
patient reminders that encourage healthy behavior choices that can both help prevent of the world’s most vulnerable populations. Together, we can surely make the next five 
and treat disease. The mHealth Alliance has been proud to support these advancements years as exciting and significant as the past five have been.
through its global work.
2 4 2 5
mhealthalliance.org
26
