THE LIBERIAN AGRICULTURE 
UPGRADING, NUTRITION, AND CHILD 
HEALTH (LAUNCH) PROJECT 
Monitoring food distribution and improving food security in Liberia 
LOGISTICS 
Implementation date: June 2010 to June 2015 
After nearly a quarter century of civil conflict, Liberia faces enormous challenges to increase access to food and improve nutrition 
for vulnerable populations. While malnutrition rates have improved slightly in recent years, a 2013 report released by the 
Liberian Ministry of Agriculture stated that almost 36 percent of the population is malnourished. Since 2010, The Liberian 
Agriculture Upgrading, Nutrition, and Child Health (LAUNCH) project has worked to improve food security and reduce chronic 
malnutrition of vulnerable women and children under-5 years of age, in  Bong and Nimba counties. The project distributes 
supplementary food rations monthly to pregnant and lactating women, as well as to families with children under the age of two.  
In order to create a cost-effective, efficient, transparent, and accountable supply chain that ensures only targeted people receive 
rations, LAUNCH developed the Beneficiary Based Commodity Management System (BBCMS).  Using the information collected 
during registration and after distributions, the BBCMS is able to calculate commodity needs for each food distribution point (FDP), 
as well as validating post-distribution stock levels. All data inputs to the electronic database system were originally paper-based, 
however significant delays in data entry, difficulty in implementing post-distribution verification processes, and monitoring and 
evaluation needs, led to the exploration of mobile-based solutions.  
About LAUNCH 
When new, eligible beneficiaries are identified, the LAUNCH While this transition facilitated a quicker and easier 
p roject seeks to have them registered in the BBCMS and registration process and improvements to the overall 
receiving their supplementary food rations as soon as program management, the point-of-distribution system 
possible.  Initially, the project aimed to deliver the first set of (including reconciliation of receipts and completion of the 
r ations within six weeks of registration. Yet the team was BBCMS reports) remained paper-based. This was time-
frustrated to find that wait times were well exceeding that consuming on distribution day, since it involved manually 
target—sometimes by two full months. The registration comparing recipient tickets with ledgers and using low-
 
process, initially paper-based, faced a series of challenges quality thumb prints for positive verification of recipients 
including loss of paper forms, slow data entry and poor either during or upon review of distribution. It also limited 
s upervision. In April 2012, LAUNCH transitioned to a the ability of the commodity management team in Monrovia 
mobile-based registration process that uses Magpi, an open to verify that rations reached the intended recipients.    
source mobile application, on Nokia E63 and E6 phones.  
 
50  |  mHealth Compendium Volume 4 
In March 2014, LAUNCH tested a two-part mobile 
intervention in a proof of concept study. First, the 
mobile registration system was modified using forms 
built on the SurveyCTO platform on Nexus 7 
Android tablets, to include a photo of each 
beneficiary and all alternate recipients to allow for 
photo identification.  At the point of distribution, a 
tablet-based system was developed and linked with 
the BBCMS to allow for photo verification of the 
beneficiary status and provide a verifiable record of 
the distribution process by replacing thumb prints 
with comparison photos from each distribution.    
Evaluation and Results 
The initial transition from paper to mobile-based 
registration system in April 2012 greatly improved 
overall program management and significantly 
reduced beneficiary wait times. In the first five 
months of implementation, the average wait time for new beneficiaries receiving rations decreased from 14 to 5 weeks. 
These shorter wait times have been sustained throughout the duration.  
In April 2014, new beneficiaries for two FPDs were registered using the new tablet-based photo registration system, and all 
previously registered beneficiaries had photos added to their records.  In May and June 2014, food distribution at the two 
pilot FDPs was conducted using the new system, demonstrating that the photo verification concept was feasible.  Food 
distributions have been halted due to the 2014 Ebola outbreak, so the impact of the new system could not be fully evaluated. 
Based on anecdotal evidence, however, the team feels that the revised system improves on the earlier version and is worth 
pursuing for future projects with a commodity distribution component. 
Lessons Learned 
 Fast data transfer has led to faster data processing, and faster Geographic Coverage: Bong and Nimba 
delivery of rations to new beneficiaries. Counties in Liberia  
 One-time data entry and logic patterns within the mobile 
application led to improved data quality for the project as a Implementation Partners: ACDI/VOCA, 
whole. Project Concern International, John Snow, Inc., 
The costs to achieve a high increase in speed and accuracy are and Making Cents International   
low. Funder: USAID Food for Peace  
 Photo verification systems are a promising new tool to ensure 
that food aid reaches the intended beneficiaries. Contact Information: 
ACDI/VOCA | Barry Elkin, Food Security 
Conclusion Technical Director (Belkin@acdivoca.org) 
Mobile data collection platforms can play a vital role in improving JSI | John Stanton, Global Program Manager, 
(jstanton@pfscm.org) 
routine programmatic functions.  For programs that track individuals 
over time, a mobile tool combined with a strong database can greatly USAID | Mette Karlsen, Food For Peace Officer 
improve efficiency, data visibility, and reduce leakages. (mkarlsen@usaid.gov) 
 
 
mHealth Compendium Volume 4  |  51 
