eLMIS Bangladesh
IMPLEMENTATION DATE:  2014 
Mobile alerts to increase reporting rates and reduce potential 
stock outs of family planning commodities 
The Government of Bangladesh has made noteworthy progress over the past decade in increasing access 
to family planning (FP) methods. From 2001 to 2011, the total fertility rate decreased by 23 percent (from 
3.0 to 2.3 births per woman), the maternal mortality ratio decreased by 40 percent (from 322 to 194 
maternal deaths per 100,000 live births), and the percentage of married women with an unmet need for 
FP decreased from 17 percent to 14 percent. 
As part of the FP 2020 global partnership, Bangladesh has further committed to reduce the total fertility 
rate to 2.0 by 2016 and 1.7 by 2021 by increasing adolescent-friendly sexual reproductive health and FP 
services to one-third of maternal, newborn, and child health centers. However, ensuring uninterrupted 
availability of FP commodities is crucial to meet these targets. Though recording and reporting on stock 
levels is a critical component of the supply chain management cycle, the linkages between facility-level 
information and national-level program policies and plans have traditionally been weak. Thus, accurate 
forecasting of essential FP commodities remains a challenge.
About eLMIS Bangladesh
E nsuring access to life-saving FP methods requires and accurate data is critical for making informed decisions strengthening the national supply chain system so that on FP commodities, monitoring performance of the supply 
quality products are available when and where needed. chain, and improving availability and use of products.
Since 2011, the USAID-funded Systems for Improved SIAPS developed an electronic Logistics Management 
Access to Pharmaceuticals and Services (SIAPS) program, Information System (eLMIS) that collects data on 
implemented by Management Sciences for Health, has been consumption and availability of FP commodities from all 
using  a systems approach to increase  availability of reliable districts and sub-districts. Data from service delivery points 
and timely data for decision making in Bangladesh. Available 
68  n  LOGISTICS
Management Sciences for Health
(SDPs) is consolidated and entered into the Supply Chain a significant reduction in contraceptive stock out rates at 
Information Portal (SCIP) that has an interactive dashboard sub-district levels (n=488) from 5.9 percent in August 2009 
presenting easy-to-understand charts, maps, and tables on to 0.7 percent in December 2014. At the facility level, a 
stock levels throughout the country. By and large, it was reduction of stock-out rates for implanon was also observed, 
assumed that increasing data accessibility would naturally from 69 percent in August 2009 to 1.0 percent in December 
lead end-users to review and act upon the available data. 2014. Finally, among SDPs, stock out rates for contraceptives 
However, the program observed that even a visually-engaging reduced from 1.63 percent in February 2014 to 0.28 percent 
dashboard with actionable data does not sufficiently in January 2015 for selected sub-districts.  
guarantee effective data use at the local level. 
To address this, SIAPS incorporated scheduled Short Lessons Learned 
Message Services (SMS) features and email alerts in SCIP 
to ‘push’ data to users, producers, and their supervisors. 
n Policy makers are proactively reviewing the SCIP/eL-
This system generates SMS alerts, sent in the name of MIS and tracking data in order to make evidence-based 
the Ministry of Health and Family Welfare (MOHFW)/ decisions that have a positive impact on the entire FP 
Procurement and Logistics Management Cell (PLMC), supply planning process.
which are received by users who might not be using such 
systems or might be more attuned to a reactive model of n This push notification system has been facilitating the 
addressing supply chain management failures rather than transition process for local managers from having a 
proactively preventing them. The alerts are sent in the “data producing role” to employing a “data use culture”, 
following instances: (1) Action reminder - time to report;  thus improving decentralized decision making. 
(2) Tracking report submission against timeline; and n This level of performance visibility also has profound 
(3) Alerts for potential stock imbalance/stock out of FP motivating effects in terms of recognition of excellence 
commodities. and transparency.
Evaluation and Results Conclusion 
Increased facility level reporting rates contributed to informed A systematic and functional national supply chain ensures 
decision making. Direct uploading of logistics data from the availability of affordable, safe, and effective FP commodities, 
Upazila Inventory Management System (UIMS) to the web- including contraceptives, at the point of need. This begins 
based eLMIS has improved significantly: from 49 percent in with sustainable, effective LMISs that make data accessible 
February 2013 to 98 percent in March 2015. This on-time to managers, ensuring evidence-based supply planning 
reporting has positively affected prompt decision making by of essential commodities. It is also crucial to analyze and 
managers at all levels. share available information across systems and stakeholders 
Improved logistics information systems have also contributed for improved decision making. This mechanism ensures 
to a more responsive supply chain. A pre-post analysis showed good governance and accountability and creates stronger 
partnerships among stakeholders. Improving coordination, 
governance, and LMISs leads to cost-savings, streamlined 
Figure 1. Percent of SDPs having stock-outs of FP-RH procurement systems, a responsive supply chain, and, 
commodities between Feb 2014 and Jan 2015  ultimately, increased availability of FP commodities, saving the 
2.0 percent lives of women and children. n
1.63% 
1.5
Actual % of SDPs having stock-out of 
FP-RH commodities
Geographic Coverage:  Bangladesh
1.0 Implementation Partners: Management Sciences for Health 
(MSH), through the Systems for Improved Access to 
Pharmaceuticals and Services (SIAPS) project 
Linear 
0.5 Donor: USAID 
.28% Contact Information: Mohammad Golam Kibria, Senior Techni-
cal Advisor, Quantification and HIS, SIAPS/MSH Bangladesh, 
mkibria@msh.org 
Feb Jan
2014 2015
mHEALTH COMPENDIUM  VOLUME 5  n  69
