The following SMS was sent 
to 46,000 U-Reporters: 
“Do you know how to 
prevent yourself from 
getting Ebola?” Out of those 
who responded, 38% had 
no knowledge. 
U-Report: Fighting Diseases Across Borders
IMPLEMENTATION DATE:  April 2014 to Present 
Text-based youth engagement tool with real-time data analysis 
During the Ebola outbreak of 2014, UNICEF identified a need to improve information communication 
flows between relevant government ministries and the affected communities. This need was identified in 
Nigeria, where U-Report already existed as a general SMS-based youth engagement platform, as well as 
in countries where it did not exist, such as Liberia and Sierra Leone.1
Once the need was identified, U-Report was used as an innovative solution that could be implemented 
relatively quickly and be community-led while supporting governments to combat the disease. In 
partnership with governments, the tool was used to understand knowledge gaps and provide necessary 
information to fill them, as had previously been done during Ebola outbreaks in Uganda in 2012.  The 
application of lessons learned combined with the improved transferable SMS RapidPro technology 
underlying U-Report enabled swift implementation.2,3
About U-Report
U -Report is a social monitoring tool designed for youth and  As of April 2015, U-Report has been launched in 12 other community members to strengthen community- countries with over 650,000 young people participating as 
led development and citizen engagement. It uses community U-Reporters in Burundi, Democratic Republic of Congo, 
communication to identify health needs, raise awareness, Indonesia, Liberia, Mali, Nigeria, Sierra Leone, Swaziland, 
identify health sector gaps, and establish a strong long- Uganda, Zambia, Zimbabwe, and Central African Republic.
term system post-emergency. It provides a forum for youth Application of the program to Ebola-affected countries  
empowerment, sends alerts to key stakeholders about the included a twin strategy: (1) Utilize U-Report in Nigeria 
issues being faced in their communities, and feeds back useful where over 100,000 young people were already engaged and 
information to the U-Reporters, so they are empowered to some Ebola cases had been recorded; and (2) set up new 
work for change and improvements in their localities. U-Report programs in Liberia and Sierra Leone, build a user 
20  n  BEHAVIOR CHANGE COMMUNICATION
Mark Naftalin
base (called U-Reporters), and empower it with relevant During the course of the Ebola efforts to date, over 320,000 
information to combat the disease. SMS messages have been sent aimed at understanding the 
In Nigeria, the existing U-Report community was engaged needs of young people and providing them with information. 
to understand the level of knowledge around Ebola preven- Over the same period, UNICEF has received over 86,000 
tion. For example, the following SMS was sent to 46,000 messages about Ebola, each one the voice of a young person 
people: “Do you know how to prevent yourself from getting contributing to a community-based effort to stop the disease.
Ebola?” Eight thousand people responded, 3,000 of whom 
had no knowledge. The results were mapped, providing Lessons Learned 
UNICEF and the government with an approximate picture 
of where knowledge on Ebola prevention was most lacking. 
n It is important to have young people write the out-
UNICEF was also able to assess which tactics the commu- going SMS questions so they are understood. In Liberia, 
nity thought were working best and worst in combating an SMS framed as, “Are you aware of the Ebola disease?” 
Ebola: 59 percent said raising awareness was working well becomes “do pple no abt Ebola?” In order to resonate with 
and that hand sanitizers had a perceived minimal effect. All young people at scale, they must be part of the process.
U-Reporters subsequently received advice on how to prevent 
Ebola from spreading. n Media-based recruitment activities will skew male in 
the aforementioned countries unless there is a strategic 
U-Report: Fighting Diseases Across Borders In Liberia and Sierra Leone, the approach was different as approach that targets gender-based issues specifically.the system had to first be set up and U-Reporters needed to 
be recruited. The UNICEF team, in partnership with the n It is possible to launch a program in emergency cir-
respective government ministries responsible for health, was cumstances and start engaging with communities within 
able to get the programs live within four weeks. This includ- four weeks.  
ed acquiring short codes, agreements with telecommunica- n While launching during an emergency is possible, and 
tions networks, coordination with ministries, staff recruit- sometimes necessary, having the infrastructure in place 
ment, technical implementation, and forming partnerships before a crisis strikes makes it more far-reaching, 
with local organizations.4  and therefore arguably more impactful, when a health 
In Liberia, the program is being used to deal with the impact emergency takes place.  
of the Ebola crisis on children as low school attendance is 
still being observed. Conclusion 
Evaluation and Results The key element that all U-Report programs have in 
common is sustainability before, during, and after a crisis. 
The programs in Liberia and Sierra Leone jointly engage over By approaching young people, mothers, and children as a 
33,000 young people, and there were over 170,000 U- whole, U-Report stays engaging and can be used for long-term 
Reporters in Nigeria as of March 2015. Liberia is one of the strategic planning by government ministries to strengthen 
fastest growing U-Report programs in existence with 20,000 systems post-crisis around a variety of issues. Involving young 
people signing up over a 10-day period in early 2015, demon- people at scale in government decision-making processes 
strating demand for the service that UNICEF has seen in other reduces the gaps between the voices of the people and their 
countries across the continent.  representatives. As a direct consequence, young people can 
have input into development planning, and in return receive 
Response rates remain strong, with 23 percent responding to important information that they need to fill knowledge gaps. n
the most recent polls in Liberia and 19 percent responding in 
Sierra Leone—both above the international benchmark of 15 
percent for response to quantitative questions. All countries 
have subsequently diversified youth engagement topics to work 
on areas including child protection, education, and fighting 
other diseases such as HIV/AIDS. Gender representation isn’t Geographic Coverage: Global
equal but is in line with mobile phone ownership. Where Implementation Partners: UNICEF
countries skew to over 60 percent male, the recruitment Donor: UNICEF
strategy for U-Report requires adjustment to ensure female 
Contact Information: Kidus Asfaw, Product Manager, UNICEF, 
U-Reporters have an equal voice.  kasfaw@unicef.org
mHEALTH COMPENDIUM  VOLUME 5  n  21
