Introduction	to	Mobile	Money	(Free	Self-Paced
Course)
Share	this:
 Tweet  Share 0  Share 0
> Introduction	to	Mobile	Money	(Free	Self-Paced
All	courses Course)
This	on-demand	online	course,	developed	and	delivered	by	the	Mobile	Solutions	team	at	USAID,	QED,	and
TechChange,	includes	over	2	hours	of	dynamic	content	informed	by	the	best	thinking	in	the	field.	Access	this	full
course	for	free	from	anywhere	with	an	internet	connection	and	anytime	no	matter	your	time	zone.
Course	Description
Mobile	money	has	the	power	to	do	for	entrepreneurship	what	commercial	banking	did	for	the	industrial
revolution.	It	can	accelerate	financial	inclusion	for	the	1.8	billion	people	with	access	to	a	mobile	phone	but	not	a
bank,	root	out	corruption,	and	empower	entrepreneurs.	Yet	despite	the	over	150	globally	deployed	mobile	money
services,	only	a	handful	of	these	platforms	have	reached	economies	of	scale.	USAID	and	its	partners	have	an
incredible	opportunity	to	change	this	situation.
This	on-demand	online	course	developed	and	delivered	by	the	Mobile	Solutions	team	at
USAID,	QED	and	TechChange	helps	to	ensure	that	USAID’s	programs	are	informed	by	the	best	thinking	in	the	field.
It	moves	beyond	“why	this	is	important”	and	toward	the	important	question	of	“how	do	we	implement	successful
mobile	money	programs.”	The	course	covers	topics	such	as	how	to	effectively	work	with	MNO’s	and	governments,
and	navigate	challenges	of	regulation,	agent	networks,	interoperability,	and	scaling	up.	Participants	can	expect	a
dynamic	and	practical	learning	environment	with	a	number	of	real-world	examples	and	case	studies.
Course	Methodology
The	entire	course	is	delivered	online	and	intended	to	be	taken	as	an	on-demand	learning	experience	that	can	be
completed	in	2	hours	in	one	sitting	or	more.	Content	is	arranged	in	the	form	of	slides,	videos,	animations,
interactive	exercises,	quizzes,	glossaries	and	more.
Acknowledgements
Many	thanks	to	Priya	Jaisinghani	(USAID	Mobile	Solutions),	Nandini	Hariharishara	(USAID	Mobile	Solutions),
Michael	Joseph	(former	CEO	of	Safaricom),	Chrissy	Martin	(MEDA),	Sarah	Rotman	(CGAP),	Camilo	Tellez	(CGAP),	and
Jordan	Weinstock	(Open	Revolution)	for	sharing	their	knowledge	and	experiences	in	this	course.
Technical	Requirements
Flash:	Flash	Player	10	or	later,	and	one	of	the	following	browsers:
Windows:	Internet	Explorer	6	and	later,	Firefox	1.x	and	later,	Safari	3	and	later,	Google	Chrome,	Opera	9.5	and	later
Mac:	Safari	3	and	later,	Firefox	1.x	and	later,	Google	Chrome
Linux:	Firefox	1.x	and	later
HTML5:
Windows:	Internet	Explorer	6	and	later,	Firefox	1.x	and	later,	Safari	3	and	later,	Google	Chrome,	Opera	9.5	and	later
Mac:	Safari	3	and	later,	Firefox	1.x	and	later,	Google	Chrome
Linux:	Firefox	1.x	and	later
Apple	iOS:	Articulate	Mobile	Player;	Apple	iOS	5.0	or	later	on	iPad
Next	Session
Introduction	to	Mobile	Money
Change
JOIN	COURSE
Platform	Screenshots

Contact:	techsupport	[at]	techchange.org
Terms	of	Use
Privacy	Policy
Policies
©	2012-2019	TechChange
