 
  
C hakruok Interact ive Radio Program 
 
B rief Overview 
 
Married adolescent girls have relatively poorer health 
and use fewer health services than their unmarried 
peers in developing countries. Improving their access 
to critical services, including those related to 
reproductive health and HIV, is still a challenge.  
Studies from around the world indicate that married 
girls are often isolated and have limited access to 
information in general. There is often a generational 
gap between married girls and their partners, making 
contraceptive use negotiation and the uptake of other 
reproductive health services difficult.  Yet, married girls 
often have sex more frequently than their unmarried 
peers, given the constant availability of their marriage 
partners.  
 
In order to address these issues, Population Council, through the USAID-funded APHIA II Operations 
Research (OR) Project, in collaboration with Well Told Story and the Kenyan Ministry of Public Health and 
Sanitation, designed and implemented a community health project that included a radio program with an 
interactive mHealth component. The goal was to expand access to reproductive health and family planning 
(RH/FP), as well as HIV information and services for married adolescent girls in order to improve their 
reproductive health outcomes.  
 
The project was implemented in Homa Bay and Rachuonyo Districts of Nyanza Province, Kenya, between 
2009 and 2011. 
 
  
 Geographic Coverage: 
 Nyanza Province, Kenya 
 
 Implementation Partners: 
Population Council through the APHIA II Operations Research Project, in partnership 
with Well Told Story and the Kenyan Ministry of Public Health and Sanitation 
 
 Funder: 
USAID 
 
 For More Information Contact: 
USAID  
 Jerusha Karuthiru, Agreement Officer’s Technical Representative; 
Email: jkaruthiru@usaid.gov 
Population Council  
 Chi-Chi Undie, Associate, Reproductive Health Services & Research; 
General Accident House, Ralph Bunche Road, Nairobi, Kenya; 
Tel: +254-20-271-3480; e-mail: cundie@popcouncil.org 
 
 9 
 
Behavior Change Communication 
 Chakruok Interactive Radio Program 
 
About Chakruok  
Well Told Story, in collaboration with the APHIA II OR Based on evaluation surveys, researchers noted that 
project, developed a radio soap opera series revolving there was a significant change in the following indicators 
around the life of a married adolescent girl, consisting of by the end of the project: 
20-minute episodes. The soap opera aired twice a week • Increased uptake of family planning methods 
in the evenings, along with a weekly discussion segment (including long-acting methods) among married 
exploring key educative topics. Entitled Chakruok adolescent girls; 
(meaning ‘Beginnings’ in Dholuo), the soap opera was • Increased support among partners for married 
aired on three FM stations in Nyanza province over an adolescent girls’ access to reproductive health 
eight-month period.  services; 
 • Increased attendance at the four recommended 
Text messaging and call-ins were incorporated into the antenatal care visits among married adolescent 
radio drama to encourage listener participation and girls exposed to the intervention; 
communication about the RH/FP and HIV issues raised • Decreased use of unskilled birth attendants 
in the episode concerned. During the weekly discussion during the last pregnancy among married 
segment of the radio show, some listeners who sent in adolescent girls; 
text messages or letters were telephoned for • Increased use of postnatal care services within 
interviews, and a pre-recorded interview with an expert 48 hours of delivery among married adolescent 
in that week’s topic was played. A Facebook page was girls; and 
also set up for listeners to explore the issues raised in • Decreased likelihood of worrying about being 
the show in more detail. Several times a week, different HIV-positive among married adolescent girls 
questions were posted on the Facebook page to and partners, and increased uptake of HIV-
encourage discussion and debate. testing among never pregnant married 
 adolescent girls. 
Leaflets referencing the radio soap opera were  
developed (in Dholuo language) to accompany the key Lessons Learned 
topics explored within Chakruok and to link readers to 
Radio campaigns built in synergy with multiple media 
the radio program. Each leaflet tackled a separate topic. 
channels can successfully be used to target hard-to-
Leaflets were distributed to married adolescent girls by 
reach groups, such as married adolescent girls.  When 
community health workers (CHW) during periodic 
SMS information is reinforced through other channels of 
home-visits, and were also mailed free, twice monthly, 
communication such as radio and IEC materials, they are 
to Chakurok listeners who requested copies, sending in 
more effective.  
their names and addresses via text message.  
  
 
Evaluation and Results Conclusion 
The combined use of this mHealth application with 
In the course of the radio programming, 3,407 questions 
community health worker visitation, health information 
and comments were texted to the Charuok radio 
provision, and referrals, is an effective means of 
program, and the Chakruok Facebook page had garnered 
reinforcing RH/FP and HIV messages, and of increasing 
406 Facebook fans.  By the end of project survey, study 
access to RH/FP and HIV information and services 
results revealed that 66 percent of married adolescent 
among married girls in rural settings.  
girls interviewed had either listened to Chakruok, or 
 
been visited by a CHW in the past one year. There was 
an increase in demand and utilization of family planning 
methods among married adolescents.  Additionally, 
support from partners of the married adolescent girls 
increased.   
Information was excerpted from: 
Chi-Chi Undie, Harriet Birungi, Francis Obare, Ben Ochieng, Wilson Liambila, Erick Oweya, Ian Askew, Rob Burnet, Bridget Deacon, 
10  Aisha Mohamed. 2012. Expanding access to comprehensive Reproductive Health and HIV information and services for married adolescent girls in Nyanza Province. APHIA II OR Project in Kenya. Population Council: Nairobi, Kenya. 
 
