International Civil Aviation Organization 
 
Technical Advisory Group (TAG) on the Traveler Identification Group (TRIP) 
 
 
 
GUIDELINES 
Visible Digital Seals (“VDS-NC”) for Travel-
Related Public Health Proofs  
 
SUMMARY:  A key challenge presented by COVID-19 is the need for global consensus on new 
approaches for issuance, exchange and verification of various public health status records in 
some instances required to support cross-border mobility of people in a facilitative way, while 
still ensuring appropriate risk assessment related to public health. On the basis of the field-
proven VDS-technology ICAO presents a solution which combines practicability, security and 
ease of verification re-using the existing e-passport trust model to address this challenge.  
 
 
 
 
 
  
1 
 
International Civil Aviation Organization 
 
Technical Advisory Group (TAG) on the Traveler Identification Group (TRIP) 
 
 
 
1.0 BACKGROUND 
 
The COVID-19 global pandemic has resulted in renewed emphasis on assessing an individual’s 
risk to public health as a key component in determining the ability to move freely.   
 
While mobility overall has been affected, perhaps one of the hardest-hit sectors is cross-border 
air travel.  The ability to restart this sector is highly dependent on establishing a baseline of 
predictability in terms of public health requirements for entry, as well as establishing the means 
for travelers to provide information relevant to their level of public health risk in order to gain 
entry.  This is a challenge that must be met by both industry and governments, both as it relates 
to immediate biosecurity measures (ensuring flights are safe, from a public health perspective) 
and admissibility (limiting public health risks at the point of entry).   
 
ICAO member states fully recognize the immense economic impact of the pandemic on the 
cross-border aviation sector, and the sector’s dire need for immediate solutions to address the 
specific challenges related to potential future use of public health “proofs” in the cross-border 
inspection context.  Industry and international associations like the International Air Transport 
Association (IATA) and the World Economic Forum (WEF), as well as other influential industry 
players, are proposing technical solutions aimed at meeting this challenge.  These organizations 
are also seeking consideration for use of COVID-19 related public health credentials as a use 
case for the W3C’s verifiable credentials standard1, which is not yet used in the global travel 
document continuum.  ICAO has considered these approaches and, along with the CART and its 
experts, assessed their viability alongside other possible solution frameworks, to arrive at 
recommendations made later in this document.    
 
As the science around assessing COVID-19 risk levels has become more precise and as more risk 
mitigation measures become available – including most importantly the roll out of vaccines 
deemed safe by public health agencies - governments are now collaborating on the challenge of 
establishing acceptable baselines for assessing public health risks in a variety of situations.  
Global standards-setting bodies, including the World Health Organization (WHO) and the 
International Civil Aviation Organization (ICAO) will be key contributors to these efforts, aimed 
at establishing global baselines for common approaches.   
 
 
 
 
                                                             
1 W3C, the “Worldwide Web Consortium”, is an international community where Member organizations, a full-time staff, and the public work 
together to develop web standards.  Verifiable credentials are tamper-evident credentials which have authorship that can be cryptographically 
verified – SEE http://www.w3.org, and http://w3.org/vc-data-model/ 
2 
 
International Civil Aviation Organization 
 
Technical Advisory Group (TAG) on the Traveler Identification Group (TRIP) 
 
 
ICAO’s Coordinated Approach 
 
The facilitative efforts of the ICAO, via its Council on Aviation Recovery Task Force (“CART”), 
have been underway since Spring of 2020, with the aim of establishing guidance to restart the 
cross-border aviation sector.  The CART has released two rounds of guidance thus far – the first 
round of guidance reflected the very early days of the pandemic, focusing predominantly on 
hard public health measures for aviation, like masking and sanitation.  The most recent round 
of guidance, released in November 2020, provided early guidance for states on the 
implementation of testing regimes as part of broader border and health risk mitigation 
strategies2.   
 
ICAO – Test Certificates 
  
The ICAO CART exercise has now entered its third phase.  One of the areas of focus for this 
phase is developing a global framework for the validation of testing records and or certificates.  
This involves 1) identifying the standard elements needed on the certificate 2) establishing 
baseline data components for verification, and 3) the technical means of conveying this data, 
i.e., the “token”, and the system to support its verification.  While this work is expected to be 
completed by the end of February 2021, the working group suggests that the framework 
specified may be valuable in the future as a possible starting point for elaboration of 
specifications for health related proofs that might be provided for under the relevant Annexes 
to the Convention on International Civil Aviation and/or the International Health Regulations. 
 
The WHO Smart Vaccination Certificate Initiative 
 
The WHO is also leading an initiative seeking global consensus on proofs related to 
vaccinations, having struck a team of global experts to advance its Smart Vaccination Certificate 
initiative.  The WHO has stated its intention to enhance security of paper-based certificates and 
develop a digital token, to enable improved safeguards against fraud compared to simple, 
paper-based health tokens (i.e. yellow book3).  To advance the Smart Vaccination initiative, the 
WHO, will establish core data requirements based on health care requirements first, and then 
develop requirements for a secure, trusted, and globally-interoperable token.  ICAO travel 
document specification experts are actively contributing to this exercise, where work is 
expected to be completed by the end of March 2021.   
 
 
 
 
                                                             
2 ICAO Doc 10152 – “Manual on Testing and Cross-Border Risk Management Measures” 
3 Officially known as International Certificate of Vaccination or Prophylaxis (ICVP) 
3 
 
International Civil Aviation Organization 
 
Technical Advisory Group (TAG) on the Traveler Identification Group (TRIP) 
 
 
 
2.0 A VERIFIABLE PUBLIC HEALTH PROOF - GUIDING PRINCIPLES 
 
Across the various fora of discussions, there are some common guiding principles emerging 
around a public health-related token intended for globally-interoperable use: 
 
 Impossible to produce without appropriate authority
      Fraud Resistant  Non-transferable between bearers
 Ability to authenticate proof to establish trust in the document
 Easy to issue
Convenient  Simple to present – paper-based and/or digital
 Quick verification for both users and verifiers (i.e., borders and air sector)
 Quick to stand-up
     Implementable  Usage of existing infrastructure, verifiable in offline environments 
 Cost feasibility for all stakeholders
 Should be usable in most environments 
Flexible
 Options for limited infrastructure (e.g., wifi, kiosks, etc.)
 Should respect privacy of users
Private  Avoid central data repositories (as they will be difficult cross border between countries)
 Protect sensitive personal data
 Should be internationally-accepted (i.e., examined in detail by experts worldwide) 
         Consensus-Based
 Interoperable with key stakeholders and their systems
 No inappropriate advantage is given to any supplier(s).
    Open Source
 Countries can easily build-into the system
 
3.0 EXISTING GLOBAL TRUST MODEL FOR TRAVEL DOCUMENTS 
 
ICAO, currently composed of representation from 193 states and key stakeholder international 
organizations (including, for example, the OECD, UNHCR, IOM etc.), facilitates collaborative 
efforts to establish baseline standards in many areas related to civil aviation.  One of those 
areas is the establishment of travel document specifications aimed at enabling both safe and 
facilitative cross border travel.  Here, ICAO, in close cooperation with member states and 
stakeholder international organizations, has a long and respected history of building member 
state consensus around interoperable solutions.   
 
4 
 
International Civil Aviation Organization 
 
Technical Advisory Group (TAG) on the Traveler Identification Group (TRIP) 
 
 
 
ICAO Doc 9303 defines global interoperability as: 
 
The capability of inspection systems (either manual or automated) in different States 
throughout the world to obtain and exchange data, to process data received from 
systems in other States, and to utilize that data in inspection operations in their 
respective States. Global interoperability is a major objective of the standardized 
specifications for placement of both eye readable and machine readable data in all 
eMRTDs. 
 
Over the past two decades, ICAO’s travel document specification work has focused on 
leveraging advances in technology to strengthen a travel document’s verifiability, through 
implementation of improved physical and digital security features, while still being backwards-
compatible.  The outcome of this work is that the cross-border travel continuum already has a 
trust model established for travel documents, reliable issuance processes, and an established 
means of document verification.   
 
This trust/verification model has been built around ICAO specifications for electronic passports 
(“ePassports”).  In the early 2000s, to combat fraud attacks on traditional paper-based 
passports like photo substitution and alterations to the data page, ICAO’s travel document 
experts began to discuss ways of leveraging technology to improve the passport’s overall 
verifiability.  The outcome of these discussions was based on what is now known as the TRIP 
strategy specifications for a passport including an integrated-circuit chip which, as well as 
storing the information on the passport’s data page digitally, also has digital security features 
enabling vastly improved document verifiability.  With ePassports, for the first time, verifiers, 
with the appropriate tools, had the ability to establish trust in a travel document using fully 
automated means, freeing up valuable inspection resources to focus on potentially higher-risk 
individuals.   
 
ePassports and Digital Signatures 
 
An ePassport’s verifiability relies on authoritative issuers “digitally signing” the data on 
ePassport chips they issue at point of issuance (resulting in an ICAO-compliant ePassport), and, 
on the verification side, verifiers making use of something called a public key infrastructure 
(“PKI”) to check that digital signature, thus establishing trust in issuance (authenticity and 
integrity) of the document.  In order to facilitate this verification by verifying entities, ICAO 
members agreed to establish a central repository of the information required to verify 
ePassports (NOTE - information in the repository is NOT considered personal information), 
called the Public Key Directory (the “PKD”).  ICAO’s PKD is complemented by national 
masterlists and national directories of the public key data necessary for verification of the 
ePassport, exchanged and shared.  Given the proliferation of ePassports globally, the majority 
5 
 
International Civil Aviation Organization 
 
Technical Advisory Group (TAG) on the Traveler Identification Group (TRIP) 
 
 
of States have invested in the sharing and acquisition of these certificates in order to verify the 
documents of those entering their territories. Thus, the infrastructure for ICAO-compliant 
ePassport verification is highly developed as a result of years of development and refinement in 
the majority of states.  In addition to the ICAO PKD, there also exist other technical possibilities 
to verify the authenticity and integrity of ePassport information based on the same trust 
network. 
 
In terms of issuance, the ePassport has become a global norm.  Approximately 145 countries 
now issue ePassports.  In terms of verification, ICAO members are beginning to realize the 
transformative benefits of leveraging the digital security inspection features of ePassports at 
their borders, through increasing use of automated border control, and of the ICAO PKD.  
Increased circulation/leveraging of ePassports at borders represents a critical step towards 
seamless facilitation of low-risk travelers.  
 
FIGURE 1 – ePassport Implementation – from Issuance to Verification 
 
STEP 1 – ISSUANCE - personalization, digital 
ICAO PKD signature of ePassport with private key by 
6
authoritative issuer
3
STEP – 2 – ISSUANCE – public key is 
2 uploaded by issuer to ICAO Public Key 
Directory
STEP 3 – VERIFICATION (ongoing) verifying 
authority downloads ALL keys from ICAO PKD
4 STEP 4 – VERIFICATION – traveler presents 
at POE;  automated checks performed on 
ePassport chip using downloaded public keys
STEP 5 – VERIFICATION – if chip IS verified, 
1 chip data can be trusted, traveler can be 
processed using facial recognition
STEP 6 – VERIFICATION – if chip is NOT 
verified, traveler referred to manual inspection
5
 
 
4.0  LEVERAGING THE EXISTING ePASSPORT TRUST MODEL – “VISIBLE DIGITAL SEALS” 
 
In 2018, ICAO member states endorsed a technology involving a simpler implementation of the 
same trust/verification model established for ePassport, called a visible digital seal (“VDS”).  
The envisaged use of the VDS was to add a similar level of digital security to non-chipped 
documents, with original use cases developed for a visa counterfoil and emergency travel 
documents.  The technology has, however, been applied in other real-world scenarios to 
preserve document security for decentrally-issued documents (See ANNEX 1). 
 
6 
 
International Civil Aviation Organization 
 
Technical Advisory Group (TAG) on the Traveler Identification Group (TRIP) 
 
 
The concept of a 2D bar code is already well-known and broadly used within and outside of the 
travel continuum.  The form factor of these codes can be anything from paper hard copy to fully 
digital (displayed on a mobile device), and they provide a way to convey basic data in a quick, 
optically-readable way, enabling a basic level of automation.  ICAO technical experts sought to 
advance a 2D bar code that is “verifiable”, by applying the trust model/verifiability established 
for ePassport to enable trust in the data’s issuance.  So, just as with an ePassport, the VDS 
would enable a verifying entity to both read the basic data, and verify to establish trust in the 
authenticity and integrity of the data.     
 
A key benefit of this technology is that it enables ePassport-issuing countries, 
as well as borders equipped to read ePassports, to potentially re-purpose 
existing infrastructure and technology to secure/verify other paper/hard copy 
documents in use in the travel continuum. 
 
FIGURE 2 – Visible Digital Seals – From Issuance to Verification 
STEP 1 – ISSUANCE - creation, digital 
ICAO PKD signature on VDS with private key by 
6
authoritative issuer
3
STEP – 2 – ISSUANCE – public key is 
2 uploaded by issuer to ICAO Public Key 
Directory
OR STEP 3 – VERIFICATION (ongoing) verifying 
authority downloads ALL keys from ICAO PKD
4 STEP 4 – VERIFICATION – traveler presents 
at POE;  automated checks performed on VDS 
using downloaded public keys
STEP 5 – VERIFICATION – if VDS IS verified, 
1 5 VDS can be trusted, and traveler proceeds to 
traveler management process
STEP 6 – VERIFICATION – if VDS is NOT 
verified, traveler referred to manual inspection
 
 
5.0 VDS FOR PUBLIC HEALTH PROOFS 
 
Now, in the context of COVID-19 and the resulting pressures on safe and healthy cross-border 
mobility, ICAO’s travel document specialists recognize that existing VDS technology could be 
leveraged for the use case of public health-related proofs, to facilitate cross-border travel.  
Technical requirements are currently under development for the public health proof use case 
7 
 
International Civil Aviation Organization 
 
Technical Advisory Group (TAG) on the Traveler Identification Group (TRIP) 
 
 
for a special VDS-NC4, which would satisfy most, if not all, of the guiding principles outlined in 
section 2.0.   
 
ICAO’s experts are focused on two related objectives for ALL COVID-19 related public health 
proofs:   
 
1) Standardizing the information available to the verifying entity when reading a test 
certificate, thereby assuring that necessary information is consistently provided and 
facilitating easy and quick reading under transactional circumstance (e.g. boarding a 
flight), and  
2) Building verifiability into the proof, to enable confirmation of trustworthiness and to 
safeguard against potential fraudulent use (verifiability for authenticity of issuance). 
 
For more on what a VDS-NC in the context of public health proofs “IS” (and “ISN’T”), see 
Annex 2. 
 
There is recognition among the experts that this pandemic has introduced new challenges into 
the existing cross-border travel system.  Therefore, ICAO’s aim is to offer a flexible set of 
guidance which serves not to replace, but to enhance, tools which may already be in use in the 
global travel document landscape, just as they have aimed to do previously with eMRTD 
specifications.  This guidance may also evolve along with the challenges presented as the 
pandemic progresses and in particular as border begin to reopen, but will always have the 
benefit of being anchored in the existing trust/verification model for ePassports widely used by 
issuers/verifying entities.   
 
Objective #1: Specifications to Assist in Manual (or Machine-Assisted) Inspection 
 
With the ICAO CART Phase III Technical WG having already approved the core data components 
for a COVID-19 related token for testing in the context of cross-border travel, mapping these 
data elements to the VDS (2D bar code) format and encoding them at the point of issuance 
would immediately assist verifying entities, as they will be receiving the information in a 
predictable, easily-readable way, just as with a regular bar code.  With VDS-NC, travelers could 
also gain the flexibility of many different form factors for presentation of their public health-
related data - from simple hard copies to digitally, on their smart device.  
 
Early versions of this implementation (for example, for testing) would see the VDS-NC 
embedded in a larger proof, which would also have primary presentations of the data (similar 
to the passport’s visual inspection zone), enabling fully manual inspection if necessary.  Digital 
                                                             
4 “VDS-NC” – a VDS which can be applied in a “non-constrained” environment, ie, where there is control over the 
amount of space on which to embed the VDS. 
8 
 
International Civil Aviation Organization 
 
Technical Advisory Group (TAG) on the Traveler Identification Group (TRIP) 
 
 
signing of the VDS-NC to increase verifiability in order to guarantee integrity and authenticity of 
the data should be considered by an issuer, but, for this first iteration of the proof and 
acknowledging time and resource constraints, ICAO will only strongly recommend the digital 
signature of the data. 
 
Objective #2: Specifications to Enable Verifiability  
 
While the WHO does not recommend that states require health related-proofs for cross-border 
travel, it can be anticipated that states, in support of efforts to safely reopen borders, will layer 
some level of public health risk assessment, potentially including presentation public health-
related proofs to border inspection. As the pandemic progresses, states may also begin to 
implement higher thresholds for trust for public health proofs.  This is particularly true for 
vaccination proofs, as these will be more enduring in nature than a testing proof, with a 
traveller potentially using one proof for multiple journeys.  So, while fraud obviously will exist 
(and already exists) with testing proofs, the risk can be contained to single journeys; whereas a 
fraudulent vaccination proof, if undetected, could persist in the system across multiple 
journeys.  This consideration may lead to more interest for issuers to ensure verifiability of the 
token, therefore requiring a mandatory digital signature of the data.  As in the case of 
ePassports, it still remains the responsibility of the receiving entity (State, Airline, etc.) to verify 
the digital signature.   
 
Specifications for a digitally-signed VDS-NC for the public health would see the equivalent of the 
Document Signer Certificate (DSC – for ePassport) embedded into the 2D barcode. The benefit 
of this specification is to enable the verifier to conduct offline verification, regardless of the 
format the VDS-NC is presented in (i.e., paper or digital). In turn, the DSC is linked to the 
issuer’s root of trust contained in the Country-Signing Public Key Certificate Authority (CSCA) 
Certificate5. The ICAO trust framework, however, requires only intermittent updating of the 
CSCA certificate. The CSCA certificate can be obtained from other States bilaterally or via the 
ICAO Master List, publicly available for download from the ICAO Public Key Directory (PKD). 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
                                                             
5 In the existing global trust/verification model for ePassport, a CSCA is considered the root trust anchor for 
verifying the data on an ePassport’s chip.  This CSCA normally is controlled by a State’s travel document issuing 
authority (“TDIA”).   
9 
 
International Civil Aviation Organization 
 
Technical Advisory Group (TAG) on the Traveler Identification Group (TRIP) 
 
 
Core Technical VDS-NC Issuance Requirements  
 
For the VDS-NC proposal to proceed, it is critical that stakeholders reach consensus on the 
following technical points related to VDS-NC implementation: 
 
1. The 2-level PKI model consisting of a root of 
trust (CSCA), a document (barcode) signer and 
a Public Key Directory. The CSCA does not have 
to be the same as for e-passports. 
 
2. The certificate profiles as defined by ICAO. The 
certificate profile guarantees interoperability 
and security across the travel document and 
health proof use case.  
 
3. The barcode signer certificate is stored in the 
barcode itself in order to avoid an additional 
repository.  
 
4. A standardized barcode encoding. This could 
be finalized at the end of the discussion 
process. Easy readability is key. 
 
FIGURE 3:  High-Level VDS-NC Flow 
 
 
Issuance Models for Digitally-Signing VDS-NC 
 
Given the work to build verifiability into a VDS-NC occurs on the issuance side, applying the 
ePassport issuance model to public health-related proofs could present unique challenges, 
depending on the State – for example, for proofs related to health, an issuing authority requires 
connections to health authority systems that may not exist now).  Despite this, ICAO will 
strongly recommend that States anchor issuance of public health related proof for cross-border 
travel to the existing CSCA for ePassport, which typically is controlled by a State’s travel 
document issuance authority (TDIA).  ICAO envisions two different models for issuance of a 
VDS-NC which is anchored directly by the TDIA’s trust anchor (CSCA). 
 
 
 
 
10 
 
International Civil Aviation Organization 
 
Technical Advisory Group (TAG) on the Traveler Identification Group (TRIP) 
 
 
FIGURE 4 – Centralized Signature Service (using ePassport CSCA) 
**note this image denotes a central issuance service WITH or WITHOUT a digital signature 
 
 
 
DESCRIPTION – MODEL - Central Signing Service (using ePassport CSCA) 
At the point of issuance (vaccination centre or testing facility) the personal data of the traveller 
are collected and combined with health status-related data elements (e.g. vaccination date and 
type) into the standardized data set of the public health proof. This data set is then sent to a 
central signing service which a) recognises the point of issuance as registered/authorized and b) 
creates the VDS-NC by signing the data using its barcode signing certificate. This could be the 
same barcode signing certificate for all incoming VDS-NC signing requests or individual barcode 
signing certificates per lab/institution.  The VDS-NC is then returned to the point of issuance 
(e.g. as printable graphic or .pdf file) and the public health proof is issued to the traveller as a 
human and machine readable printout of the public health proof and/or by digital means. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
11 
 
International Civil Aviation Organization 
 
Technical Advisory Group (TAG) on the Traveler Identification Group (TRIP) 
 
 
FIGURE 5 – Decentralized, Lab-Based Solution 
 
 
 
DESCRIPTION – MODEL - De-Centralized, Lab-Based Signature Process 
This alternative model, while still anchored by a State’s CSCA, would empower labs to directly 
issue VDS-NC at the time the transaction (for whichever service) is being performed.  Therefore, 
in this model, the State is not involved in real-time generation of the VDS-NC, but establishes 
regular pushes of the “document signers” to trusted labs, which are anchored in the State’s 
CSCA (trust anchor for ePassport).  In using these pushed document signers, the lab is able to 
establish a verifiable chain of issuance health the State.  This model might serve to reduce wait 
times for return of the VDS-NC to the client/traveller, and does not require a constant on-line 
connection to a central signing service.   
 
Alternative Issuance Models 
 
ICAO will recommend using the CSCA from the ePassport, given this offers the immediate 
benefit of making the verification process simpler for border systems globally, many of which 
already use the CSCA as a trust anchor for ePassport verification.  However, it is recognized that 
some States may find domestic governance with regard to using the TDIA’s CSCA to sign a 
public health-related proof challenging.  In these instances, States may need to explore other 
domestic implementations which still model the issuance of public health proofs for cross-
border travel on ePassport, but which potentially use a trust anchor other than the CSCA.   
Please refer to Annexes 3 and 4 for suggested Trust Anchor Models – Issuance, Verification.  
 
Fortunately, a VDS-NC based approach is inherently flexible to implement, offering many 
different implementation choices for States, depending on their unique domestic 
circumstances.   
 
 
12 
 
International Civil Aviation Organization 
 
Technical Advisory Group (TAG) on the Traveler Identification Group (TRIP) 
 
 
For more general guidance for states re Implementation of VDS-NC Based Health Proofs VDS 
Implementation, see Annex 5. 
 
VDS-NC Specifications Check Against “Guiding Principles” 
 
A check of a potential VDS-NC based solution against the guiding principles for a public health 
proof, outlined in paragraph 2, finds good alignment:   
 
 VDS would be populated with key data points and can be digitally signed
      Fraud Resistant  Verification of the digital signature would allow verifier to confirm data is genuine and has 
not been tampered with  
 VDS could be issued in many form factors, everything from a simple hard-copy print out 
to a PDF which could be displayed from a mobile device.  
Convenient
 All would be read/verified in the same way: read the primary data; and check the 
signature to establish trust in its issuance.  
 Issuance/verification infrastructures already exists among ePassport-issuing countries.  
     Implementable  Verification of a VDS could be supported by a global public key infrastructure
 Building on existing systems would expedite viability of implementation
 VDS for public health purposes is being developed to be independently-verifiable, even in 
offline environments.  
Flexible
 Options being developed to eliminate (or minimize) the need for a international 
distribution mechanism
 Data in the VDS will be streamlined, but will meet the data needs for cross-border travel; 
selective data disclosure is not an option
Private
 Limited personally-identifiable data, most importantly by linking the proof to an existing ID 
or travel document.
 VDS specifications have already been endorsed by ICAO members, and build on the 
         Consensus-Based existing trust/verification model established for ePassport
 Much work between border and passport issuers to satisfy requirements 
 Specifications for VDS are publicly-available in ICAO s Doc 9303, and are open for any 
    Open Source
vendor or State to leverage  
 
 
6.0 CONCLUSIONS AND RECOMMENDATIONS 
 
The COVID-19 is an unprecedented crisis and innovative solutions are needed to deal with some 
prominent challenges to facilitate the verification of public health proofs by airlines and border 
authorities. Ideally, such solutions would also be sustainable going forward.  
Technology based on ICAO (globally implemented) specifications such as the VDS-NC, applied to 
public health proofs, offers the potential to overcome existing obstacles to cross-border travel 
by air, while meeting most if not all of the guiding principles identified.   
13 
 
International Civil Aviation Organization 
 
Technical Advisory Group (TAG) on the Traveler Identification Group (TRIP) 
 
 
Stakeholders from international organizations, as well as the public and private sectors, need to 
work together to develop the capacities and protections necessary to ensure that the benefits 
of public health proofs are realized and be part of an integral and reliable immigration process. 
The ICAO VDS-NC should be an important foundation of success in this work. 
Recommendations: 
 While early focus will be placed on testing, States are already administering vaccines, 
with the expectation that these will soon be more widely available.  Now is the time for 
Member States to consider the appropriate policies and processes for issuance of secure 
testing and vaccination certificates which will be accepted as widely as necessary. In this 
regard, states should be regularly monitoring guidance from the WHO with regard proof 
of COVID-19 vaccination for international travelers6, which outlines ongoing 
consideration of COVID-19 vaccinations and applicable existing international law, 
including the International Health Regulations7. 
 
 Proactive adaptation of existing technology developed using open sources and 
standards – particularly the ICAO VDS-NC – is advised, as this builds on the existing 
global trust model for travel document verification and offers potential for 
interoperability and universal access, thereby also making health risk more manageable. 
 
 ICAO, with its partner international organizations and State representatives/experts 
from all necessary domains, should quickly agree on the key technical and governance 
considerations necessary for a robust, privacy-protecting credentialing system. 
 
 The WHO should work with ICAO’s technical experts and other stakeholders as 
necessary to agree on the data set to be encoded in a VDS-NC barcode.  
 
 Existing solution providers should work with policymakers and the technology 
community to align on standards so as to ensure that solutions meet global goals. 
 
 Member States, and their regulatory agencies, should now develop legislation and/or 
adequate regulation as necessary to ensure proper governance of testing and 
vaccination certificate systems. 
 
                                                             
6 WHO Interim Position Paper - https://www.who.int/groups/smart-vaccination-certificate-working-group) 
7 WHO International Health Regulations (2005) - https://www.who.int/health-topics/international-health-
regulations#tab=tab_1 
 
14 
 
International Civil Aviation Organization 
 
Technical Advisory Group (TAG) on the Traveler Identification Group (TRIP) 
 
 
ANNEX 1: Real World Use Cases for the Visible Digital Seal (VDS) in Travel Continuum 
 
Use Case 1: Refugee Registration Document (Germany, 2016)  
 
In 2015, due to refugee crisis in Europe, Germany 
decided to issue a harmonized document as proof 
of a successful registration to all asylum seekers 
arriving in Germany.  It carries classic security 
features and a VDS containing all the printed 
personal data as well as a link to a database 
containing biometrics. The project involved the 
rollout of 1,500 decentral mobile enrollment 
stations for alphanumeric and biometric data as 
well as a central signing service and was 
accomplished in less than 9 months. Data was sent 
to the central signing service, which returned the 
signed VDS to be printed on the document. After 
enrollment, the document could be authenticated 
by a mobile phone app, as well as by stationary border control equipment.  
 
Use Case 2: EU Schengen Visa (2022)  
 
In 2015, the new Schengen visa counterfoil format was introduced.  In the years 
following, after observing counterfeiting of the 
new format which was of increasingly good 
quality, the EU Commission and the Member 
States decided to update the sticker with the 
Visible Digital Seal (VDS) to protect the issuance of 
the document, prevent the use of stolen blanks 
and add a layer of cryptographic security to a 
physical document. The VDS can be authenticated 
online and offline using the existing ICAO PKI 
infrastructure in use for ePassports. All EU 
Member States will issue visas containing the VDS by May 2022.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
15 
 
International Civil Aviation Organization 
 
Technical Advisory Group (TAG) on the Traveler Identification Group (TRIP) 
 
 
ANNEX 2: What is a Visible Digital Seal (VDS) in the  
Public Health Context (and what it is NOT)? 
 
What it IS: 
1. The VDS-NC is designed as a specific token for cross-border travel, as an 
interoperable proof of health events (soon 
test, later vaccination).  
2. The VDS-NC is a digitally signed 2D-
barcode, to ensure the data is authentic 
and not been modified.  
3. The VDS-NC relies on an existing two-level 
PKI trust model as it is used for e-
passports since 2004. It consists of a root 
of trust (CSCA), a document (barcode) 
signer, a Public Key Directory and the 
document itself. 
4. The VDS-NC shall be easily readable by most barcode scanners deployed in the 
travel/border environment.  
5. The VDS-NC is offline verifiable, without the need for an online-connection.  
 
 
What it is NOT: 
 
1. The VDS-NC is not the primary medical 
vaccination document. This function stays 
within the health-related environment: 
vaccination certific ates will be treated and 
governed as health documents.  
 
2. The VDS-NC is not intended to replace any 
national/ multilateral vaccination 
document.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
16 
 
International Civil Aviation Organization 
 
Technical Advisory Group (TAG) on the Traveler Identification Group (TRIP) 
 
 
ANNEX 3 – Issuance and PKI Models 
 
PKI model A: Single CSCA for both travel docs and health proofs 
 The CSCA for issuing travel documents acts as the single root of trust for both 
travel documents and health proofs. 
 The document signers are specific for each travel documents and health proofs.  
 The certificate profiles ensure that certificates can be used for the intended 
purpose only.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
17 
 
International Civil Aviation Organization 
 
Technical Advisory Group (TAG) on the Traveler Identification Group (TRIP) 
 
 
PKI model B: Specific CSCAs for each travel docs and health proofs 
 There are specific CSCA’s for issuing travel documents and for issuing health proofs.  
 The document signers are specific for each travel documents and health proofs.  
 The certificate profiles ensure that certificates can be used for the intended purpose 
only.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
18 
 
International Civil Aviation Organization 
 
Technical Advisory Group (TAG) on the Traveler Identification Group (TRIP) 
 
 
ANNEX 4 – Verification Models  
 
PKI model A: Single CSCA for both travel docs and health proofs 
 Immigration systems import the CSCA certs as currently for travel documents.  
 They are then able to verify both travel documents and health proofs.  
 The certificate profiles ensure that certificates can be used for the intended purpose 
only.  
 Barcode and doc signer certificates could be downloaded from the (single) PKD. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
19 
 
International Civil Aviation Organization 
 
Technical Advisory Group (TAG) on the Traveler Identification Group (TRIP) 
 
 
PKI model B: Specific CSCA’s for each travel docs and health proofs 
Immigration systems import the CSCA certs for travel documents and for health proofs.  
They are then able to verify both travel documents and health proofs.  
The certificate profiles ensure that certificates can be used for the intended purpose only.  
Barcode and doc signer certificates could be downloaded from the (specific) PKD. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
20 
 
International Civil Aviation Organization 
 
Technical Advisory Group (TAG) on the Traveler Identification Group (TRIP) 
 
 
ANNEX 5 – Guidance for States re Implementation of VDS-NC Based Health Proofs 
 
A significant benefit of pursuing a VDS-based approach to provision of travel-related health 
proofs is the inherent flexibility afforded to implementers. Depending on one’s existing 
infrastructure and capabilities, the processes that one has put in place and one’s general 
preferences, different choices can be made that will reduce costs of implementation and 
operation while maximizing benefits. 
 
This Annex is intended to provide initial guidance to States to support decision-making. 
Different options for implementation by the various parties involved in an end-to-end process 
are listed. Additionally, checklists are included that States choosing particular implementations 
should consider in their rollout efforts. By comparing their existing capabilities and 
infrastructure against the requirements included in these checklists, States can identify the 
options that should be easiest and least costly to pursue.  
 
All choices made by stakeholders can be changed over time. Thus, the operational models that 
States choose might evolve. A State might decide to update its processes in order to issue 
digitally signed VDS-NC barcodes rather than unsigned barcodes once its capabilities aligned 
with those listed in the first column of Table A1 below, for example.  
 
It is emphasized that States can implement different processes and make different decisions at 
different locations within their territory. This could be exemplified with the task of verification 
of VDS-NC based health proofs, for example, where airports with existing barcode readers 
integrated into their physical infrastructure might choose to make use of these devices whereas 
other (typically smaller) locations might simply deploy hand-held devices to appropriate staff 
for barcode reading and/or verification.    
 
It is noted that the content presented is not exhaustive. Only the main dimensions of decision-
making are presented. Furthermore, while a variety of implementation options are examined, 
States may identify additional possibilities that they deem more appropriate based on their 
own circumstances.   
 
A) Guidance for issuance of VDS-NC based health proofs 
 
Figures 3 and 4 in this paper highlight that different entities may manage the issuance of VDS-
NC based health proofs in any region or state. Choices can also be made in terms of whether 
proofs including the VDS-NC barcode are issued on paper or in digital format, and whether the 
barcode is digitally signed (as strongly recommended above) or not. If the barcode is to be 
digitally signed, the State will have to define then the appropriate trust anchors within the 
public key infrastructure being used. These dimensions of optionality are highlighted in Figure 
A.1. 
21 
 
International Civil Aviation Organization 
 
Technical Advisory Group (TAG) on the Traveler Identification Group (TRIP) 
 
 
 
 
 
(If the VDS-NC is to be signed) 
 
 
 
Figure A.1. The main choices that States should make regarding issuance of VDS-NC based 
travel proofs 
 
The following checklists list the main steps that implementers will have to undertake for 
issuance according to the choices made. As there is extensive interdependencies between the 
choice of issuing entity and any decision to digitally sign the VDS-NC, these choices are 
considered in combination. 
 
 
22 
 
International Civil Aviation Organization 
 
Technical Advisory Group (TAG) on the Traveler Identification Group (TRIP) 
 
 
 
 Digitally sign the VDS-NC Encode data without signature 
Issuance at This setup requires appropriate security to 1. The health centre must have 
the testing protect private keys used for signature. It would access to the necessary IT 
normally not be a prudent approach unless 
location infrastructure, which will include 
testing is undertaken in larger, centralized a standard computer terminal or 
locations. 
other digital device with the 
  necessary software for preparing 
1. The health centre must have access to the VDS-NC barcode from data 
the necessary IT infrastructure, which input in accordance with the 
will include a Hardware Security Technical Report (all data 
Module for secure private key storage required in the dataset). 
and a standard computer terminal with  
the necessary software for preparing 
the VDS-NC barcode from data input in 
accordance with the Technical Report 
(all data required in the dataset). 
2. The health centre must have 
appropriate physical security at the test 
site to protect this IT infrastructure.  
3. Organizational arrangements must be 
in place so that the health centre can 
obtain barcode signers from the central 
trust authority (Figure A.3) for use. 
Issuance by a At least two processes can be envisaged – A) At least two processes can be envisaged 
centralized issuance by the centralized entity based on – A) issuance by the centralized entity 
electronic data exchanged with the health based on electronic data exchanged with 
entity 
centre; or B) issuance based on a paper the health centre; or B) issuance based 
document provided by the health centre on a paper document provided by the 
 health centre. It may be noted, 
A) nevertheless, that this latter two-step 
1. An electronic connection must exist process might be considered excessively 
between the health centre and the laborious for production of a document 
centralized issuing entity (e.g. a of limited security. 
dedicated data transfer tool; secure  
email) that the health centre will use A) 
for trusted transfer of the necessary 1. An electronic connection must be 
data for VDS-NC issuance. in place between the health 
2. Organizational arrangements must be in centre and centralized issuing 
place so that the centralized issuer can entity (e.g. a dedicated data 
obtain barcode signers from the central transfer tool; email) that the 
trust authority.  The State must ensure health centre will use for transfer 
that the issuer has appropriate IT of the necessary data for VDS-NC 
capabilities and security measures in issuance. 
place (it would normally be the case 
23 
 
International Civil Aviation Organization 
 
Technical Advisory Group (TAG) on the Traveler Identification Group (TRIP) 
 
 
that an entity that already engages in 2. The process for return of the 
secure electronic document issuance barcode to the subject will need 
fulfil this role, implying the existence of to be defined (e.g. through an 
necessary IT capabilities and knowledge email provided by the test 
and implementation of necessary centre). 
security measures). B)  
3. Processes must be defined for return of 1. The centralized issuer must be 
the signed barcode to the test subject familiar with the paper certificates 
(e.g. through an email provided by the issued by the health centres in its 
test centre). region.  
B) 2. Procedures must be in place that 
1. The centralized issuer must be familiar allow the intending traveler to 
with the paper certificates issued by present the paper certificate to the 
the health centres in its region. Ideally, centralized issuer in person in 
the certificates will incorporate order to obtain a VDS-NC 
appropriate secure features to assure (unsigned). 
authenticity and prevent tampering. 
2. Procedures must be in place that allow 
the intending traveler to present the 
paper certificate to the centralized 
issuer in person in order to obtain a 
VDS-NC. 
3. Organizational arrangements must be in 
place so that the centralized issuer can 
obtain barcode signers from the central 
trust authority and ensure that the 
issuer has appropriate IT capabilities 
and security measures in place (it 
would normally be the case that an 
entity that already engages in secure 
electronic document issuance fulfil this 
role, implying the existence of 
necessary IT capabilities and knowledge 
and implementation of necessary 
security measures). 
4. Processes must be defined for return of 
the signed barcode to the travelling 
subject (e.g. through an email provided 
by the traveler). 
 
 
 
 
 
24 
 
International Civil Aviation Organization 
 
Technical Advisory Group (TAG) on the Traveler Identification Group (TRIP) 
 
 
Table A1. Checklists for implementation with different issuing entities and with both digitally 
signed and unsigned VDS-NC barcodes 
 
Provide a printed proof 1. The entity in contact with the intending 
traveler (this will be the health centre in 
all cases except that of issuance by a 
central entity based on a paper 
document provided by the health centre) 
must have a locally available printer of 
sufficient quality. Suggested 
specifications are provided in section 2.1 
of Part 13 of ICAO Doc9303. 
Provide a digital file Two possibilities are foreseen: 
a. The email address of the intending 
traveler is included in the dataset 
provided. The procedures must be 
defined to ensure sending of the file by 
either the centralized entity or the health 
centre. This option is feasible irrespective 
of the issuer. 
OR 
b. The centralized entity has an established 
online portal for receipt of requests for 
VDS-NC. The intending traveler receives 
the digital file through this portal 
following request submission, based on 
data shared by the health centre with the 
centralized entity. This option is only 
envisaged in the case of centralized 
issuance. 
 
***ICAO recommends consideration to provide 
both of the above formats, digital and printout.  
Partner with an external app provider 1. A secure electronic connection is in place 
for the submission of data from the 
health centre to the app provider. 
2. The health centre enrolls all data 
foreseen in the established dataset and 
submits it to the app provider. 
3. The app has the necessary capabilities to 
encode the data in a VDS-NC and make 
the barcode associated with the 
intending traveler available to him/her 
within app. 
25 
 
International Civil Aviation Organization 
 
Technical Advisory Group (TAG) on the Traveler Identification Group (TRIP) 
 
 
(If the VDS-NC is to be digitally signed) 
4. The app developer has the appropriate 
agreements in place with State 
authorities in order to obtain the 
necessary barcode signer private key. 
 
Table A2. Checklists for implementation with different media for issuance 
Use the travel document CSCA 1. Necessary agreements and arrangements 
are in place between the Central Signing 
Certificate Authority associated with the 
State’s travel documents and the entity (-
ies) issuing the VDS-NC barcodes for the 
signing of Certificate Signing Requests 
submitted by the issuing entity (-ies) 
using the CSCA private key. 
Note. These agreements should include, inter alia, 
detail on the private key usage periods that will 
define the regularity of new barcode signer 
certificate issuance and the definition of 
communication focal points for regular liaison in 
case of need, e.g. should certificate revocation 
become necessary. 
Use a trust anchor established within the 1. Necessary agreements and arrangements 
health domain in the State are in place between the trust anchor 
authority and the entity (-ies) issuing the 
VDS-NC barcodes for the signing of 
Certificate Signing Requests submitted by 
the issuing entity (-ies) using the CSCA 
private key. 
 Note. These agreements should include, inter 
alia, detail on the private key usage periods that 
will define the regularity of new barcode signer 
certificate issuance and the definition of 
communication focal points for regular liaison in 
case of need, e.g. should certificate revocation 
become necessary. 
2. Arrangements are in place for the 
necessary sharing of the public keys 
associated with the PKI with all verifying 
entities. Appropriate distribution 
mechanisms, as per the Technical Report, 
include bilateral exchange and sharing 
through the ICAO Public Key Directory. 
 
26 
 
International Civil Aviation Organization 
 
Technical Advisory Group (TAG) on the Traveler Identification Group (TRIP) 
 
 
 
Table A3. Checklists for implementation with different trust anchors of the Public Key 
Infrastructure used 
 
B) Guidance for reading/verification of VDS-NC based health proofs 
 
A number of different parties will normally be involved in the reading and/or verification of 
VDS-NC based health proofs, both around the point of departure and arrival. At departure, 
carriers are frequently required to ascertain the health status of the intending traveller and 
his/her compliance with the rules for entry into the State of destination. The authorities of the 
State of destination, meanwhile, will normally want to confirm such compliance. Authorities 
might include those involved in immigration, customs and public health monitoring. Reading of 
the VDS-NC barcode should provide the necessary data in all cases, with verification confirming 
the veracity and integrity of that data. 
 
These parties will need to make choices as to the equipment that they use for reading. State 
authorities will normally wish to verify the data to the greatest extent feasible. Private sector 
entities may choose to do so, particularly if required by the relevant legal or administrative 
frameworks in place. Figure A2 depicts these two main dimensions of choice on the 
reading/verification side. 
 
 
 
Figure A2. The main choices that verifying entities will have to make 
 
 
 
 
27 
 
International Civil Aviation Organization 
 
Technical Advisory Group (TAG) on the Traveler Identification Group (TRIP) 
 
 
 
The following checklists list the main steps that implementers will have to undertake for 
reading and verification according to the choices made. 
 
Use integrated barcode readers 1. Visible light barcode readers are in place 
at the points of check, e.g. in boarding 
gates, e-gates, kiosks etc. 
2. The barcode readers are connected to IT 
equipment necessary to decode the data 
presented in the format defined in the 
accompanying Technical Reports. 
Use standalone devices 1. All appropriate parties have easy access 
to standalone smartphone or tablet 
devices with an integrated camera and an 
appropriate reading and barcode 
decoding app installed.  
Note. Suitable apps are available for public 
download from app libraries. 
Accept data obtained externally 1. Secure portals are established for the 
purpose of enrolling health-related data 
in the context of travel. 
Note. A typical case might involve a State 
establishing an online portal for use by those 
travelling to that State. The traveler will provide 
all necessary data in advance of their travel. 
Provision might include the intending traveler 
scanning the VDS-NC barcode using his/her device 
in order to provide the necessary data in a secure, 
efficient and error-reducing manner. 
2. All parties have access to the relevant 
data obtained from these portals in order 
to execute the health-related tasks 
requested of them.  
 
Table A4. Checklists for different data attainment possibilities based on VDS-NC based health 
proofs 
 
Verify the digital signature 1. The IT system connected to the data 
attainment device (Table A4) has access 
to the appropriate barcode signer public 
key (obtained from a different source 
than the key stored in the barcode itself), 
28 
 
International Civil Aviation Organization 
 
Technical Advisory Group (TAG) on the Traveler Identification Group (TRIP) 
 
 
CSCA public key and/or other trust 
anchor public key. 
2. The system can accomplish digital 
signature verification based on the 
protocols defined in the accompanying 
Technical Reports. 
Accept reading without signature No additional steps required beyond those in 
verification Table A4.  
 
Table A5. Checklist for digital signature verification of VDS-NC based health proofs 
29 
 
