TC430:	Instructional	Design	with	Articulate	360	(In
Person	Workshop)
Share	this:
 Tweet  Share 0  Share 0
> TC430:	Instructional	Design	with	Articulate	360	(In	Person
All	courses Workshop)
 	$395.00
 	1	day
Do	you	want	to	learn	how	to	build	online	learning	modules	like	the	pros?	This	one-day	workshop	will	help	you
advance	your	Articulate	abilities	and	allow	you	to	do	new	things	you	never	thought	possible	with	the	software!
TechChange	has	used	Storyline	(and	now	Articulate	360)	to	author	dozens	of	engaging	and	beautiful	online
courses	for	clients	including	UNICEF,	USAID,	World	Bank,	Hilton	Hotels,	International	Youth	Foundation	and	more.
You	can	see	examples	of	our	Storyline	work	below:
UNICEF	-	Introduction	to	RapidPro
USAID	-	Mobile	Data	Solutions
World	Bank	-	Trade	in	Africa
State	Department:	Religion	and	Conflict
Workshop	Objectives
At	the	conclusion	of	this	workshop,	participants	will	be	able	to:
Understand	how	to	take	existing	content	and	translate	it	to	online
Understand	how	to	work	effectively	with	subject	matters	experts
Design	storyboards	and	scripts	based	on	tested	techniques
Apply	techniques	to	create	new	types	of	slide	interactions
Create	interactive	content	with	re-usable,	interactive	models
Space	is	limited	to	10	people	so	reserve	your	spot	today!
Pricing
$395	for	one	day	workshop,	including	lunch
$995	for	individual	one-on-one	workshop	tailored	to	your	needs	and	built	around	your	schedule
Group	discount	rates	available.	For	more	details,	please	contact	us	at	social	[at]	techchange.org.	If	you	are	not
happy	with	your	course	experience	for	any	reason,	TechChange	is	happy	to	discuss	refunds.
Next	Session
None	upcoming...
Change
Details
Workshop	Location:	2001	13th	St	NW,	Washington,	DC	20009
Tech	requirements:	Bring	your	laptop	with	Articulate	360	trial	or	full	version	installed.	If	you	don’t	have	a	license
TechChange	will	help	you	get	set	up	with	one!
Prerequisites:	No	previous	experience	or	graphic	design	skills	needed!
Food:	Lunch	is	included
Dates	don’t	work?	Email	us	about	scheduling	a	one-on-one	workshop	at	social@techchange.org
On-site	or	online	team	training:	Want	us	to	train	your	team?	We	provide	a	range	of	options	for	custom	in-person
and	online	training.	Email	us	to	start	the	conversation	at	social@techchange.org.
Contact:	techsupport	[at]	techchange.org
Terms	of	Use
Privacy	Policy
Policies
©	2012-2019	TechChange
