THE REFERRAL EXCHANGE SYSTEM 
(SIJARIEMAS) 
Reducing obstetric and newborn emergencies through the use of information 
and communication technologies in Indonesia 
SERVICE DELIVERY 
Implementation date: 2011 to 2016 
Indonesia’s maternal mortality rate (359 maternal deaths per 100,000 births) is one of the highest in South East Asia1. In the 
event of an obstetric or newborn emergency, an efficient patient referral system between health centers and hospitals can save 
lives. The current referral system in Indonesia has bottlenecks, delaying care for both pregnant women and newborns. Challenges 
include delays in patients seeking care, in patients being referred, and in providing adequate care to patients.  Poor coordination 
and communication between facilities and health providers is a major factor that contributes to delays. In addition, most health 
facilities and hospitals are frequently ill-prepared to manage incoming emergencies, sometimes resulting in patients being referred 
to multiple hospitals before receiving treatment.  
About SIJARIEMAS 
The SIJARIEMAS system was developed to address those the referral. If accepted, the incoming referral notification is 
c hallenges by facilitating timely communication and improved automatically forwarded to the emergency team so they will 
coordination within an agreed upon referral network (public be prepared to receive incoming referral with specific 
and private facilities and health providers). The system complication/diagnosis. The midwife who initiated the 
u tilizes SMS, internet and phone calls to initiate and manage referral, will then receive SMS confirmation about the 
the referral process. Upon identifying an obstetric or destination hospital and the stabilization advice from 
newborn emergency, a health center-based midwife sends an specialist. If rejected, the system automatically routes the 
 
SMS with patient data, vital-signs, diagnosis and pre- message to the next closest, pre-selected hospital.  During 
treatment information to the SIJARIEMAS system.  The the process, the midwife of the referred patient will receive 
s ystem automatically routes the information to the nearest guidance from specialist at the hospital on the stabilization 
hospital per the referral pathway pre-registered in the treatment that is needed prior to transporting the patient. 
system. Upon receiving the notification, an alarm is activated The midwife is kept up to date about the patient’s referral 
i n the hospital emergency room, maternity ward and/or status at receiving hospitals and is alerted via SMS with 
newborn ward. Referral hospital staff assess whether they follow up guidance after the patient is discharged and sent to 
a re able to handle the patient (based on diagnosis, bed the facility where they have been referred. 
availability, clinical equipment, etc.) and either accept, reject 
 
 80  |  mHealth Compendium Volume 4 
The data collected through the system are being used to improve the 
hospital, health centers accountability, transparency as well as to 
encourage community participation. Through the system, the District 
Health Office (DHO) have access to monitor all referral cases and 
referral services in the district in real time as well as the director of 
hospital for their hospital only. 
SIJARIEMAS was designed based on intensive care patients’ needs 
assessment and engaging local stakeholders to map out the optimal 
referral pathway in any given district between health centers and 
hospital.  There was also a critical need develop the standard 
operating procedures for the referral process. The software was 
developed using open source software.  
Evaluation and Results 
SIJARIEMAS has been deployed in six provinces and 23 districts in 
Indonesia. The system has networked over 13,000 health providers, 
700 health facilities and has facilitated over 19,500 obstetric and 
newborn referral cases. Among all cases, 79 percent of cases are 
responded to within ten minutes. 
Based on the testimonial from the users, the system gives certainty 
and self-confidence to the midwife who referred the case, as “tour 
the hospital” cases are minimized because the midwife receives an 
SMS confirmation from the destination hospital that ready to receive 
the patient. For the receiving hospital, the advance notification ensures they are prepared to receive the emergency referral 
patient. Lastly the DHO has more accurate referral data for analysis of the emergency referral system in real time. 
SIJARIEMAS data show that the number of referral cases facilitated and the number of health providers and facilities 
registered in the referral system, is increasing.  The adoption of the 
referral system by local stakeholders (DHO and Hospital) has gone 
beyond initial expectation. All districts and hospitals have been allocated 
funds (the local budget) to participate in the referral system.  Geographic Coverage: 23 districts in six 
provinces (North Sumatera, Banten, West 
Java, Central Java, East Java, South Sulawesi) in 
Lessons Learned Indonesia 
 It is important to provide numbers of communication channels to Implementation Partners: JHPIEGO 
accommodate different communication preference of midwives  (prime), RTI International, Save the Children, 
 Increasing the number of health providers and facilitates linked into Muhammadiyah, Budi Kemuliaan  
the system will increase the effectiveness of SIJARIEMAS  
Funder: USAID 
 There are constraints in using the technology such as mobile network 
signal and coverage, power outages and internet connectivity  Contact Information: 
RTI International – EMAS | Bambang 
Conclusion Wijayanto, ICT Advisor (+622129201502, 
bwijayanto@id-emas.rti.org) 
Midterm Review of EMAS Program, indicates that the SIJARIEMAS has  
substantial acceptance, useful and feasible for districts and health facilities. JHPIEGO – EMAS | Maya Tholandi, Senior 
The intervention is an important and effective driver of for the Director M&E (+622129201502, 
improvement of referrals in the district. Lastly SIJARIEMAS provides Maya.tholandi@jhpiego.org) 
important source of data, from which analysis can be done to understand  
weaknesses and strengthen the referral system, greatly contributing to the See References on page 89. 
reduction in obstetric or newborn emergencies.  
 
mHealth Compendium Volume 4  |  81 
