 
TOBACCO KILLS: SAY NO & SAVE LIVES 
The Tobacco Kills: Say No & Save Lives 
campaign was launched in January 2013.  
ABOUT TOBACCO KILLS 
Campaign participants are able to take 
action via one of four ways: 
1. Join social media channels on 
Twitter or Facebook. Participants can 
contribute to the discussion and join 
nearby events. 
2. Tune into the edutainment drama 
featured in six languages across the 
country. The edu-drama follows the 
characters as they share how their day-
to-day lives are affected by tobacco. 
Listeners can express their views and 
comments on what they learn from each 
episode online or via SMS. 
3. Sign the petition that shows 
community support for the Tobacco 
Control Bill via SMS or online. 
BRIEF OVERVIEW 
4. If the participant is an organization such as a 
According to the World Health Organization’s 2011 
restaurant, bar or hotel, it can declare their space as 
Report on the Global Tobacco Epidemic, tobacco is the 
smoke-free, protect workers and patrons from 
leading preventable cause of death in the world. It is 
secondhand smoke, and be part of Uganda’s 1st 
expected to cause approximately eight million deaths 
smoke-free map 
per year by 2030, 80% of those in low- and middle-
income countries. Additionally, the 2011 Uganda 
Demographic Health Survey states 15% of adult males 
and 3% of adult females smoke, and tobacco is 
responsible for 2% of all non-communicable diseases in 
the country. 
Text to Change (TTC) is working on Uganda’s first 
nationwide anti-tobacco campaign utilizing mobile 
technology and social media. Entitled Tobacco Kills: Say 
No & Save Lives, the one-year campaign is designed to 
bring Ugandans awareness of the harms of tobacco. It 
will also support the proposed comprehensive Tobacco 
Control Bill that aims to introduce a law in 2013 to 
regulate the manufacture, sale, promotion, advertising, 
sponsorship, distribution and public use of tobacco 
products. 
18 mHEALTH COMPENDIUM   │    VOLUME 2 
 
 BEHAVIOR CHANGE COMMUNICATION 
The campaign also conducted an opinion poll via SMS to  Building partnerships is vital for public awareness 
assess public attitudes towards raising revenue through and advocacy efforts, and contributes to ensuring 
increasing tax on tobacco products. Over 500 responses the cause’s sustainability 
were received and results were used to support the 
economics paper on increasing tobacco tax. Both were 
submitted together to the Ugandan Parliament.  CONCLUSION 
In the upcoming months, the campaign will continue to 
Google Hangouts are organized on Google+ to have 
use social media for promotional activities. Participants 
face-to-face group interaction to discuss related topics 
will be speaking to schools on youths’ opinions and 
such as top tips to quit smoking  
knowledge about tobacco control, as well as promoting 
the signing of the petition, which will be shared with the 
MPs leading up to the hopeful passage of the Tobacco 
EVALUATION AND RESULTS Control Bill.  
On launch day, #tobaccokills was mentioned 853 times 
on Twitter and became the number one trending  
hashtag in Uganda, earning thirty followers and 119 G EOGRAPHIC COVERAGE 
tweets. Uganda 
As of March 2013, the campaign has earned a total of 
IMPLEMENTATION PARTNERS 
1,558 fans on Facebook and a weekly reach of 147,262 
Text to Change; Partners: Campaign for Tobacco-Free 
people. The fan growth rate is at 1.378% and fans 
Kids, Uganda Health Communication Alliance (UHCA), 
respond actively to 30% of the campaign’s posts. 
Parliamentary Forum for Non-Communicable Diseases 
Overall, fans are most active between 8am to 11am and 
(PFNCD) and Uganda National Health Consumers 
2pm to 5pm. Tuesday is the most active day, followed 
Organization (UNHCO)  
by Wednesday, and Sunday is the least engaging  
FUNDER 
LESSONS LEARNED Campaign for Tobacco-Free Kids  
 New media can be used aside traditional media to 
increase the interactivity and engagement of the CONTACT INFORMATION 
audience Text to Change  
 Bas Hoefman, Founder and Director  
 Establish ongoing M&E and regular community Email: bhoefman@texttochange.com  
management of online channels, value the Campaign for Tobacco-Free Kids  
importance of strong support, and ensure sufficient 
 Joshua Kyallo, Director, Africa Programs  
resources Email: JKyallo@tobaccofreekids.org  
 Creativity is key. Combine social media with offline 
activities, and understand that some trial and error 
will be part of determining the best content that 
appeal to local audiences and that will produce a 
strong call to action. 
Information was excerpted from:  
“Building a Tobacco Free Africa via Mobile & Social Media.” Text to Change. 2013. Web. 
WHO Report on the Global Tobacco Epidemic, 2011: Warning About the Dangers of Tobacco . World Health Organization. 2011. Web. 
  MHEALTH COMPENDIUM  |  VOLUME 2 19 
