  
C   hangamka Maternal Health Smartcard 
  
B rief Overview 
 
In Kenya, the maternal mortality rate is high with 
approximately 488 maternal deaths per 100,000 live births 
(according to  UNAIDS data from 2008/9). Only 47 percent 
of women make the recommended four or more antenatal 
care visits, while just 44 percent receive skilled care during 
delivery. Inadequate access to health care services, low levels 
of education about the importance of skilled care during 
childbirth, poverty, and apathy towards health insurance are 
just some of the many factors contributing to maternal 
deaths. 
 
In 2008, in order to improve access to affordable healthcare, Changamka MicroHealth Limited (‘Changamka’) 
introduced the medical smartcard, a mobile technology solution that enables users to save money over an 
extended period of time to gain access to primary health care services. Clients save for health care expenses 
using a medical smart card combined with mobile money transfer service systems such as M-PESA and make 
payments at designated providers for goods and services at pre-contracted prices. Changamka offers two 
products to the general public: the out-patient smartcard and the maternal health smartcard. Changamka also 
offers a smartcard for third party payers schemes, aimed primarily at reproductive health schemes that utilize 
vouchers, and an in-house smartcard for instutions and universities that run their own health clinics. 
 
In partnership with Pumwani Maternity Hospital, the largest maternity hospital in Sub-Saharan Africa, 
Changamka piloted the maternal health smartcard between July 2010 and September 2011.  Over 3,500 cards 
were distributed. Today, the maternal health smartcard is used at nine private hospitals in Nairobi and at 
hospitals in Mombasa and Naivasha. 
 
 Geographic Coverage: 
Kenya 
 
 Implementation Partners: 
                          Changamka MicroHealth Limited is leading a team of partners including:  
                          Safaricom | Pumwani Maternity Hospital | Vodaphone | GA Insurance 
 
 Funder: 
      Changamka MicroHealth Limited 
 
 For More Information Contact: 
Changamka  
 Sam Agutu – CEO and Co-Founder, Zack Oloo – Executive Director 
and Co-Founder; 
P O Box 25646 -00100 Nairobi, Kenya; 
Email: Info@changamka.co.ke 
 35 
 
Finance 
  
 Changamka Maternal Health Smartcard 
 
About Changamka Maternal Health • 80 percent said that it was safer to carry the 
Smartcard smartcard than to carry cash; 
The maternal health smartcard is a pre-paid card that • 87 percent thought it was more convenient than M-
allows the bearer to obtain ante-natal, delivery, and PESA; 
post-natal services at listed prices in participating • 75 percent said the smartcard helped them save 
maternity facilities. The card is available at participating money by not letting them spend it on other things; 
hospitals for 250 Kenyan Shillings and can be topped up • 15 percent said the smartcard helped by preventing 
by M-PESA or at the hospital terminal kiosk. The bearer their families from spending the money on other 
has up to nine months in which to save the amount things; and 
required for delivery at their facility of choice as long as • 97 percent gave birth at a health facility. 
it is accredited.    
 In total, six percent of smartcard users engaged in 
The maternal health smartcard provides a dedicated genuine savings and two-thirds of savers used cards for 
savings mechanism for the mother to be that is deliveries. While discontinuation of card use was high, 
convenient, safe, affordable, and user friendly. Each and only a small portion of card recipients made savings 
maternal health smartcard is personalized, does not deposits on the card, the study highlights substantial 
expire, absorbs deposits, has no deposit limit, and can latent demand and appreciation for certain features of 
only be used to pay for health services. the card.  
  
Evaluation and Results Lessons Learned 
A study conducted by the USAID-funded Strengthening • Partnerships are critical to success. Changamka 
Health Outcomes through the Private Sector (SHOPS) relies on the convergence of what it calls the “3Ms” 
project analyzed the benefits, challenges, and potential (mTechnology, mMoney, and mHealth) and survives 
opportunities associated with Changamka’s maternal due to its partnerships with Safaricom, Vodaphone, 
health smartcard. The study utilized in-depth interviews and the networks of participating hospitals and 
with a subsample of survey respondents. clinics. 
 • The cost of smartcard terminals at 400 US dollars 
The study compared the experiences of smartcard users and the cost of smartcards at two US dollars each 
to that of the comparison group (women who obtained are in most cases prohibitively expensive and a 
Pumwani Hospital services before or after 15 months barrier to expansion.  
when the card was offered) and found the following:  • There is need for awareness creation, research, and 
• The average card user made 4.3 ANC visits, 14 monitoring and evaluation 
percent more than comparison group (statistically  
significant difference across education and income Conclusion 
subgroups); and  The Changamka - Pumwani pilot demonstrated that an 
• Card users were more likely to have at least four initiative allowing poor people to contribute to their 
ANC visits (the WHO recommendation).  healthcare can be successfully implemented in resource-
 constrained settings.  The widespread availability and 
Among card users: use of cell phones in Kenya provided the impetus for 
• 78 percent found the smartcard convenient to use;  the development of this mHealth initiative and is central 
• 60 percent said the smartcard helped them to pay to its success. In 2012, Changamka upgraded its 
for services and leave the hospital more easily; technology to bring on board a web based platform with 
 mobile application integration to address the financial 
 barriers to scalability posed by the terminals and 
 smartcards. 
 
Information was excerpted from: 
http://changamka.co.ke/html/news%20&%20events.html 
http://www.ke.undp.org/index.php/mdgs/goal-5-improve-maternal-health 
36 http://www.healthunbound.org/content/changamka-medical-smart-card  http://shopsproject.org/sites/default/files/resources/Changamka%20Presentation%20at%20HSR%20Symposium%20in%20Beijing.pdf 
