MOBILE PHONES FOR IMPROVED 
ACCESS TO SAFE WATER (M4W) 
Strengthening monitoring and evaluation of water, sanitation and hygiene in 
Uganda 
SERVICE DELIVERY 
Implementation date: October 2011 to present 
Mobile Phones for Improved Access to Water (M4W), is an initiative aimed at improving the functionality of rural drinking water 
sources and strengthening operations and support mechanisms. The project has been running from October 2011 across eight 
pilot districts in Uganda (Amuria, Arua, Kabarole, Kasese, Katakwi, Kyenjojo, Lira and Masindi Districts). 
This collaborative initiative, implemented by The Netherlands Development Organization SNV, IRC/Triple-S, Makerere University, 
Water Aid Uganda and the Ministry of Water and Environment (MWE), has documented many successes including availing 
regular water sanitation and hygiene (WASH) monitoring data to the District Water Offices (DWOs). The Project has reduced 
the response time to fix non-functional water sources in participating districts, resulting in the community’s increased access to 
and utilization of safer water sources.    
Through M4W, a consumer can notify (via text) the system, which is hosted at DWO.  The water source is fixed usually within a 
short period of time, depending on the vigilance of Water Source Committee (WSC) or the DWO.  Overall, M4W is an 
information sharing and management system that ensures safer rural water sources remain functional. 
About M4W 
The M4W system, designed by Makerere University College location of the water sources and management are available 
o f Information Science and Technology, uses multiple through Google maps.  
technology platforms (computers and mobile phones) and 
When reporting a problem, the user sends a text message to 
provides information to various stakeholders at sub-national 
 code ‘8888’, providing the source identification number and and national levels. The District Water Management 
type of problem. Once the system is notified, it generates an 
Information System (DWMIS), a module of the system, 
SMS which is automatically sent to the relevant Hand Pump 
enables DWOs to monitor water points via internet. Data 
 Mechanic’s (HPM) phone. Upon receiving the message, the 
are accessible on the M4W website and through the M4W 
HPM goes to the source in question to assess the magnitude 
system, depending on the user. Information on functionality, 
of the fault. For minor faults, the HPM advises the WSC on 
 
 
74  |  mHealth Compendium Volume 4 
the necessary action. For major faults, the DWO is 
informed accordingly. Each fault attended to by the HPM 
is reported to the system and the user is also given 
feedback. In short, the system was designed to reduce 
the time taken to report and respond to faults on water 
sources. 
Evaluation and Results 
Improved response to Non-functional Water 
Sources: Maintenance of safer water sources has 
improved in the pilot districts. Participating HPMs were 
recruited and trained by the M4W stakeholders. Since 
M4W’s initiation, approximately 1,561 messages have 
been received, of which 377 water sources have been 
fixed. This represents 24 percent of the water sources 
that have been repaired in all the eight pilot districts on 
basis of the messages received. 
Cheaper Option for Acquisition of WASH Monitoring Data: The M4W system has provided an opportunity to use 
ICT to support monitoring of WASH sector activities, locally and nationally. A total of 9,278 water sources are currently 
being monitored under the M4W initiative. In 2011, the baseline data collected revealed that at least 19 percent of the water 
sources that existed in the pilot districts, had not been captured on the MWE database. Estimates reveal that it would cost 
an estimated $314,080 for national deployment of the system in all the 111 districts in the country together with an 
additional $46,080 for subsequent recurrent costs, annually. If implemented, the $314,080 budget would suffice for MWE to 
update the national data base periodically, compared to spending about $1million for the same purpose – a savings of over 
$650,000. 
Lessons Learned 
 Political support determines the success or failure of an initiative  Geographic Coverage: Eight  Districts in 
 Use of existing local government structures was a core strength Uganda (Amuria, Arua, Kabarole, Kasese, Katakwi, 
that contributed to results of the initiative; moreover, using Kyenjojo, Lira and Masindi)  
existing enables scale-up across the country 
 A collaborative initiative like M4W requires all involved Implementation Partners: IRC International 
stakeholders to fulfill their roles. i.e. water users have to continue Water and Sanitation Centre, SNV Netherlands 
paying for services, HPM are motivated in timely manner, DWO Development Organisation, Water Aid Uganda, 
is responsive Ministry of Water and Environment – Uganda, 
 The M4W system would work better with a business model Makerere University College of Computing and 
designed around it e.g. in a scenarios where private operators are Information Technology 
responsible for maintenance and lose money when water is not 
flowing Funder: African Transparency and Technology 
 For the M4W system, communities must send messages on faulty Initiative, SNV Uganda and WaterAid in Uganda  
water sources and they also must contribute money for Contact Information: 
operations and maintenance through their WSCs on regular 
(monthly) basis if the system is to work properly. IRC International Water and Sanitation Centre | 
Jane Nabunnya Mulumba, Country Director, 
Sustainable Services at Scale (Triple- S) Project 
Conclusion Uganda, (+256 758200808, 
The M4W initiative is a real potential for improving response to non- nabunnya@ircwash.org ); Joseph Abisa, Research 
functional drinking water sources in the rural areas of Uganda, Officer, IRC/Triple-S Uganda, (+256 759767241, 
therefore increasing access to safer rural water sources. The system abisa@ircwash.org) 
uses the existing government structures at national and district level 
See References on page 89. 
for collecting and reporting WASH related data. The system currently 
provides instant data which is useful for updating DWMIS and is also 
being considered for updating the national data base through the MIS. 
 
mHealth Compendium Volume 4  |  75 
