  
M  aternal Health (Antenatal and Postnatal 
 
Care) 
 
 
B rief Overview 
 
In Tanzania, almost 80 percent of the 
population lives in rural areas, often far 
from well-equipped health facilities with 
trained personnel. This has contributed to 
one of the highest maternal mortality 
ratios in the world, with about 454 
maternal deaths per 100,000 live births.   Service Delivery 
 
In order to improve the quality of care for 
pregnant women during the antenatal and  
postnatal period, D-tree International, with 
support from Jphiego’s USAID-funded 
Mothers and Infants, Safe, Healthy, and of Services 
Alive (MAISHA) project, has developed a mobile phone-based tool for service providers  to use with pregnant 
clients.  The application follows national and international guidelines of care, providing service providers  with 
checklists and electronic data entry platforms.  Improved adherence to national and international guidelines of 
care has been demonstrated to have a positive health impact on mothers and their children. Hence, this 
project aims to improve adherence, and consequently, health outcomes. 
 
The project is currently being implemented by service providers  in two health facilities in the Morogoro 
region of Tanzania. Implementation of using mobile phones for health began in 2011, with a pilot phase in 
some  health centers of Morogoro .  The second phase of the project will begin in November-December 2012 
and will  include a mobile phone application for community health workers to use..  The project is expected to 
continue under MAISHA. 
 
 
  Geographic Coverage: 
Morogoro, Tanzania 
  
 Implementation Partners: 
 Jhpiego is a lead partner, collaborating with: 
D-tree International | Tanzania Ministry of Health Reproductive and Child Health Section 
 
 
 Funder: 
USAID 
 
 
 For More Information Contact: 
          USAID  
 Raz Stevenson; 
Tel: +255-222-294-490 ext. 4568; email: rstevenson@usaid.gov  
Jhpiego  
 Dunstan Bishanga, Chief of Party – MAISHA; 
Tel: +255-22-277-1346; email: dbishanga@jhpiego.net 
D-tree  
 Marc Mitchell, President; 
52 Whitney Tavern Road, Weston, MA 02493 
   Tel: +1-617-432-6322; email: mmitchel@hsph.harvard.edu 
 61 
 
RH 
 
Maternal Health (Antenatal and Postnatal Care) 
About Maternal Health (Antenatal and Evaluation and Results 
Postnatal Care) Project There has been a very positive response from health 
The application, used by service providers as they attend workers using the application.  Service providers have 
pregnant women, includes an electronic registration reported that the application helps in calculation of 
form and checklists to ensure that all services such as expected date of delivery (EDD) based on last normal 
checking for blood pressure and screening for other menstruation period (LNMP), age, gestation age, and 
danger signs are done according to standard. Screening directs them on what to do according to the age of 
protocols also include monitoring for fetal growth and pregnancy. This helps them to provide appropriate, 
maternal health. All of the care that is provided is based quality care. One user said; “The application is very good 
on the obstetric and medical history of the woman and as it looks like a checklist, so instead of opening different 
the gestation age. After seeing the client through the books, we just use the phone for everything”. Nurses have 
antenatal period, the nurse records the delivery quickly been able to integrate this tool into their daily 
outcome, and the client is transferred to the postnatal work in in both medium and high volume sites, where 
care portion of the application. From there, all of her they see nearly 400 clients on a monthly basis. 
previous visits are still available for viewing, and she is  
then seen through postnatal visits, following the checks In an earlier implementation of this project in Tanzania, 
for danger signs, counseling, physical examinations and implementing partners observed a marked increase in 
treatments recommended in the national guidelines. The the number of women in which anemia and high blood 
application supports the providers in their daily pressure was detected. This indicates that the tool helps 
attendance of clients, as well as referrals if needed.  It users to not only perform the necessary checks at each 
facilitates the tracking of clients through indicators visit, but also to interpret the results correctly.  
showing each client’s expected clinic visit dates and  
identifies those who are overdue for their next Lessons Learned 
appointment.  LNMP is not always known, and thus, it is important 
 to allow any rules-based program such as this to be 
The application runs offline on phones and synchronizes flexible in allowing service providers to use their 
with the server using general packet radio service judgment to assist in establishing the gestation age. 
(GPRS), a packet oriented mobile data service, for back  In addition to use at the facility level, the service 
up, reporting and analysis. From the server, supervisors providers  were enthusiastic about using the phones 
can monitor the activity levels of individual health during their outreach visits, which has the potential 
facilities and nurses, as well as identify trends in care to extend high quality maternal care from the 
such as referral rates, average number of antenatal care facility to the community level 
(ANC) and postnatal care (PNC) visits, etc. The data 
 Shortage of necessary commodities for treatment 
required to generate government reports for antenatal 
and lab tests impacts health worker compliance 
care are currently available and the postnatal reports 
with guidelines, and we have updated the 
will be available in the coming months. 
application to show “not available” to make it clear 
 
where the health workers know what needs to be 
The next phase of the project will include an application 
done, but don’t have the necessary commodities to 
for community health workers (CHWs) to use. This 
do so. We are actively working with the facility in 
application will guide CHWs through registration, 
charges and the district to address these issues 
checking for danger signs, educating, and making 
 
referrals for women during the pre and post-partum 
Conclusion 
periods.   This will complement the application run by 
The project has shown that the application can be 
service providers in health facilities by supporting high-
effectively implemented in rural settings and that health 
quality care for women both in facilities and in the 
workers in reproductive and child health clinics are 
community.  
pleased to be supported with such a tool.  
 
Information was excerpted from: 
62  http://www.jhpiego.org/files/Tanzania%20Country%20Profile.pdf 
http://www.voanews.com/content/tanzania-seeks-help-with-high-maternal-mortality-rate/1519187.html 
 
