 
MOBILE MEDIA RICH INTERACTIVE 
GUIDELINES  
Mobile-phone based media-rich clinical guidelines to improve community health 
worker performance 
improving and maintaining their 
knowledge and performance. One 
strategy is the use of job aids that 
provide just-in-time knowledge and 
information. However, paper-based 
versions have not produced ideal 
results due to poor design, incomplete 
explanations and lack of explicit 
workflow, all leading to a possible 
increase in the user’s workload.  
One solution is the development of 
mobile phone-based job aids enhanced by 
rich media such as text, audio and visual 
aids. These tools can provide CHWs with 
the point-of-care clinical information and 
decision support they need to improve 
their performance and subsequently 
health outcomes within their 
communities.  
Implementation date: 2008 to 2009 
About Media Rich 
Interactive Guidelines 
A study funded Microsoft Research and  
performed by the University of Texas and 
University of Antioquia in Medellin, 
Colombia investigated and analyzed the 
possible benefits on CHWs’ performance 
of point-of-care clinical guidelines (MRIGs, 
also known as Interactive structured m-
rich media guidelines) presented as 
interactive rich media job aids on small-
format mobile platforms. The MRIGs 
were used to diagnose and treat pediatric 
and adult medical conditions in a 
simulated setting. Fifty CHWs were 
Community health workers (CHWs) play a vital role divided into an intervention (rich media job aids) or 
in developing countries, often serving as the primary control (traditional paper-based job aids) group. Each 
and sometimes sole providers of healthcare to many CHW treated a total of 30 standardized cases using 
people, especially in areas where there is a shortage both methods in a randomized cross-over design. 
of physicians and nurses. Since the educational 
The Spanish version of the WHO’s Integral Management 
background, literacy and clinical training of CHWs 
of Childhood Illnesses, and two common Colombian 
varies, it is important to provide means towards 
56 mHEALTH COMPENDIUM   |   VOLUME 3 
 
MOBILE MEDIA RICH INTERACTIVE 
GUIDELINES  
Mobile-phone based media-rich clinical guidelines to improve community health 
worker performance  SERVICE DELIVERY 
evidence-based, peer-reviewed, published guidelines simulators in a laboratory setting, not on real 
were presented in both paper and mobile phone format. patients. Further research using human patients, 
HTC Tilt cell phones running Windows Mobile 6.1 used rather than patient simulators, and with CHWs and 
a system called GuideVue® to present the guidelines patients across a spectrum of educational levels is 
interactively, step by step. Guidelines were also loaded needed. 
into cell-phone memory or micro-SD cards so CHWs 
could access the tool during times of poor connectivity. 
The instructions of each step were presented Conclusion 
simultaneously with voice/audio, text and/or images/ The use of MRIGs on mobile phones by CHWs in 
video. Video was used if the step was an instruction for developing countries has the potential to decrease their 
performing a task. Otherwise, a static image of the perceived workload, fatigue, and enhance their ability to 
relevant medication, supply item, or other object was provide better care for more patients. These results 
presented. Each step provides up to five options that the indicate encouraging prospects for mHealth technologies 
CHW can select, leading to the next step in the clinical in general, and for the use of rich media clinical 
practice guideline, based on information provided in the guidelines on cell phones, for improving CHW 
current step. Each executed step was saved into a time- performance. Future work could include enhancing the 
stamped history log in the phone for later upload into a user interface, adding features such as GPS location, and 
database and analysis. repeating the study with human patients in Colombia 
and elsewhere.  
An additional report analyzed the perceived workload 
and usability aspects of the interactive, structured media -------------------------------------------------------- 
-rich clinical guidelines by the health workers.  
Geographic Coverage: Colombia 
Implementation Partners: University of Texas, 
Evaluation and Results 
University of Antioquia 
A total of 1,394 cases were evaluated. The intervention 
reduced errors by an average of 33% and increased Funder: Microsoft Research 
protocol compliance with approved guidelines by 30%. 
CHWs using the mobile phone MRIGs also reported Contact Information:  
statistically significant decreases in mental demand University of Texas: M. Sriram Iyengar, Associate 
(cognitive load), frustration and overall workload as Professor of Biomedical Informatics, University of Texas 
compared to using paper-based job-aids.  Health Science Center at Houston (+1-281-793-4733, 
M.Sriram.Iyengar@uth.tmc.edu) 
 
Lessons Learned References: 
 1. Florez-Arango JF, Iyengar MS, Dunn K, et al. Performance  Presenting clinical guidelines in an interactive rich 
Factors of Mobile Rich Media Job Aids for Community Health 
media structured format on small phones can 
Workers. J Am Med Inform Assoc. 2011; 18(2), 131-137. 
decrease error rates and enhance protocol 
2. Iyengar MS, Florez-Arango JF. Decreasing workload among 
compliance, indicating significant potential benefits 
community health workers. Technology and Health Care. 2013; 
for health outcomes and standardization of care. 
21, 113-123. 
 Acceptance of new technologies can be inhibited if 
the ensuing workload is perceived as excessive 
compared to existing methods. 
 Medical cases were presented on human patient 
  mHEALTH COMPENDIUM   |   VOLUME 3 57 
