 
eNUT 
Supporting the diagnosis and treatment of childhood malnutrition 
Nearly 12% of children in Zanzibar 
suffer from acute malnutrition. 
However, when this entirely 
treatable condition progresses to 
severe acute malnutrition (SAM), it 
becomes life threatening and 
requires urgent treatment. Prior to 
2009, 20% to 30% of children who 
were admitted with SAM died 
despite receiving treatment, but 
this number could be reduced to 
as low as 5% if children with SAM 
were treated according to the 
WHO-UNICEF standard 
treatment guidelines. In response, 
the Government of Zanzibar is 
working to nationally eradicate 
malnutrition, especially among 
young children, by collaborating 
with UNICEF on a comprehensive 
program for the identification and 
treatment of malnourished children in the community guidelines using data from past and current visits to 
using national standards of care. assess the child’s progress and determine the next steps 
for effective treatment. Nurses can access patient data, 
D-tree International designed the nutrition software, enter new data and schedule appointments. The 
eNUT to facilitate implementation of these guidelines software captures the data that the nurse enters during 
and standards. eNUT was built to streamline the the patient visit, providing the health service 
management of information and support the decision- administrators with real-time access to program data 
making needs of health workers, helping them to and improving overall decision-making abilities. 
implement the national guidelines for providing effective 
treatment to children suffering from malnutrition. The software runs on the Android™ operating system 
Launched in November of 2010 and continuing to scale and combines on-device electronic medical records with 
through December of 2013, eNUT is an integral protocol execution, using a password-protected login 
component of Zanzibar’s national nutrition program and procedure for data security. Information is drawn from 
is fully supported by the Ministry of Health and Social several major parts of the electronic protocol to 
Welfare.  contribute to the patient record, including screening and 
registration, physical examinations, treatment, 
Implementation date: 2010 to 013 counseling for the caregiver and appointment scheduling. 
D-tree’s private-sector partner, Zantel, is currently 
supporting the project with reduced fees for data 
About eNUT transfers and technical support, helping to keep program 
The eNUT software provides an interactive mobile costs low.  
version of the government-approved treatment 
guidelines for acutely malnourished children. Used by 
government health workers, primarily nurses, the  
application takes them step-by-step through the 
54 mHEALTH COMPENDIUM   |   VOLUME 3 
c. 2013/Mark Leong 
 
eNUT 
Supporting the diagnosis and treatment of childhood malnutrition  SERVICE DELIVERY 
Evaluation and Results number of patients reached.  Although the Tanzania 
An independent evaluation carried out on the first six DHS survey indicated high levels of SAM, D-tree has 
sites of the project concluded that the intervention sites not seen a corresponding high number of patients.  
were 20% more accurate in diagnosis than the non-
project sites. A qualitative survey of the health workers’ 
perceptions about the application was also completed. Conclusion 
The majority of the users reported an improved ability eNUT provides an innovative delivery mechanism and 
to register and screen children, an easing of workload, decision support system for Zanzibar’s national 
and improved skills and capacity. standards of care for the identification and treatment of 
malnourished children. This component of the national 
Currently, the scale up has reached 3 districts and 12 nutrition program is integral in aiding the Government 
health facilities. It is now focused on integrating the of Zanzibar eradicate malnutrition as a public health 
existing application with the Integrated Management of problem, and thus reduce overall morbidity and 
Childhood Illness (IMCI) strategy, developed by WHO mortality in the population, especially among young 
and UNICEF, to better incorporate the use of the children. 
application into the routine clinical workflow.  
-------------------------------------------------------- 
Lessons Learned Geographic Coverage: Zanzibar, United Republic of 
 Tanzania  Success in the clinics where D-tree has been 
working can be attributed to close follow-up, Implementation Partners: D-tree International, 
flexibility, and an understanding of the environment Zanzibar Ministry of Health and Social Welfare, Zantel, 
and needs that stem from user feedback.   Edesia, UNICEF 
 Underpinning its ability to scale-up, D-tree has Funder: UNICEF, mHealth Alliance 
found that the key factor influencing the level of 
grassroots support among patients and FWHs is Contact Information:  
integration of the mobile service into the flow of D-tree International: Marc Mitchell, President (+1-617-
care.  For the mobile service to be integrated 875-5143, mmitchel@hsph.harvard.edu) 
effectively into the health system, it must be seen as mHealth Alliance: Patty Mechael, Executive Director 
lessening the burden on FHWs and improving the (+1-202-419-6414, pmechael@mhealthalliance.org) 
quality of health services for clients.    
References: 
 mHealth interventions are not a panacea – they 1. mHealth Alliance. IWG Round 1 Grant Winners. D-tree 
cannot be viewed as a quick fix to an underlying International – Mobile Technology to Support the Diagnosis and 
public health problem.  By working with the Treatment of Malnutrition (Zanzibar) Project Profile. The World 
government at multiple levels, D-tree has learned Health Organization, 2013. Web. 
how to integrate its mobile solution into broader 2. Francis Gonzales. IWG Grantee Year 1 Update: D-tree 
public health initiatives and into the health system. International. Health UnBound, May 7, 2013. Web.  
 3. Tanzania Demographic and Health Survey 2010. Dar es Salaam,  Though effective scale-up depends on successfully 
Tanzania, National Bureau of Statistics and ICF Macro, 2011. 
engaging with government partners, D-tree has 
4. Collins S et al. Management of severe acute malnutrition in 
found that engaging with the right government 
children. The Lancet, 2006, 368:1992-2000 
actors is challenging, as these actors are scattered 
across multiple levels and departments.  
 An additional challenge for D-tree has been a low 
  mHEALTH COMPENDIUM   |   VOLUME 3 55 
