sPoTlIgHT
MAY 2013
THe lIgA InAn PRoJeCT
TIMOR-LESTE
BACKgRoUnd
The Liga Inan (“Mobile Moms”) Project is using mobile phones to connect 
expectant mothers with health care providers in Timor-Leste to improve the 
likelihood of a healthy pregnancy and birth. Funded by USAID’s Child Survival 
and Health Grants Program, Liga Inan is implemented by Health Alliance In-
ternational (HAI) with Catalpa International, in partnership with Timor-Leste’s 
Ministry of Health (MOH). The goal of the Liga Inan project is to increase 
Putting health into the utilization of quality skilled care before, during and after delivery.  
hands of mothers High maternal and newborn mortality rates continue to be a major problem 
in Timor-Leste, and community understanding of optimal health behaviors 
The Liga Inan project, Timor- during pregnancy, such as nutritional advice, danger signs of pregnancy, 
Leste’s fi rst mHealth project, is and care-seeking behaviors, is limited. Contact with midwives is limited to 
changing the way mothers and a few antenatal care (ANC) visits, which do not allow for the repetition and 
midwives stay in touch. reinforcement of health messages that are most likely to produce behavior 
change that would improve health outcomes. Although there has been 
progress in increasing the rates of skilled birth attendance since Timor-Leste 
became a new nation in 2002, the utilization of maternal health services re-
mains low with the majority of women giving birth at home assisted by only 
a family member or friend. 
Many women in Timor-Leste live in remote and rural areas which make it 
challenging for them to access health facilities and midwives. As a result, 
pregnant women often fi nd it diffi  cult to get good advice and support to 
improve their chances of a having a safe pregnancy and healthy baby. Rec-
ognizing the limited possibilities for communication between midwives and 
pregnant women, HAI designed and developed the Liga Inan mobile phone 
MAMA: MOBILE ALLIANCE FOR MATERNAL ACTION | SPOTLIGHT MAY 2013 1
project, with its technical partner Catalpa International, a mobile and soft-
ware development company focused on technical solutions in low resource 
settings. The system sends maternal health-related text messages twice 
weekly to pregnant women who enroll in the project at the time of their first 
antenatal visit. The system also facilitates phone contact between pregnant 
or postpartum women and their midwives, including regular phone contact 
around the time of delivery. 
Use of MAMA MessAges 
HAI began the process of developing the text messages with a review of the 
messages specific to the gestational stage of pregnancy that are available 
from the Mobile Alliance of Maternal Action (MAMA). Initially it was antici-
pated that Liga Inan would only send one text message per week to enrolled 
women, so a limited number of the 115 prenatal and 157 postpartum MAMA 
messages were selected. Initial messages were those that aligned best with 
existing messages of the Timor-Leste MOH, as well as those that seemed 
particularly relevant to the rural population where the project is being im-
plemented. The original messages were then translated into Tetum, the local 
language, and edited to assure that they could be clearly presented within the 
maximum SMS (text message) length of 160 characters. 
The messages were then reviewed in stakeholder meetings with the MOH 
at both the national and district levels, which provided an opportunity for 
feedback and policy alignment. Based on that feedback, on existing literature 
(photos by Catalpa) indicating that more frequent messages were more likely to be effective, and 
on HAI’s receipt of a private supplement to the USAID grant, we decided to 
increase the messages to twice weekly. Further pretesting was done with 
pregnant women in the project area to determine the extent to which a 
sample of messages could be read, were understood, and were considered 
acceptable. Feedback from that process revealed that much of the content 
of the messages was new information for the pregnant women, further rein-
forcing the decision to double the number of messages to be sent.
Ultimately the emphasis of most of the messages consisted of cues to action: 
having four ANC visits, using a skilled birth attendant, nutrition messages, 
birth planning, and knowledge about danger signs of pregnancy, delivery 
and the newborn period. It was also decided to provide messages regarding 
traditional practices around birth that are prevalent in Timor-Leste and may 
have harmful consequences. For example, many women in Timor-Leste 
practice a postpartum tradition of tuur ahi (literally, “sitting fire”) where the 
new mother and newborn are sequestered in the home for several weeks 
next to an open fire because the heat is believed to have beneficial healing 
effects. To address that common practice we included a message about the 
harm that can be caused to newborns from smoke from these open fires, 
with advice to keep mothers and newborns a distance from the smoke. 
While most of the messages are tailored to a women’s gestational stage 
based on her estimated due date, many subjects are repeated for emphasis 
and priority messages have been identified to assure that despite the gesta-
tional stage of a woman’s enrollment, she won’t miss important key informa-
tion: women who enroll late in the pregnancy will receive these messages in 
addition to the set she is timed to receive.
MAMA: Mobile AlliAnce for MAternAl Action | spotlight MAy 2013 2
Midwives role playing to practice how to 
enroll women in the Mobile Moms project. 
(photos by Catalpa)
PRogRAM sPeCIfICs
At the start of the Liga Inan project HAI conducted a knowledge, practice and 
coverage household survey to collect data on utilization of health services 
and mobile phone ownership and usage in our implementation district. We 
found that household ownership of mobile phones was high; there was fa-
miliarity of text messaging among women who report access to cell phones 
and 73% of women reported being able to read the local Tetum language. 
This survey will be repeated two years after implementation.
Midwives use smart phones provided by the project to enroll women into the 
Liga Inan project during a first antenatal care (ANC) visit. With 93% of women 
in the implementation district accessing at least one ANC visit it serves as a 
very good portal to the project. However, while rates of first ANC are quite 
high, access to other health services and information drops off considerably.
TRAInIng HeAlTH sTAff
The Liga Inan project was designed to include active involvement of district 
and subdistrict midwives. It required a high level of early stakeholder en-
gagement to assure strong MOH buy-in for an innovation that was new to 
the health sector in Timor-Leste. Midwives enroll pregnant women through a 
simple registration process using a smart phone, after which automated text 
messages are sent to enrollees twice weekly. Midwives receive reminders 
of women who are near their due date and are responsible for checking in 
through a phone call to check their health status, discuss birth planning or 
confirm whether the woman has delivered. Midwives are also responsible for 
answering questions from pregnant or postpartum women received through 
MAMA: Mobile AlliAnce for MAternAl Action | spotlight MAy 2013 3
their mobile phone (a program feature offered through the Liga Inan service), 
which involves screening for complications during the pregnancy, delivery, 
postpartum and newborn periods. They also need to determine if an emer-
gency situation exists for the pregnant/postpartum woman or her infant, and 
if one exists, make an appropriate response. 
Training for midwives on key aspects of their role in the project was conduct-
ed by HAI and Catalpa staff. Catalpa staff facilitated sessions to help midwives 
become comfortable using new the smart phones, including how to use the 
phone to register patients and for other key functions of the mobile service. 
HAI staff trained midwives in better estimation of birth date, how to respond 
to questions over the phone, and general communication with pregnant 
women with the goal of helping them to strengthen communication and 
Executive Director of Catalpa International 
demonstrates how to register women into engagement with their patients and promote healthier mothers and babies. 
the Liga Inan project to a district midwife 
(photo by Catalpa) CoMMUnITy soCIAlIzATIon  
And PHAsed RolloUT
The implementation district has four subdistricts that vary in size, population 
density and remoteness. In order to coordinate a thorough and effective 
community socialization plan to market Liga Inan while also closely monitor-
ing the implementation process, HAI decided on a phased rollout starting in 
the largest and most densely populated subdistrict of Same. The phased roll-
out has allowed HAI and Catalpa to address implementation issues and make 
necessary adjustments in a timely fashion. Early challenges with enrollment, 
such as using a woman’s full name when registering or not including enough 
digits in a woman’s phone number, could be caught and corrected early. The 
later issue led Catalpa to change registration process to require corrections 
of the registration if the old 7-digit phone number was entered.  Catalpa also 
was able to adapt the service to align with the free “call me” service provided 
Socialization meetings were held in 
communities where the Liga Inan project by the local telecommunications provider, making this service entirely free 
is being implemented. for mothers wanting to call their midwives. 
Socialization activities were carried out in communities throughout Same 
and included stakeholder meetings with broad community participation - 
village chiefs, health facility managers and other health staff, community 
health workers, teachers, community women with special effort extended 
for pregnant women to attend. HAI and MOH staff conducted a general 
health education session about maternal and newborn care, introduced the 
Liga Inan project and provided information on how women could enroll. 
The socialization efforts have been key in gaining widespread community 
support and participation in the Liga Inan project .
HAI worked with Catalpa International design staff to develop a project logo, 
so that the project could be easily identified through promotional materials. 
The logo and tag line “Your Health is in your hands” (already a recognizable 
phrase used by the MOH) was used for t-shirts, brochures, banner and post-
ers that were widely distributed during the socialization campaign. 
eARly ResUlTs
Enrollment of women into Liga Inan was launched the last week of Feb-
ruary 2013 in the subdistrict of Same. Rollout to three other subdistricts is 
MAMA: Mobile AlliAnce for MAternAl Action | spotlight MAy 2013 4
planned soon. There has been a very enthusiastic response to the project 
by both health staff and the communities they serve. After ten weeks, 278 
women have enrolled in Liga Inan and 70 births have been recorded among 
enrollees. Although it is too early to look at project impact, early numbers are 
encouraging. In Same subdistrict, the average number of births attended by a 
skilled attendant per month in 2012 was 38, and the average number of births 
at a health facility was 27. In the first full month of Liga Inan implementation 
there were 56 births attended by skilled provider and 38 deliveries at the 
health facility. This is early in the project, however, and HAI staff will be work-
ing hard over the next year to assure data quality and effective monitoring of 
the project.  
T-shirts and caps with the Mobile Moms TeleCoMMUnICATIons PRovIdeR engAgeMenT
logo and tagline, “Your Health is in your 
hands” were distributed to project staff, Currently USAID pays for the cost of text messages sent to expectant and 
health staff and community health workers postpartum women. At the start of the project in October 2011, only one 
to promote the Liga Inan project.
telecommunications company was operating in Timor-Leste; however this 
monopoly was broken in 2012 when two new mobile companies were grant-
ed licenses to operate. With new competition in the market it is expected that 
the cost of text messaging will decrease. In addition, following the launch 
of the Liga Inan project, executives from one telecommunications company 
requested a meeting with HAI and Catalpa staff to discuss possible support 
for the Liga Inan project.
MonIToRIng And evAlUATIon
HAI has in place an Operations Research (OR) plan to assess the impact of 
the Liga Inan project. Utilization data on key indicators, including skilled birth 
attendance and facility deliveries, will be assessed via a pre- and post-imple-
mentation survey in the implementation district and a neighboring district 
that will be used as a comparison where Liga Inan is not implemented. In 
addition, health information data collected routinely by the health system will 
be monitored in both districts. Phone surveys to assess enrollees’ early expe-
riences and an assessment looking at the impact on workload for midwives 
are also planned. 
Catalpa International developed for HAI a public facing website for the Liga 
Inan project which can be accessed at www.ligainan.org. A password-pro-
tected private dashboard on the website collects real time project data, 
providing staff with an excellent tool to monitor progress. Some of the data 
monitored via the dashboard are the number of enrolled women, tracking 
of all messages delivered, number of deliveries, anticipated births in the 
coming week and the number of enrollees in each village in the subdistrict. 
The online monitoring system also allows the team to monitor the real-time 
interactions between midwives and women: text messages sent to enroll-
ments women, the requests from women to please call them, and what type 
of messages midwives are sending to their cohort. 
CHAllenges
There will continue to be important lessons learned as Liga Inan is imple-
mented over the next two years.  HAI has benefitted from the wise counsel 
of our donor, USAID, and open and honest dialogue with other organizations 
MAMA: Mobile AlliAnce for MAternAl Action | spotlight MAy 2013 5
that have implemented similar mHealth projects. Donor fl exibility to modify 
the original Liga Inan proposal has allowed us to make adjustments quickly 
as challenges arise. Rolling out in only one subdistrict has also facilitated 
focused trouble shooting before taking the system to a broader population.
One challenge that became apparent quickly is a shortage of fuel available to 
district health teams and poor maintenance of health vehicles for transport-
ing laboring women to a health facility. Enrolled women and their families 
are taking advantage of the communication bridge provided by Liga Inan and 
contacting their midwife when labor begins. However, health staff  are some-
times hampered in dispatching the ambulance due to lack of fuel. The Liga 
Inan project has helped to shine light on this problem in the implementation 
district; however, other districts are known to experience the same issue. 
Armed with data to identify this problem, HAI has been engaged in opening 
up dialogue with both the MOH and the donor community in Timor-Leste to 
engage in thinking through possible solutions to chronic fuel shortages that 
impair the referral and emergency response systems.
fUTURe PlAns
Liga Inan is in its very early days of implementation, but there is already 
interest within the MOH in scaling up. However, sound evaluations are crit-
ical before mHealth projects are to move from the pilot phase to scale up. 
While very early numbers are promising, they do not yet provide evidence of 
success. HAI feels strongly that a robust evaluation to assess impact is very 
important and have plans in place to carry out this evaluation. Our next steps 
are to carry out the planned rollout to the three remaining subdistricts in 
order to have complete coverage in our implementation district.
We will be tracking routinely collected health data at the subdistrict level to 
monitor short term progress toward goals. This data will be analyzed month-
ly and compared to pre-implementation data. In addition, following rollout in 
each subdistrict a phone survey of a random sample of enrollees will assess 
if messages are received and understood, and explore enrollee satisfaction 
with the project. In late 2013 HAI will assess the impact on the health system 
in terms of perceived changes in the workload of midwives following the 
introduction of the Liga Inan project. And fi nally, two years post-implemen-
tation (2015) HAI will conduct a household survey of key project indicators 
and compare with a baseline survey to measure impact. Further qualitative 
studies are also being considered. 
HAI and Catalpa will continue to engage with the mHealth community to 
learn from the work of others and share lessons learned and results as they 
become available.
MAMA: MOBILE ALLIANCE FOR MATERNAL ACTION | SPOTLIGHT MAY 2013 6
The MAMA Community Spotlight series 
shines a light on some of the great work 
being done by organizations using MAMA’s 
adaptable mobile messages. Each month 
we feature a new organization that has 
downloaded our messages and is using 
mobile technology to improve maternal, 
newborn and child health.  
Inspired by these innovative programs? 
Download the MAMA messages for yourself 
by visiting www.mobilemamaalliance.org 
and completing our short questionnaire.
For inquires about working with our 
partnership, contact: 
MAMA Global
 tel: 202.887.9040 
email: info@mobilemamaalliance.org
Media Inquiries, contact: 
Mabinty Koroma 
tel: 202.862.6315 
email: mkoroma@mobilemamaalliance.org
