 
FONEASTRA 
A safety management system for human milk banking 
Breast milk is considered a pillar of child survival; it pasteurization equipment: a freezer, a pot and a heat 
has unique immunological and nutritional properties source. A novel USB bridge connects the phone and 
that help infants get a healthy start to life. Infants who temperature probe, allowing the phone to act as the 
receive breast milk are less likely to become seriously CPU walking users through the pasteurization process 
ill or die from infections, compared to those who do through simple audio and visual instructions. The phone 
not receive breast milk. This is especially true of then transmits the data wirelessly to a central servicer 
vulnerable infants in developing countries who may for review, reports and archiving.  
face continual exposure to pathogens through unsafe 
water or unhygienic conditions. For infants whose 
mothers’ milk is unavailable, the World Health Evaluation and Results 
Organization supports human milk banks (HMB) as a In early 2012 , PATH, in collaboration with the Human 
critical intervention for guaranteeing access.  Milk Banking Association of South Africa, managed a one
-year pilot study of FoneAstra. This included a field test 
To ensure safe pasteurization in resource-limited health 
to evaluate the use of FoneAstra as a low-cost HMB 
care facilities, PATH is advancing a pasteurization 
system compared to routine flash-heat. User 
management system based on a platform developed by 
assessments were performed with milk bank staff to 
University of Washington called FoneAstra. This system 
validate they were able to correctly operate the system. 
leverages the use of mobile phones to precisely monitor 
A cost analysis was also conducted to guide scalability of 
pasteurization of donor breast milk.  
HMB systems in South Africa. 
Implementation date: October 2011 to June 2013 
None of the 100 samples pasteurized with the new 
FoneAstra system showed any bacterial growth. This 
finding confirmed the safety of this pasteurization 
About  FoneAstra 
method, since it was effective in completely destroying 
To address the challenge of ensuring safe pasteurization the bacteria present in 86 of the pre-pasteurized 
in homes and samples. 
resource-limited 
health care facilities, 
PATH is advancing a Lessons Learned 
safety management 
 Human milk bank technicians can successfully 
system based on a 
operate the FoneAstra devices. 
platform called 
FoneAstra.  The ability to provide remote monitoring, as well as 
FoneAstra is a real- push updates remotely, is a key advantage of the 
time temperature platform and allows for off-site supervising and 
monitoring device tracking. 
and remote data 
recording tool. This  Some challenges that continue are the cost of the 
system leverages phones and the risk that they could be lost or 
mobile phones to stolen. 
precisely monitor 
 Small-scale human milk banks can be fully 
flash-heat 
operational even with limited staff using with 
pasteurization of 
simplified systems such as FoneAstra.  
donor breast milk. FoneAstra components include a 
mobile phone, a USB cable and bridge, a glass jar and a 
temperature sensor probe. These are paired with simple 
42 mHEALTH COMPENDIUM   |   VOLUME 3 
 
FONEASTRA 
A safety management system for human milk banking  LOGISTICS 
Conclusion donations from private foundations and individuals to the 
FoneAstra has undergone significant development and PATH Health innovation Portfolio, and the National 
refinement, making the technology well-integrated with Science Foundation Research Grant No. 11S-1111433. 
existing organizational workflows. It is a feasible, safe, 
and affordable tool, costing about US$600, for resource- Contact Information: 
limited settings to ensure the safety and enhance the PATH: Kiersten Israel-Ballard, Technical Officer, Maternal 
acceptability of donor breast milk. With its established and Child Health and Nutrition Program, (kisrael-
quality measures, the pasteurization management system ballard@path.org), Noah Perin, Commercialization Officer 
has the potential to prevent significant infant morbidity (nperin@path.org) 
and mortality through increased access to contaminant-  
free donor milk, a critical step toward expanding HMB References: 
adoption.  1. PATH. Technology Solutions for Global Health: Safety 
Management System for Human Milk Banks. June 2012. Fact 
-------------------------------------------------------- Sheet.  
 
Geographic Coverage: South Africa 
Photo credits: c. PATH, Steffanie Chritz 
Implementation Partners: PATH, University of 
Washington 
Funder: Funding was provided from a grant from the Bill 
& Melinda Gates Foundation through the Grand Challenge 
Explorations Initiative, the University of Washington 
Department of Computer Science and Engineering, 
  mHEALTH COMPENDIUM   |   VOLUME 3 43 
