MA SANTÉ 
Mobile data collection on malaria and child health indicators in Mali and 
Senegal 
DATA COLLECTION 
Implementation date: 2011 to 2014 
Malaria is a major public health challenge, particularly in resource-constrained settings. According to the World Malaria Report 
2011, malaria is prevalent in 106 countries of the tropical and semitropical world, with 35 countries in sub-Saharan Africa 
bearing the highest burden of cases and deaths. Many malaria-related deaths are due to limited of knowledge of malaria 
prevention or detection in advanced clinical stages. In the slums of Yirimadjo, Mali, where malaria treatment accounts for 65 
percent of the healthcare demand, various factors have caused unnecessary morbidity and mortality. Pregnant women and 
children under the age of five comprise the majority of the patients, as they are most vulnerable to malaria. By making regular 
house-visits to check up on the health of young children and pregnant women in particular, Community Health Workers (CHWs) 
play a vital role in the screening and prevention of common illnesses such as malaria and diarrhea, and encourage clients to seek 
care in health facilities.  
To better monitor the general health in the community and to map specific disease-prone pocket areas within the community, 
Dutch NGO International Institute for Communication and Development (IICD) assisted Muso Ladamunen, a local NGO working 
with CHWs, with the introduction of mobile phones and a mobile app called MAMMA which enables CHWs to more easily and 
rapidly collect data on health indicators and to improve logistical coordination, clinical communication and health surveillance, 
particularly of malaria, through the Ma Santé Project.  
About Ma Santé 
The MAMMA app (Mamans contre le Malaria au Mali) is a treatment the facility-based health worker either calls or 
s imple application based on Frontline SMS (a free text sends an SMS to the CHW who sent the data. The CHW 
messaging software) and pre-installed on feature phones informs the patient and arranges transportation by calling or 
(low-cost mobile phones with limited web access), which are texting taxi companies.  
d istributed to the CHWs. The application consists of a 
All CHWs received training in basic ICT skills and learned 
questionnaire designed to capture data on various health 
how to use the mobile phone and MAMMA application. 
indicators, including malaria indicators, and is filled out by  
 Professional health workers in the local health center were 
CHWs during their house visits. The collected data are sent 
taught how to access the web-enabled data-base and analyze 
by SMS to a database with a web interface allowing the 
the data collected by the CHWs, and where needed, 
h ealth centers in the area to monitor the health status of the 
received ICT skills training as well.  
community on a daily basis and respond when needed. If the 
health facility determines that a patient needs immediate 
30  |  mHealth Compendium Volume 4 
Evaluation and Results 
TA pilot involving 50 CHWs in Yirimadjo, Mali was 
carried out in 2012, followed by scaling-up to another 
zone in Bamako, and replication in Fatick, Senegal with 
the French-Senegalese NGO RAES. Once scaled up, the 
application is to be used by 300 CHWs reaching out to 
300,000 people. 
The use of the MAMMA application has a positive effect 
on the fight against malaria. The results from activities 
during 2011 to 2013 show the following: 
 Use of MAMMA enabled CHWs and health facilities 
to more quickly detect and refer a suspected case 
of malaria, thus reducing the response time by 65 
percent; health clinics and community associations 
can respond faster to an outbreak of malaria 
 Shorter response time and faster referral resulted 
in a 25 percent increase of young children receiving 
treatment within 24 hours 
 CHWs worked faster and more efficiently, resulting in a 20 percent increase of number of house calls by CHWs, leading 
to a 22 percent increase of women sleeping under a treated bed net 
 By equipping CHWs with a mobile phone, the communication between doctor and CHW has improved as previously 
communication could only take place face-to-face 
 By collecting data on a large scale in a specific community, health facilities are now able to more quickly detect outbreaks 
of malaria, enabling them to allocate resources where and when needed most 
Lessons Learned 
 It is possible to train semi-literate people in basic ICT-skills and the 
use of particular applications like MAMMA as long as the training 
takes the capacities of the CHWs into account Geographic Coverage: Yirimadjo, Mali and 
 When introducing a new tool, make sure there is a clear benefit for Fatick, Sengal  
the user directly working with the tool 
 Scaling up and maximizing the impact that the tool can have, is Implementation Partners: Muso Ladamunen 
dependent on the capacities of CHWs  (Mali), Sikoroni (Mali), RAES (Senegal), IICD 
(The Netherlands), Orange (France), Orange 
Mali (Mali)  
Conclusion 
Funder: Dutch Ministry of Foreign Affairs, 
The Ma Santé Project has so far proven to be successful as it indeed Innovation Working Group (NORAD, mHealth 
strengthens CHWs’ work and allows community health organizations to Alliance, United Nations Foundation, WHO, 
faster and more easily monitor diseases and allocate scarce resources to Belgium Development Agency (BTC)  
where it is needed most. The introduction of the tool in other countries Contact Information: 
is possible, but careful analysis is needed of the context in which the tool 
IICD | Hilde Eugelink, Community Relations 
is used. The replication in Senegal showed us, that the tool brings less 
Officer (heugelink@iicd.org) 
value, as the CHWs in Senegal are more restricted in what they are 
allowed to do.  
 
mHealth Compendium Volume 4  |  31 
