A unique partnership 
between insurance and 
telecommunications 
companies proves a different 
path to increase access to 
health financing.
Airtel Insurance with MicroEnsure
IMPLEMENTATION DATE:  January 2014 to Present
Sustainable health microinsurance at scale
Health insurance penetration in Africa remains under 1 percent, serving fewer than 3 million people, 
despite there being over 400 non-profit and private health insurance schemes active across the 
continent. Along with a range of other factors, the high expense of traditional health insurance keeps 
it out of the hands of the mass market. While public health insurance projects are underway in many 
markets, MicroEnsure decided to pursue a complimentary private solution with Airtel, a pan-African 
telecommunications company.
By introducing consumers to a free, basic health insurance product, establishing trust through transparent, 
reliable operations, and then offering iterative up-sell products to allow customers to increase their 
coverage by paying larger premiums, MicroEnsure believed it could create an alternative path to health 
insurance coverage. 
About Airtel Insurance with MicroEnsure
M icroEnsure and Airtel launched their first simple health communications informing them the amount of insurance insurance product in Ghana in January 2014 and have they earned for the following month.
since launched in seven other African markets.  The product The health insurance offered a simple benefit, consistent 
is relatively straightforward: Airtel rewards loyal customers across every market: qualifying customers received one 
(who registered for the product by dialing a shortcode) with month of hospital cash as a lump sum of up to $150 paid to 
free insurance as long as they spent a minimum amount them via mobile money if they spent three nights or more in 
of airtime (usually $2).  The more a customer spent with any hospital across the nation, for any medical reason, with 
the telecom, the more health insurance could be earned. no exclusions.  This wide-open claims model was designed to 
Customers were educated as to how the product works via eliminate the fine print traditionally associated with insur-
a Unstructured Supplementary Service Data (USSD) menu ance and to demonstrate a reliable product. Furthermore, 
showing policy information and through monthly SMS even a small amount of health insurance coverage represent-
58  n  FINANCE
JSI
ed a massive improvement n A simple health insurance benefit is perceived as 
over the status quo in better than having no health insurance at all; it is not 
these developing markets, necessary for the uninsured customer to enroll for full 
and provided a prelim- health coverage from the start.
inary foray into health 
n Mobile channels offer important assets to enhance an 
financing.  mHealth service, but the telecom will only unleash 
SIM-card swapping is those assets if they will directly benefit in their own core 
common in Africa and business growth; the benefit must be clearly communi-
there is generally a low cated to show the mutual gains received through the 
level of brand loyalty initiative.
towards many African 
telecoms. Because the 
MicroEnsure-Airtel Conclusion 
product was expected to 
increase brand loyalty as Airtel and MicroEnsure received positive first-year results 
well as revenue for the telecom, Airtel paid the premiums to from and testimonials about Airtel Insurance.  Contrary 
MicroEnsure and its partner insurance companies in various to many common assumptions about health financing, 
markets. The customer’s airtime was not deducted but rather the partners have proven a different path to increase access 
the cover was provided for free and paid by the telecom on to health financing and anticipate continued product 
the basis of the overall increase in value to their core business development.
(via airtime spend) from the portfolio of insured customers. Plans for the product moving forward include offering higher 
This business model therefore offered a “win-win-win” for amounts of coverage for which customers would pay.  In 
the patient, distributor, and insurer alike.  The patient re- March 2015, Airtel and MicroEnsure began offering an up-
ceived free and reliable means of mitigating risk, the distribu- sell product which provided double the amount of coverage 
tor received a product to increase revenue and brand loyalty, for the subscriber; the same coverage was also offered to a 
and the insurer saw millions more customers become poli- family member. Within the first two months, more than 
cyholders on a financially viable basis as premiums exceeded 50,000 customers had purchased the up-sell and many said 
the cost of claims. they were excited to do so based on the provenance of the 
initial free insurance product.
Evaluation and Results Later in 2015, MicroEnsure and Airtel will launch mHealth services to Airtel Insurance customers, allowing them to 
enjoy health financing as well as health education products in 
The major objectives for this project concerned scaling health a simple package that can be offered at scale from day one.  n 
microinsurance, financial sustainability, and creating new 
market penetration by offering customers their first-ever 
health insurance policies. While health insurance enables 
access to inpatient hospital care, the impact of this product 
on health outcomes is not yet known. 
In 2014, more than 3.1 million customers enrolled in sim-
ple, free health insurance through Airtel and MicroEnsure. 
As of May 2014, the product has expanded to eight African 
markets and all products are still available. Surveys across 
operating markets have indicated that for 86 percent of Air-
tel/MicroEnsure’s customers, Airtel Insurance was their first 
insurance policy of any kind.
Geographic Coverage:  Ghana, Zambia, Burkina Faso, Nigeria, 
Niger, Madagascar, Kenya, Malawi
Lessons Learned Implementation Partners: MicroEnsure; Airtel Africa  
Donor: None
n Low health insurance penetration is not a result of Contact Information: Steve Knight, Communications Manager, 
a lack of demand but rather a function of high cost, low MicroEnsure, steve.knight@microensure.com 
trust, poor access, and product complexity.
mHEALTH COMPENDIUM  VOLUME 5  n  59
Julia Ruben, D-tree International
