In addition to transmitting 
real-time data, the 
mobile application also 
improved the proper 
management of cases and 
facilitated interpersonal 
communication and 
counseling to caregivers. 
Without a doubt, the tool 
allowed for rapid data 
analysis by a variety of 
decision-makers.
CRS SENEGAL mHEALTH PILOT
IMPLEMENTATION DATE:  April 2013 to April 2014 
Using mobile phones to improve diarrhea case management 
for children under five
Across four community health projects, Catholic Relief Services (CRS) Senegal directly works with 
2,139 unofficial community health workers (CHWs), and through this work identified a challenge 
in ensuring quality and timely data collection, reporting, and effective health messaging/sensitization. 
Specifically, CHWs are delayed in transmitting important information at the health hut level to the 
health post or CRS staff, lack proper documentation of available and expired medicine, and delay 
communication on important health information until the end of the month when information from 
daily consultation is compiled.  
Furthermore, data analysis from the health huts is analyzed quarterly, often when trends such as 
high malaria rates have already occurred and timely messaging or response is subsequently late and 
ineffective. The current paper reporting system does not allow for timely community sensitization and 
responses regarding increases in illness.
About CRS Senegal’s mHealth Pilot
To respond to this need, CRS and CommCare jointly health services or reference to the next level health post. The developed a real-time cell-phone and web-based approach would also allow district health authorities at the 
application that was used by CHWs in a pilot program to health post level to take appropriate and quick decisions 
manage child diarrhea cases. By testing mobile phone and and reinforce CHWs to educate the community on health 
database applications, CRS and the community health team concerns. The app that was developed was able to collect data 
aimed to have access to real-time data focused on precise that is accessible via a central database, trigger referrals, and 
numbers and illness trends at the community level facilitated transmit key behavior change messages to mothers through 
by a cell phone application. The app could provide appropriate pictures and voice recordings in local languages.
messaging and steps for CHWs to increase the quality of 
38  n  DATA COLLECTION
Kara Cherniga
Furthermore, the pilot supported the Government of Lessons Learned  
Senegal’s Ministry of Health and Social Action objectives 
within an ongoing five-year community health program 
n Ensure consistency of messages. The ability to play a 
(PSSC II) funded by the US Agency for International recorded message in the local language helped to ensure 
Development to target 10 CHWs based in 10 health huts in beneficiaries were receiving the exact same messages 
the Diourbel Health District to increase quality health care related to promoted behaviors, such as identifying 
and services at the first point of contact for health services. warning signs of diarrhea and treating it. 
The program further aligned with the national strategy by 
contributing towards: 1) an emphasis on improved care n No availability of electrical power charging points.
and case management at community level; 2) building the Because most of the health huts did not have access to 
technical capacity of CHWs; 3) reducing infant diarrhea electricity throughout the day (long-lasting power cuts), 
cases, which will lead to reduction in malnutrition and the health workers had to travel to the nearest Poste de 
deaths in children under the age of five; and 4) increasing Santé to have their phones recharged. Future design 
health professionals’ ability to conduct timely data analysis should consider solar charger devices.
in order to identify timing, trends, and drug stock-outs, n Ensure that merit is recognized and showcased. 
and strengthen the impact of integrated management of Openly recognize CHWs that are submitting their 
childhood illness. data regularly and are encouraging others to do the 
same. The project can purchase airtime for a health 
Evaluation and Results worker’s personal cell phone as an incentive to encourage continuous submission of data for the next six months.
The pilot allowed CRS to test the integration of technology n Provision for spare devices. The project team should 
and an approach that has the ability to change the way CRS have a contingency plan for devices in case of needed 
Senegal collects and analyzes data and subsequently allows repairs or replacements.
for timely and higher quality health responses. The cell 
phone application also has the ability to directly impact the Conclusion
quality of service offered by CHWs by providing consistent 
and uniform guiding questions, reminders and key messages 
to reinforce with beneficiaries. Project success was measured The second phase of the larger community health program  
by two key indicators: 1) number of timely and complete requires integrating and establishing a larger number of  
monthly reports from health huts; and 2) reduction of time health hut sites as well as the integration of new services in  
between identification of significant trends and response the current health package. The majority of activities in the  
(community message, campaign, increase of medicine second phase include strengthening quality standards and  
supply, and expiration of medicine). At the end of the pilot, sustainability of the health hut system to be integrated into  
CHWs reported that there was an overall increase in the the formal health sector under the health post. CRS presented 
completeness and timeliness of reports and that the use the methodology, progress, and results of its CommCare  
of mobile phones to collect and transmit data did, in fact, pilot to other members of the PSSC II consortium and 
reduce information transmission delays (data that was once offered exchange visits. In addition, as the local implementing 
only available monthly or quarterly was suddenly available partner is the Government Health District, CRS worked 
in real time), eliminate the need to travel every month to closely with regional government authorities to ensure un-
collect information and prepare reports, and serve as a very derstanding and implementation of the approach for future 
user-friendly platform that was very easy to master and replication. The application also allows for direct timely 
maintain. Additional findings demonstrated that in addition communication by integrating technology at the community 
to transmitting real-time data, the mobile application also level and for reporting serious health cases to the health post. 
improved the proper management of cases and facilitated Based on results, best practices and lesson learned, CRS will 
interpersonal communication and counseling to caregivers. continue to support integration of this approach in other 
Without a doubt, the tool allowed for rapid data analysis by health districts and programs. n
a variety of decision-makers. Other positive, but unintended 
results demonstrated that the use of the mobile technology Geographic Coverage: Diourbel, Senegal
elevated the status of CHWs within communities and Implementation Partner: Catholic Relief Services
increased the perception of improved health outcomes on the Donor: Dimagi, Catholic Relief Services
part of community members.
Contact Information: Nickie Sene, Head of Programs, Catholic 
Relief Services Senegal, Kristina.sene@crs.org 
mHEALTH COMPENDIUM  VOLUME 5  n  39
