  
  
Delivery Team Topping Up System (DTTU) 
B rief Overview 
To ensure the availability of health commodities, countries 
must implement reliable supply chains with robust distribution 
systems. In countries described to be “fragile states,” 
generalized disruptive turmoil (such as political instability, 
war, civil unrest, economic failure, or particularly poor 
governance) drastically weakens government systems. Both 
the health and transportation sectors are affected by the 
weakened systems of fragile states—and the health 
commodity supply chain is often gravely compromised. 
 
The Delivery Team Topping Up (DTTU) system, implemented in 
Zimbabwe by the Ministry of Health and Child Welfare and John Snow, Inc. (JSI) through the USAID | DELIVER 
PROJECT, is providing solutions to the challenges faced by fragile states. The DTTU system is a distribution 
paradigm in which investments are made to ensure that reliable vehicles, drivers, technical staff members, or a 
combination of these will directly provide or “top up” facilities with the health products that they need.  
 
Under the DTTU system, delivery trucks are filled with a predetermined quantity of a product—based on past 
consumption patterns—and the product is driven to health facilities. The delivery team is made up of a Team 
Leader, who is a staff of the Zimbabwe National Family Planning Council, and a truck driver.  The Team Leader, 
along with staff from the health facility, conduct physical inventories of products, calculate current consumption and 
re-supply quantities, and “top up” the inventory of each facility with quantities needed to meet the next period’s 
requirements.  
 
The USAID | DELIVER PROJECT and its predecessor projects, Family Planning Logistics Management (FPLM) and 
DELIVER, also managed by JSI, have been working with the DTTU system since 2008, successfully employing the 
system to ensure reliable supply chains in areas that present logistical challenges. 
 
  Geographic Coverage: 
 Zimbabwe 
 
 Implementation Partners: 
Zimbabwe Ministry of Health and Child Welfare; Zimbabwe National Family Planning 
Council (ZNFPC); DFID; USAID | DELIVER PROJECT through John Snow, Inc.((JSI); 
Supply Chain Management System through John Snow, Inc. (JSI); Crown Agents 
Zimbabwe; National Pharmaceutical Company (NatPharm) 
 
 Funder: 
USAID, under the USAID | DELIVER PROJECT 
 
 For More Information Contact: 
USAID 
 Peter Halpert, USAID Health Office Director: 
Tel: +263-4-252-400, email: phalpert@usaid.gov 
Project 
 David Alt, Country Director, Zimbabwe; 
Tel: +263-4-309-829, email: dalt@zol.co.zw 
 41 
 
Logistics 
 
Delivery Team Topping Up System 
About the Delivery Team Top Up A costing study conducted in 2010 compared different 
In Zimbabwe, the USAID | DELIVER PROJECT and the logistics systems in Zimbabwe to determine the most cost 
Supply Chain Management System (SCMS) project support efficient approach.  The study found that for a smaller 
the Delivery Team Topping Up (DTTU) system, a logistics number of commodities that are intended for primary health 
system which manages condoms, contraceptives, and HIV care facilities, the DTTU system was shown to be less costly 
commodities such as test kits and antiretroviral medicines for than a pull system. 
the prevention of mother to child transmission. In the DTTU  
system, facility staff does not place orders; rather, every The AutoDRV and the TOP Up software are also used for 
facility is visited once per quarter by a delivery truck, which the Zimbabwe Informed Push (ZIP) and Primary Health Care 
acts as a rolling warehouse.  Package (PHCP) system, which is managed by the Ministry of 
 Health and Child Welfare Directorate of Pharmacy Services 
On the truck is a delivery team leader, who works with (MOHCW DPS). The ZIP/PHCP teams have expanded and in 
facility staff to collect basic logistics data, including physical early 2010 the team started a national round of deliveries of 
inventories, any days out-of-stock, and any losses or essential medicines, including malaria and tuberculosis 
adjustments. This data is entered into customized software medicines, and medical supplies included in the Primary 
called the AutoDRV (Automatic Deliver/Receipt Voucher), Health Care Packages to all ten provinces across the country. 
which is loaded on a laptop. The software calculates resupply The success of the DTTU and ZIP/PHCP commodity 
quantities, and facilities are “topped up,” or re-supplied, to distribution systems is progressively advancing.  
their maximum level. Upon return from a delivery, data from  
the laptops are synched to the TOP Up software at the Lessons Learned 
central level. The TOP Up software generates national-level • In a vendor managed inventory system such as DTTU, 
stock status and other program management data. These shifting inventory tasks away from facility staff to a 
reports are shared with stakeholders electronically and in delivery team has enabled facility staff to have more time 
hard copy at regularly scheduled coordination meetings. The to spend with clients rather than completing logistics 
automation of data collection from service delivery points responsibilities. 
began in 2008, and was rolled out nationally in 2009. • The costing study found that DTTU was actually 
 cheaper to implement than the traditional pull system. 
Evaluation and Results Only team leaders (65 people) require training, rather 
The DTTU system reduces the burden on healthcare than facility staff (~1,300 people). 
providers, ensures reliable data is speedily available at any • Automating data collection has significantly reduced the 
time it’s needed at the central level, and minimizes stock- calculation errors that Team Leaders make, and has 
outs. An evaluation in 2008 showed remarkable results. reduced the amount of time that must be spent at each 
Focusing on condoms for HIV and AIDS prevention and facility.  
contraceptives, the evaluation found that throughout the • Data collected from the facility level is automatically 
nation, the DTTU system has achieved 99 percent of migrated into the national level database.  No data entry 
coverage of all service delivery points—more than 1,200 is required, and national level consumption and stock-
health facilities. On the same national scale, it has achieved on-hand data rapidly available for decision-making. 
more than 95 percent availability of contraceptives and HIV  
and AIDS condoms. HIV tests and nevirapine, an anti- Conclusion 
retroviral drug used to prevent mother-to-child transmission The DTTU system yields positive results in increasing the 
of HIV as well as other uses in HIV and AIDS management, availability of health commodities in challenging environments 
have been added to the DTTU.  by guaranteeing direct delivery to health facilities. 
 
 
Information was excerpted from: 
Video: Information Highway to Health: 
http://deliver.jsi.com/dhome/search/searchdetail?p_item_id=26503029&p_token=17F12A1574567BF850E251BDA6244126&p_item_title=Ne
w%20Video%3A%20Information%20Highway%20to%20Health 
Article in Pharmalink on using technology in supply chain management: 
http://www.epnetwork.org/index.php?option=com_docman&task=doc_download&gid=295&Itemid=15 
Success story on DTTU: http://deliver.jsi.com/dlvr_content/resources/allpubs/logisticsbriefs/ZW_DTTUBrin.pdf 
42   Photo: JSI, USAID | DELIVER PROJECT. The delivery Team Leader records a clinic's inventory, indicated on a carbon copy report, into a laptop as part of the 
Delivery Team Topping Up system in Zimbabwe, 2011.  
 
