Delivering health microinsurance at  
scale across Africa
POWERED BY MICROENSURE
A maternity nurse with a mother and her two newborn twins. Marangu Hospital, Moshi, Tanzania. Photo by David Dorey/MicroEnsure.
12  n  AIRTEL INSURANCE AND MICROENSURE
AIRTEL INSURANCE
The Airtel/MicroEnsure partnership aimed to introduce millions 
of emerging consumers to their first health insurance products 
by offering simple cover, for free, aimed to establish trust through 
transparent, reliable operations. It then offered products for 
customers to increase options, creating a path to greater health 
insurance coverage.
Health insurance penetration in Africa remains under 3%, serving fewer than 3 million people, even though more than 
400 private and nonprofit health insurance schemes operate across the continent, according to the Landscape of 
Microinsurance in Africa 2012. Moreover, these health insurance schemes on average are unsustainable, paying out 
more in claims than they attract in premiums.
By contrast, all other forms of insurance operating on the continent have less than half as many products active, yet in 
aggregate they serve 17 times the number of people.
The reasons for low penetration of health insurance are multifaceted, but a key issue has been the high expense of 
traditional health insurance, which keeps it out of the hands of the mass market. While public health insurance projects 
are underway in many markets, MicroEnsure decided to pursue a complimentary private solution with Airtel, a pan-
African telecommunications company, in order to deliver a sustainable health product to the emerging customer.
The Airtel/MicroEnsure partnership aimed to introduce millions of emerging consumers to their first health insurance 
products by offering simple cover, for free. By introducing consumers to a basic health insurance product, MicroEnsure 
aimed to establish trust through transparent, reliable operations. It then offered intuitive up-sell products to allow 
customers to increase their coverage by paying for more cover for themselves and/or their families, which created a 
path to greater health insurance coverage.
About Airtel/MicroEnsure
M icroEnsure and Airtel launched their first simple health a lump sum of up to US$300 paid to them via mobile mon-insurance product in Ghana in January 2014, and even- ey if they spent three nights or more in any hospital across 
tually launched in seven African markets. The product was the nation, for any medical reason, with no exclusions. This 
relatively straightforward: Airtel would reward loyal custom- wide-open claims model was designed to eliminate the fine 
ers (who registered for the product by dialing a shortcode) print traditionally associated with insurance and to demon-
with free insurance as long as they spent a minimum amount strate a reliable product.
of airtime (usually US$2). The more customers spent with Furthermore, while it might seem naïve to a typical, devel-
the telecom, the more free health insurance (and life and oped-market health insurance consumer that a lump sum of 
accident insurance as well) they could earn. Customers were $50, for example, would be attractive, MicroEnsure knew 
educated as to how the product works via an unstructured from its 12 years of experience in the mass market that, when 
supplementary service data (USSD) menu showing policy there is no health insurance available at all, even a small 
information and through monthly SMSs informing them amount of health cover represented a massive improvement 
the amount of insurance they had earned for the following over the status quo, and provided a stair-step into health 
month based on their airtime usage in the previous month. financing. In other words, $50 of hospital cash is viewed by 
The health insurance offered a simple benefit: qualifying the mass market in Africa as an excellent cover, especially 
customers received one month of hospital cash insurance— when the cover is accessible for free.   
mHEALTH COMPENDIUM  SPECIAL EDITION 2016  n  13
Due to SIM-card swapping and a low level of brand loyalty 
for many African telecoms, this product was designed to 
increase loyalty as well as revenue for the telecom, hence it 
paid the premiums to MicroEnsure and its partner insurance 
companies in various markets. The customer’s airtime was 
not deducted but rather the cover was provided for free and 
paid by the telecom on the basis of the overall increase in 
value to the core business (airtime spent) from the portfolio 
of insured customers.
This business model therefore offered a win-win-win for the 
patient, distributor, and insurer alike. The patients received 
free and reliable means of mitigating their risk; the distributor 
received a product to grow revenue and loyalty; and the insurer 
saw millions more customers become policyholders on a finan-
cially viable basis—as premiums exceeded the cost of claims.
Program Design Process 
MicroEnsure had previously delivered mobile insurance 
through a “freemium” strategy, with Tigo in Ghana and 
Tanzania (2010–2013). In its partnership with Airtel 
MicroEnsure focused product design efforts on bringing a 
simple, valuable health insurance product to the mass market 
through the mobile channel.
commit fraud; 2) by providing a small sum assured for most 
MicroEnsure found from its experience that a traditional of the telecom’s customers (i.e. the lower spenders), reducing 
health insurance model was unlikely to be sustainable. It their motive for a large payday; and 3) by providing a lump 
could not build a panel of hospitals and clinics and still meet sum benefit instead of a per-day benefit, thereby reducing 
the telecom’s requirements to serve all of its customers across the incentive for customers with genuine claims to overstate 
Africa within a year; nor could it operate a third-party pay- the size of their claim.
ment scheme to health providers without experiencing the 
fraud that dooms many health insurance schemes. Once MicroEnsure had determined that hospital cash was 
the correct approach from the supply side, it had to identify 
When MicroEnsure looked into provider insurance fraud, it whether there was demand for hospital cash insurance.
found that mutual distrust between providers and insurers 
is likely an unsolvable problem for now in Africa, where de- MicroEnsure’s research illustrated that nearly 30% of 
veloped information technology (IT) systems are few and far health-related expenditure in these markets is for costs other 
between—doctors resent being paid less by an insurer than than the medical expenses themselves. These costs include 
the service cost them to provide, and so they over-charge transport, food, lost income, and other foregone expenses, 
knowing the insurer will pay less; then, the insurer sees the such as children’s school fees. Furthermore, the research 
overcharge and charges the provider with fraud. This vicious showed that customers who had never been insured did 
circle dooms many health insurance products in Africa. not expect a full indemnity product, as traditional health 
insurance operates; rather, if they received a $50 payout from 
MicroEnsure resolved, therefore, to use a hospital cash MicroEnsure, they perceived it to be valuable, as it was great-
product, paying the patient directly instead of paying the er than $0—the amount of insurance they had ever received 
provider. However, many other hospital cash schemes had before. With this knowledge, it appeared as though custom-
experienced problems with fraud as well. MicroEnsure decid- ers would value the product as designed.
ed to work to limit fraud in three ways: 1) by providing the 
product for free, thereby reducing the claimant’s incentive to 
14  n  AIRTEL INSURANCE AND MICROENSURE
 Sample Nigerian promotion
Growth in Scale 
MicroEnsure designs its products, systems, and distribu- n Airtel Kenya launched in August 2015, reaching 
tion strategies for large-scale implementation. MicroEnsure 173,000 by March 2016.
launched with Airtel Ghana in January 2014, and grew the In aggregate, these products had enrolled 3.74 million 
enrolled customer base to 1.2 million within its first year. customers into hospital cash insurance in seven countries by 
Once the product had demonstrated success, other countries March 2016, a little over two years after the initial product 
launched in quick succession: launch.
n Airtel Burkina Faso launched in August 2014, reaching MicroEnsure’s board approved significant growth in its IT de-
231,000 within its first year. velopment and African regional team, as well as local teams to 
n Airtel Nigeria launched in September 2014, reaching deliver the product on the ground. Despite these investments, 
1.02 million within its first year. by the end of the roll-out phase it was clear to MicroEnsure 
n Airtel Madagascar launched in December 2014, reach- that it did not plan enough expenditure on technology—es-
ing 57,000 within its first year. pecially the process of integrating its systems with the local 
telecom. Experience showed that it should have planned for 
n Airtel Niger launched in December 2014, reaching more cost in recruiting, training, and development.
194,000 within its first year.
n Airtel Malawi launched in May 2015, reaching 163,000 
by March 2016.
mHEALTH COMPENDIUM  SPECIAL EDITION 2016  n  15
Photo by MicroEnsure
Evaluation and Results
The major objectives for the project concerned: scale of mobile insurance model in 2017. Customer surveys across its 
health microinsurance, financial sustainability, and creation operating markets have indicated that for 86% of its customers, 
of new market penetration by offering customers their Airtel Insurance was their first insurance policy of any kind.
first-ever health insurance policies. Unfortunately, there are no assessments of health outcomes, 
As of March 2016, MicroEnsure had enrolled 3.74 million as MicroEnsure does not track patients beyond the submis-
customers into hospital cash insurance in seven countries, a sion of a claim, nor does it track any additional information 
little over two years after launch. Airtel’s continued expan- about their health, including the cause of hospitalization. 
sion and the fact that no insurance companies dropped the However, with a large-scale footprint, MicroEnsure expects 
product indicate overall financial success of the product. to be able to have a much more significant impact on health 
MicroEnsure expects to break even on its investment in the outcomes, as it has built the customer base. 
Lessons Learned in Program Implementation and Scaling 
Low health insurance penetration is often assumed to be a Furthermore, mobile channels offer important assets to en-
function of low demand for insurance in general. MicroEn- hance an mHealth service, but the telecom will only unleash 
sure has found that low penetration of traditional insurance those assets if they will directly benefit in their own core 
is more likely a function of: high cost, low trust, poor access, business growth; if this is not clear to them they will not lend 
and product complexity. If these barriers can be overcome, their brand and footprint to the initiative.
enrollment numbers indicate that mass-market consumers MicroEnsure experienced several challenges during the rapid 
are very eager to be protected from health risk. growth of the program. For example, due to Airtel’s em-
MicroEnsure research shows that a simple health insurance phasis on rapid expansion across markets, MicroEnsure did 
benefit is perceived as better than having no health insurance not invest in client education and impact to the degree that 
at all; it is not necessary—or financially viable—for the unin- it might have with a slower roll-out. This underinvestment 
sured customer to enroll in full health coverage from the start. led to lower uptake in some markets than initially expected, 
16  n  AIRTEL INSURANCE AND MICROENSURE
Photo by MicroEnsure
and to fewer claims than expected as well. Additionally, the drive value for the customer. MicroEnsure learned that in 
overhead and administrative cost as well as the day-to-day future multinational roll-outs, it should move more deliber-
operational headaches of expanding in market after market ately in order to ensure each project is performing according 
often served as a distraction from the key program focus—to to best practice prior to the next product being rolled out.
Future Plans 
MicroEnsure’s main plans for Airtel Insurance are currently higher-value products with greater health benefits. Micro-
centered on transitioning from a free product to a product Ensure is currently prototyping telemedicine and health 
that customers pay for in order to make the product sustain- education products in Kenya and is designing other mHealth 
able for the long term. The free product was successful in solutions, which it expects to make available at scale near the 
generating additional revenue and reducing customer churn end of 2016 and early 2017.  n
for Airtel, but the company will not pay for free insurance in 
perpetuity. MicroEnsure has launched a prototype of a paid Snapshot: Airtel Insurance powered by MicroEnsure
product in Ghana, which more than 100,000 people have Geographic Burkina Faso, Ghana, Kenya, Malawi, Madagascar, 
purchased to date. It expects to roll out the lessons learned Coverage Niger, Nigeria
from the prototype to other Airtel markets throughout 2016. Implementation 2014 to present
Dates
MicroEnsure does not expect that all Airtel Insurance prod-
ucts will remain live, as telecoms’ priorities change; however, Implementation MicroEnsure (product design, mobile Partners implementation, insurance arrangement, field 
it expects 3-4 of the products to remain live, including in engagement, back office support)
its largest markets of Ghana and Nigeria. By year-end 2017 Airtel Africa (marketing and distribution)
it expects to have more than 2 million paying customers on Various insurers (risk underwriting)
Airtel Insurance overall. If it successfully converts a sufficient Donor(s) N/A
number of customers from free to paid products, MicroEn- Contact Peter Gross, Marketing Director, MicroEnsure, 
sure plans to seek to drive additional value through Information peter.gross@microensure.com
References & Additional Resources
1. McCord, Michael J, et al. The Landscape of Microinsurance in Africa 2012. Munich/Eschborn, Munich Re Foundation and GIZ. March 2013.
2. Mulupi, D. How to sell insurance to low-income earners in Africa. 2015.  http://www.howwemadeitinafrica.com/how-to-sell-insurance-to-
low-income-earners-in-africa/51547/. 
3. Chrispinus, J. MicroEnsure: Providing microinsurance to the mass market. 2015.  http://www.biasharaleo.co.ke/index.php/en/2014-10-19-18-
25-47/techie/item/116-microensure-providing-microinsurance-to-the-mass-market.
4. Jarvis, E. Microensure. 2015. http://www.africaoutlookmag.com/outlook-features/microensure. 
mHEALTH COMPENDIUM  SPECIAL EDITION 2016  n  17
Photo by David Dorey/MicroEnsure
