  
  
M obile Product Authentication™ (MPA™)   
 
B rief Overview 
 
The global counterfeit drug market is a serious 
threat to public health worldwide. Up to 30 
percent of medicines sold in developing 
countries are counterfeit or are substandard. 
The global counterfeit drug market is estimated 
to be worth USD $200 billion. 
 
Counterfeit drugs have led to a significant 
number of deaths globally. According to a 2009 
International Policy Network report, over 
700,000 deaths have resulted from inauthentic 
drugs for malaria and tuberculosis alone. Counterfeit drugs have also contributed to increased drug resistance 
in treating serious global diseases. 
 
Sproxil, Inc. is combating the global counterfeit drug market through a Mobile Product Authentication™ 
(MPA™) solution that enables consumers to verify the authenticity of pharmaceutical products. Sproxil’s MPA 
solution allows customers to send a free text message containing a code found on a drug to Sproxil’s servers, 
which immediately respond and indicate whether the drug is genuine or fake. In partnership with BIOFEM 
Pharmaceuticals and Nigeria’s National Agency for Food and Drug Administraiton and Control (NAFDAC), 
Sproxil piloted its mobile verification application between February and May 2010 in Nigeria where the 
government has been proactive in the fight against fake drugs and there is a strong mobile phone culture.  
 
Since its pilot, Sproxil has expanded rapidly in Nigeria, Ghana, Kenya, and India.  
 
   Geographic Coverage: 
 Nigeria, Ghana, Kenya, and India  
 Implementation Partners: 
Sproxil, Inc. developed the application and partnered with a team which included: 
Nigeria National Agency for Food and Drug Administration and Control (NAFDAC) | 
BIOFEM Pharmaceuticals 
              
 Funder: 
      BIOFEM Pharmaceuticals 
 
 For More Information Contact: 
Sproxil  
 Jeff Loucks, PR Manager;  
145 Wood Road, Braintree, MA 02184;  
Tel: +1-781-571-9330; email: jeff@sproxil.com 
 
 47 
 
Logistics 
 
 
MPA™ 
About MPA Lessons Learned 
Sproxil has developed a Mobile Product • Partnership building is a major component of 
Authentication™ (MPA™) solution that enables Sproxil’s success. The company works very closely 
consumers to verify that the pharmaceutical product with multinational mobile phone companies to 
they are buying is genuine. Nigeria-based drug bundle the price of text messaging for its clients and 
distributor BIOFEM Pharmaceuticals had been searching collaborates with national governments to ensure 
for a solution to address massive counterfeiting of its coordination. 
flagship Merck Soreno product for Type 2 Diabetes, • Care must be taken to secure qualified and 
Glucophage. Sproxil’s solution provided the company reputable manufacturers for scratch labels. The 
with a low-cost and efficient way to combat this company has introduced a rigorous vetting and 
negative trend. screening process to make sure that the suppliers 
 meet quality needs, especially focusing on security 
Consumers use a scratch card, similar to those used to and reliability. 
replenish cellular talk-time, to reveal a one-time-use • Technology can be used for national tracking of 
code on pharmaceutical products. They then send the counterfeit drugs. Using MPA™, pharmaceuticals 
code via SMS to a “911 for fake drugs” number which is and the appropriate national authorities can track 
identical on all cellular networks within a country. A the specific mobile network associated with an 
response is dispatched immediately from Sproxil’s incoming text message and identify areas of the 
servers, indicating whether the drug is real or fake. If a country with possible counterfeit activity. 
fake product is found, consumers are given a hotline  
number to call and report it.  Conclusion  
 Leading pharmaceutical companies and regulatory 
Evaluation and Results organizations in developing countries of Africa and India 
During the pilot phase in Nigeria, Sproxil’s scratch have been leveraging Sproxil’s MPA™ solution to 
codes were affixed to over one million sachets of protect consumers from taking potentially harmful 
Glucophage. Glucophage sales increased by more than counterfeit and substandard drugs since the company 
10 percent in Nigeria and BIOFEM had seen a return on launched in 2009. 
investment of over1,000 percent within 90 days.  
 Since its pilot, Sproxil has been expanding rapidly in 
As of February 2012, Sproxil had sent more than one Nigeria, Ghana, Kenya, and India. In 2011, Sproxil 
million text messages in Nigeria to verify drug received US$1.8 million in investment from Acumen 
authenticity. To further improve access, Sproxil Fund, a non-profit impact investment fund. These new 
partnered with all global systems for mobile funds enabled Sproxil to begin expansion into India and 
communication (GSM) networks in Nigeria (Etisalat, Kenya, build sales teams in Nigeria and the United 
Glo, MTN, and Zain), with the potential of reaching 67 States, and further enhance the company’s technology. 
million users. Consumers can now text on any GSM  
network in the country using one live short code, In August 2012, Bharti Airtel (‘Airtel’), a global 
38353. The company has been able to replicate this telecommunications company with operations in 17 
same service in Kenya through its partnership with countries across Africa, announced a partnership with 
Safaricom and the Kenya Pharmacy and Poisons Board Sproxil to combat the counterfeit drug market in Africa. 
(PPB), the national drug regulatory authority. The partnership is designed to facilitate the deployment 
 of the MPA™ solution throughout developing regions of 
 Africa – markets where Airtel is entrenched as a leading 
 telecommunications provider. 
  
Information was excerpted from: 
http://www.acumenfund.org/investment/sproxil.html 
48  http://www.businesscalltoaction.org/wp-content/files_mf/sproxilcasestudy2.23.2012forweb17.pdf http://www.policynetwork.net/health/publication/keeping-it-real-protecting-worlds-poor-fake-drugs 
http://www.reuters.com/article/2010/06/10/us-customs-drugs-idUSTRE65961U20100610 
