 
MEDIA RELEASE          10 AUGUST 2021 
 
RCPA updates advice surrounding rapid antigen tests 
 
Due to limitations in sensitivity, the Royal College of Pathologists of Australasia remains 
concerned over the uncontrolled use of rapid antigen tests (RATs) in Australia and New 
Zealand whilst the prevalence of SARS-CoV-2 remains generally low. However, the RCPA 
recognises that governments and public health authorities fighting localised outbreaks may 
need to use RATs for surveillance testing in defined circumstances, in addition to the more 
accurate mainstream molecular tests. 
 
The RCPA is the leading professional organisation representing pathologists, medical 
specialists and scientists who provide pathology testing in Australasia. The College plays a 
key role in maintaining the quality and standards of pathology services in Australia and New 
Zealand. 
 
Dr Michael Dray, President of the RCPA, says that by being informed of the limitations of 
RATs, the RCPA aims to assist authorities in making their limited use for surveillance testing 
in COVID-19 hotspots as effective as possible. 
 
“RATs are less able to detect SARS-CoV-2 and therefore should never be used alone for 
diagnostic purposes in a symptomatic patient where a false-negative result may provide 
unwarranted reassurance and lead to ongoing community transmission.  It is wrong to 
automatically assume that mass surveillance through frequent use of RATs may detect SARS-
CoV-2 infection more (or as) quickly as infrequent use of the superior gold standard 
Polymerase Chain Reaction (PCR) molecular test. This strategy has some rationale in 
countries with high prevalence of the virus, such as in the US and UK, where they did not have 
the capacity to use the more sensitive PCR tests and where the implications of a false negative 
or false positive are not as serious. 
 
“There is limited evidence supporting mass surveillance by RATs in Australia and New 
Zealand where only a small number of independent evaluations have been performed in 
populations with a low prevalence of COVID-19. This is why the RCPA continues to urge 
caution when using RATs and why the College is advocating for an initial limited rollout as part 
of well-supervised feasibility studies. Some studies have in fact shown that the sensitivity of 
RATs is poor in asymptomatic patients. Whilst the College is open to explore new possibilities, 
molecular tests remain the preferred method for COVID-19 diagnosis as they are highly 
sensitive and specific,” said Dr Dray. 
 
Dr Lynette Waring, Chair of the RCPA’s Microbiology Advisory Committee says that RATs 
have several impracticalities that must be addressed. 
 
“If RATs are to be used in Australia and New Zealand, there must be caveats in place around 
their use. Firstly, all positive RAT tests must be verified by an additional molecular test due to 
the high likelihood of false-positive results. As self-collected and self-administered RATs are 
not approved for use in Australia or New Zealand, a mid-nasal swab must still be collected, 
and the test performed by a trained operator. These operators must wear appropriate personal 
protective equipment (PPE) and have access to suitable waste disposal. 
 
“It is imperative that we are still able to accurately track the spread of the virus, therefore 
results of RATs must be recorded in individuals’ medical records, and positive and negative 
results reported to public health authorities. In addition to isolating a RAT-positive individual 
while awaiting the result of the definitive molecular test, the appropriate interim response at 
the testing site must be pre-determined and acceptable to public health authorities. RAT kits 
 
must be transported, stored and handled correctly at each non-clinical test site and each test 
site should participate in a registered quality assurance program (QAP) conducted at quarterly 
intervals,” said Dr Waring. 
 
The Therapeutic Goods Administration (TGA) has updated its guidance regarding supply, 
training and supervision requirements for RATs. The RCPA agrees that health practitioners 
must ensure that anyone performing the test under their supervision (including sample 
collection and interpretation of test results) should be appropriately trained in all matters 
related to good testing practice. This includes training in infection control; collection of 
samples; correct use of the device and interpretation of test results; protocols for recording 
results and requirements for notification of positive results; protocols and referral processes 
for recollection and confirmatory testing; and protocols for reporting any problems or adverse 
events associated with performance of the test, including false negative or false positive 
results, to the TGA. 
 
The RCPA recommends that, as applies to all other quality diagnostic tests, a RAT is chosen 
depending on demonstration of acceptable performance in independent validations conducted 
under local conditions, in addition to being feasible and the practical issues being addressed. 
These scenarios may include: 
 
• Suspected outbreaks of COVID-19 in remote settings where PCR molecular testing is 
not readily accessible. Results would need to be confirmed by PCR molecular testing. 
• To support PCR confirmed outbreak investigations. (i.e., closed or semi-closed groups 
including schools nursing homes, cruise ships, prisons etc). The RAT result could be 
used to quickly isolate positive cases and initiate contact tracing while awaiting 
definitive molecular testing. 
• To monitor trends in disease incidence in communities particularly among essential 
workers such as healthcare workers during outbreaks or in regions of widespread 
community transmission. 
• Where there is widespread community transmission, frequent antigen testing (daily or 
second daily) may be useful for early detection and isolation of positive cases in health 
facilities, nursing homes, prisons, other institutions and essential worksites, if regular, 
routine screening with PCR methods is not available. 
 
“Pathologists have worked hard to achieve the high level of laboratory testing that has been a 
major contributor to the enviable COVID-19 position in Australia and New Zealand and we do 
not want to compromise that position by rolling RATs out too hastily. We have ample capacity 
for current methods of testing with laboratories in Australia and New Zealand continuing to 
provide reliable high-throughput molecular testing with over 100,000 COVID-19 tests 
performed daily in NSW alone,” said Dr Dray. 
 
For further information on the RCPA, please visit www.rcpa.edu.au or see updates on 
Facebook - @PathologyRCPA, Twitter - @RCPAPresident, @PathologyRCPA, or Instagram 
- @the_rcpa #RCPA #pathology #MedicineIsPathology. 
 
ENDS 
 
About the Royal College of Pathologists of Australasia: 
  
The RCPA is the leading professional organisation representing pathologists, medical 
specialists and scientists who provide pathology testing in Australasia.  Its mission is to train 
and support pathologists and to improve the use of pathology testing to achieve better 
healthcare. 
  
 
Media enquiries: 
  
Dr Debra Graves 
Chief Executive Officer 
The Royal College of Pathologists of Australasia 
+61 2 8356 5858 
Debrag@rcpa.edu.au 
  
Linsey Brown 
Managing Director 
The Public Relations Agency 
+61 425 514 005 
Linsey@thepublicrelationsagency.com 
  
Emma Brown 
Senior Account Manager 
The Public Relations Agency 
+61 488 055 334 
Emma@thepublicrelationsagency.com 
 
 
