 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Position Statement 
 
 
COVID-19 Antigen and Point of Care Testing 
Subject: 
Approval Date: 30 September 2020, June 2021, August 2021 
Review Date: June 2022 
Reviewed By: Board of Directors 
Number: 2/2020 
 
 
Introduction  
The Royal College of Pathologists of Australasia (RCPA) oversees the quality of diagnostic 
testing in Australia and New Zealand. The College highlights that COVID-19 rapid antigen 
tests (RATs) are less accurate than gold standard Polymerase Chain Reaction tests (PCR) 
or nucleic acid amplification tests (NAATs) (which they are sometimes referred to) which 
have been the highly-successful mainstay for diagnosing CoVID-19 infections in both 
countries throughout the pandemic. The use of highly-sensitive, specific, timely, high-
throughput PCR testing has been critical to the successful public health response in Australia 
and New Zealand during the CoVID-19 pandemic. RCPA remains concerned that 
uncontrolled use of RATs is not indicated while the prevalence of SARS-CoV-2 remains 
generally low and may compromise our public health response. However, the College 
recognises that governments and public health authorities fighting localised outbreaks may 
need to use RATs for surveillance testing in defined circumstances as adjuncts to definitive 
mainstream PCR testing.  By being cognisant to the limitations of RATs, the College aims to 
assist authorities in making the limited use of RATs for surveillance testing in CoVID-19 
hotspots as effective as possible. 
 
PCR Tests remain the preferred test for diagnosing CoVID-19 infection 
PCR tests are highly sensitive and specific, and remain the preferred method for COVID-19 
diagnosis. Rapid PCR tests are also available for use for urgent results but their throughput 
and reagent supplies remain limited. RATs were deployed into use in Europe and the United 
States at the height of the pandemic in 2020, particularly when the diagnostic laboratories 
were overwhelmed and turnaround times (TATs) became unacceptably long. Fortunately 
laboratories in Australia and New Zealand continue to provide reliable high-throughput PCR 
testing with over 100,000 CoVID tests performed daily in NSW alone. 
 
RATs are less accurate than PCR 
• Unlike PCR tests that detect gene segments of the SARS-CoV-2 virus, RATs are 
immunoassays that detect proteins from the virus. 
• Most importantly, RATs are less able to detect SARS-CoV-2 when present (ie. 
RATs are inherently less sensitive than PCR tests). Compared with PCR tests, 
the sensitivity of RATs in symptomatic patients has been reported to be 72-79% 
(Dinnes et al., 2021) and dropping to 40-74% for asymptomatic patients – ie. missing 
about 1 in 2-4 truly-infected infectious individuals (Dinnes et al., 2021; Taylor-
Phillips and Dinnes, 2021). RATs are therefore more likely to cause false-negative 
results, which is critical when performed in a low prevalence setting, leading to 
 
patients with active COVID-19 infection being missed and remaining infectious in the 
community. 
• The specificity of RATs (the ability to correctly generate a negative result for people 
who don't have SARS-CoV-2) is reasonably high (about 99%) (Dinnes et al., 2021), 
however, very few have undergone stringent evaluation. Notwithstanding, in a low 
prevalence population such as Australia and New Zealand, there is potential 
many of the positive results will be false positives generating confusion in the 
community and require a second mid-nasal swab for follow-up PCR testing 
• RATs still require collection of a mid-nasal swab. Some RATs are able to give a result 
within 15-30 minutes. 
• Some RATS require specific devices to read the results, which increases their 
accuracy but increases their TAT and cost. 
• Unlike PCR tests, RATs are ‘single patient’ tests that cannot go on high-throughput 
automated systems, therefore they are not scalable to be used on a large population, 
in addition they are subject to variations in operator technique and interpretation. 
Lack of training and use in uncontrolled environments can lead to unreliable results. 
 
Proponents of antigen testing postulate that mass surveillance through frequent use of the 
less-sensitive RATs may detect SARS-CoV-2 infection more (or as) quickly as infrequent use 
of the superior PCR test. This strategy has some rationale where SARS-CoV-2 infections are 
widespread, such as the US and UK in 2020. A mass surveillance program using RATs was 
conducted in Liverpool, UK, in November 2020. The results were recently published in the 
British Medical Journal. The accompanying editorial (Taylor-Phillips and Dinnes, 2021) 
contains the following two pertinent sentences: 
 
• “The most important question about community mass testing is whether it works to 
reduce transmission. Unfortunately, we do not yet know the answer”; and 
 
• “Further studies are urgently needed to ascertain whether population mass testing 
using lateral flow tests has any impact on transmission and to measure the harms of 
this massive scale screening.” 
 
There is even less evidence supporting mass surveillance by RATs in Australia and New 
Zealand where only limited independent evaluations of these tests have been performed in 
our populations with a low prevalence of CoVID-19. Hence the College’s continued note of 
caution regarding RATs and our advocacy for an initial limited rollout as part of well-
supervised feasibility studies.  
RATs have several impracticalities that must be addressed 
 
• Self-collected and self-administered RATs are not approved for use in Australia or 
New Zealand . A mid nasal swab therefore must still be collected accurately, and 
the RAT performed by a skilled and trained operator.  
• The RAT test does not inactivate the virus and therefore represents a biohazard. 
Operators require appropriate personal protective equipment (PPE) and access to 
suitable waste disposal. 
• RAT results must be recorded in the subject’s medical records, and positive and 
negative results reported to public health authorities so that accurate tracking of 
the CoVID-19 pandemic can continue. 
• Due to the high likelihood of false-positive results, even in a COVID-19 hotspot, all 
positive RAT tests must be verified by a PCR test. Due to the extraction buffer 
used in RATs, nasal swabs tested by RATs are unsuitable for PCR testing. A 
second nasal/throat swab must be collected and forwarded to a diagnostic 
laboratory for PCR testing. 
• In addition to isolating the RAT-positive individual while awaiting the definitive 
PCR test result, the appropriate interim response at the testing site, which might 
 2 
 
be a school, nursing home, medical facility or similar institution or work site, must 
be pre-determined and acceptable to public health authorities.  
• The RAT kits must be transported, stored under appropriate temperature 
conditions, rotated to remain within expiry date and otherwise handled correctly at 
each non-clinical test site, and this handling documented. 
• Each test site should participate in a registered quality assurance program (QAP) 
conducted at quarterly intervals. 
• RAT testing is for surveillance screening and must never be used for diagnostic 
purposes in a symptomatic patient where a false-negative result may provide 
unwarranted reassurance and lead to ongoing community transmission. 
 
Therapeutic Goods Administration Guidance 
The Therapeutic Goods Administration (TGA) has updated their guidance regarding supply, 
training and supervision requirements for RATs (Therapeutic Goods Administration, 2021). 
The College agrees that health practitioners must ensure all persons performing the test 
under their supervision (including sample collection and interpretation of test results) are 
appropriately trained in all matters related to good testing practice including: 
• infection control practices, including assessment of any site specific work, health and 
safety risks; 
• the collection of samples, or where applicable the supervision of self-collection in 
order to verify patient identification, sample collection, test performance and test 
results; 
• the correct use of the device and interpretation of test results; 
• protocols for recording results and requirements for notification of positive results; 
• protocols and referral processes for recollection and confirmatory testing; and 
• protocols for reporting any problems or adverse events associated with performance 
of the test, including false negative or false positive results, to the Therapeutic Goods 
Administration. 
Possible Use of RATs 
RCPA recommends that, as applies to all other quality diagnostic tests, a RAT is chosen 
dependant on demonstration of acceptable performance in independent validations 
conducted under local conditions, in addition to being feasible and addressing the practical 
issues listed above. The College understands that various scenarios for RAT testing are 
being considered. These scenarios may include: 
• Suspected outbreaks of COVID-19 in remote settings where PCR molecular testing is 
not readily accessible. Results would need to be confirmed by PCR molecular testing. 
• To support PCR confirmed outbreak investigations. (ie closed or semi-closed groups 
including schools nursing homes, cruise ships, prisons etc). The RAT result could be 
used to quickly isolate positive cases and initiate contact tracing while awaiting 
definitive PCR testing. 
• To monitor trends in disease incidence in communities particularly among essential 
workers such as healthcare workers during outbreaks or in regions of widespread 
community transmission. 
• Where there is widespread community transmission, frequent antigen testing (daily or 
second daily) may be useful for early detection and isolation of positive cases in 
health facilities, nursing homes, prisons, other institutions & essential worksites, if 
regular, routine screening with PCR methods is not available. 
 
Conclusion 
The RCPA highlights the lower sensitivity and specificity of RATs, which therefore should 
never be used alone for diagnostic purposes. Authorities may need to use RATs for 
surveillance purposes in circumscribed agreed settings in COVID-19 hotspots. RCPA 
Fellows could contribute to RAT selection and other deliberations to aid in their 
 3 
 
implementation into the Australian and New Zealand context. It is acknowledged that better 
performing RATs may be developed in the future. These will be assessed and commented 
on at that time. 
 
References 
 
Dinnes, J., Deeks, J., Adriano, A., Berhane, S., Davenport, C., Dittrich, S., Emperador, D., 
Takwoingi, Y., Cunningham, J., Beese, S., Dretzke, J., Ferrante di Ruffano, L., Harris, I., 
Price, M., Taylor-Phillips, S., Hooft, L., Leeflang, M., Spijker, R. and Van den Bruel, A., 2021. 
Rapid, point-of-care antigen and molecular-based tests for diagnosis of SARS-CoV-2 
infection. Cochrane Database of Systematic Reviews, Issue 3. Art. No.: CD013705.  
Taylor-Phillips, S. and Dinnes, J., 2021. Asymptomatic rapid testing for SARS-CoV-2. BMJ, 
p.n1733. 
 
Therapeutic Goods Administration (TGA). 2021. Applying for TGA assessment of a COVID-
19 test for inclusion in the ARTG. [online] Available at: <https://www.tga.gov.au/applying-tga-
assessment-covid-19-test-inclusion-artg#conditions> [Accessed 6 August 2021].  
 
 4 
