iDEA: Interactive Distance Education Application
IMPLEMENTATION DATE:  October 2013 to March 2015
Providing health workers with mobile-based video instruction and reference materials
Nigeria has one of the highest population growth rates in the world. The United Nations projects that 
the current population estimates of roughly 160 million will increase to almost one billion by the end of 
the century. Despite the pressing need, Nigeria has had a stagnant contraceptive prevalence rate (percent 
of currently married women who use contraceptives) of only around 15 percent and a fertility rate of 
5.5 births per woman for nearly 10 years.1 The Nigerian Urban Reproductive Health Initiative (NURHI) 
managed by the Johns Hopkins Bloomberg School of Public Health Center for Communication Programs 
(CCP) discovered that the service providers in the cities of Abuja, Ibadan, Ilorin, and Kaduna were restricting 
the use of many family planning methods based on internal biases and reasons that included the client’s age, 
parity (number of births), their marital status, and whether their spouse had granted consent. 
About iDEA
NURHI staff found that provider bias is difficult to planning methods that are appropriate and based on clients’ change, and often remains even after refresher training. desires and medical eligibility. NURHI, in conjunction 
Due to the midwives’ work schedule, the desire to use videos with a local production company, developed instructional 
as the medium for information sharing, and the need to videos with an entertainment-education approach. Each 
track progress, a mobile-based solution was proposed. As a video scenario features examples to help providers recognize 
result, NURHI launched the Interactive Distance Education their biases and then address them by suggesting alternative 
Application (iDEA) system for midwives in order to provide approaches towards counseling. Each scenario has a pretest 
a platform for providers to access relevant educational content and a posttest to gauge learning.
and resources from Android-based smartphones or tablets. iDEA is integrated with Moodle, a popular open-source 
iDEA is adapted from the Digital Campus open source learning management system, which provides users with the 
application OppiaMobile. Educational content is integrated ability to create educational modules complete with videos, 
into the application to reinforce skills after training to images, text, or audio in minutes. OppiaMobile automati-
increase a provider’s ability and willingness to deliver family cally converts the modules for use with Android, which users 
26  n  BEHAVIOR CHANGE COMMUNICATION
Media hits
Wk Tot=587
and assess diffusion. The provider interviews will help supply 
an explanation of the findings of the client exit interviews.
120 hits Page nished
Wk Tot=242
100 Lessons Learned
80
Quiz nished n Convenience: As an offline application, connectivity 
60 Wk Tot=129 costs are minimal so there is no requirement to enter 
40 Unique users into negotiations with mobile network operators.
Wk Tot=59
20
n Sustainability: By registering the application through 
Google Play, the odds for project sustainability are great-
Wed. Thu. Fri. Sat. Sun. Mon. Tue.
3 Dec 4 Dec 5 Dec 6 Dec 7 Dec 8 Dec 9 Dec ly enhanced because midwives are able to update the 
Site visits during one week in 2014 application themselves. However, connectivity in remote 
areas is still so problematic that this registration process 
Figure 1. Usage statistics is not always achievable.
n Dissemination of messaging: It is important to assume 
can install from Google Play. With a one-time connection to that the smartphone itself will be shared, and in some 
the Internet, users can download the app, install the educa- cases personal media will be loaded onto the phones. 
tional content, and register, and then can run the application There are a variety of measures that can be employed 
and content offline. (See image left page.) to reduce file tampering, such as password protection, 
which should be explored.
Evaluation and Results
Conclusion 
In Nigeria, pretests determined midwives’ knowledge of 
counseling techniques prior to exposure to educational The public health community is in the midst of exploring  
content. The average pretest score was 70 percent while the whether wide-scale deployment of mobile technology will  
ensuing post-test showed an average improvement of about  improve frontline health worker and health system performance.  
5 percent. One likely explanation for the relatively minor There are several parts to this question, including: (1) technical 
improvement in scores was that the midwives already knew  feasibility; (2) usability; (3) acceptability among users;  
the material; what they did not recognize, until a video (4) improvement in health outcomes; and (5) sustainability. The 
role play was provided, was their own tendency to display deployment of iDEA has satisfactorily addressed the first three 
a negative bias towards their clients. Qualitative interviews issues, while a planned evaluation in 2015 will begin to address 
demonstrated that the midwives recognized themselves the fourth. The design of the program will, with time, prove to 
in the “bad” example of client counseling and they then be sustainable given the low cost and accessibility of the open 
felt uncomfortable with their own behavior. Focus group source components of the application and learning management 
discussions were held; some midwives expressed guilt at system that form the core of the technology. With a planned 
having prevented clients from making their own decisions. integration of the mPowering Initiative’s media sharing platform, 
The self-assessments were typical in that the videos reflected these components could provide a complete architectural design 
and helped them recognize some of their biases. This was con- of an end-to-end educational media distribution system that any 
firmed during the pilot test and during follow-up focus group national or regional initiative could adopt in the future. Further 
discussions several months after initial deployment. plans for an open collaboration in the refinement of the tools 
and the overall distribution system will further enhance function-
Usage statistics are routinely collected by the application and ality and reduce the cost of future deployments.  n
are uploaded to the administration server whenever there is a 
connection. The graph below reflects the typical usage rates 
where, for example, over the course of one week, 59 differ- Geographic Coverage: Four Nigerian cities: Abuja, Ibadan, Kaduna, 
ent users accessed 242 pages in the family planning module, llorin
attempted 129 quizzes, and viewed 587 media sources. (See Implementation Partners: Johns Hopkins Bloomberg School of 
Figure 1 above.) Public Health Center for Communication Programs; Digital 
Campus
An evaluation is planned for early 2015 using a two-arm qua- Donor: Bill & Melinda Gates Foundation
si-experimental design with client exit interviews to compare Contact Information: Mike Bailey, Systems Development Manag-
providers with and without phones. Interviews will be con- er at Johns Hopkins Center for Communication Programs, 
ducted with providers to document perceptions about iDEA mike.bailey@jhu.edu
mHEALTH COMPENDIUM  VOLUME 5  n  27
