LOGIN		|		REGISTER	
	 	
Home About	Us Resources Members Meetings Contact	Us Sponsorships 	
>> 	Resources		>		Cisco	Webex	Event	Center
Request	AeHIN's	Cisco	Webex	Event	Center Request	it	for	Free
Meetings	are	effective	ways	 for	sharing	knowledge	and	building	stronger	relationships.	To	foster	more	in- Click	below	to	request	your	free	500	seat
country	and	cross-country	knowledge	exchange,	every	AeHIN	member	can	now	request	the	use	of	the online	meeting	platform	today.	
network's	official	online	meeting	platform,	the	Cisco	Webex	Event	Center	500.
What	is	an	Online	Meeting?
An	online	meeting	is	any	meeting	conducted	over	the	internet	and	is	arranged	by	a	member	/	country
representative	for	sharing,	learning,	knowledge	exchange,	or	collaboration.	
Learn	to	Use	the	Platform
Online	meetings	save	time	and	resources	for	people	to	meet	and	make	the	most	of	their	discussions.
There's	no	problem	if	you	are	new	in	using
Why	Request	Cisco	Webex	Event	Center? Webex.	You	can	easily	learn	its	featuresand	how	to	man	it	for	your	small	and	big
Are	there	any	discussion	session/activity	which	you	or	your	institutions	conduct	regularly?	This	could	go	as meetings.	
regular	as	monthly	to	quarterly	or	annually	(anniversary	celebration?	conferences?).	Could	be	a	technical
discussion?	A	regular	class	room	meeting?	or	an	annual	conference?	With	Cisco	Webex	Event	Center,	you Learn	how	to	use	Webex	HERE.	
can	extend	all	these	to	a	wider	audience	without	them	being	physically	present	in	your	activities. Click	"Event	Center"	in	the	course	listings
This	will	save	you	time	and	resources	in	managing	knowledge	sharing	activities and	you	are	ready	to	go.
Terms	of	Use Take	a	look
1.	 The	WebEx	platform	can	only	be	used	for	eHealth	related	activities; Glance	how	the	platform	looks	like	HERE.
2.	 The	WebEx	platform	should	not	be	used	for	promoting	tobacco	or	any	medicinal	product; You	can	also	find	the	list	of	online	meetings
3.	 Only	registered	members/institutions	can	request	use	of	the	platform	for	meetings	and	sharing	activities ongoing	and	scheduled	in	this	space.
related	to	AeHIN;
4.	 A	maximum	of	three	consecutive	requests	for	use	could	be	arranged	by	members/countries	with	the
secretariat.	The	member/country	can	only	request	the	system	for	use	after	another	party	request	the
system;	or	after	a	period	of	1	month.	Otherwise,	a	memorandum	of	agreement	shall	be	forged	between
AeHIN	and	the	requesting	member/country;
5.	 To	use	the	Cisco	WebEx	Meeting	center,	the	member/country	representative	shall	fill	out	the	website
form;
6.	 The	Secretariat	will	send	the	confirmation	of	the	request	within	24-48	hours	by	emailing	the	meeting
details	(password,	instructions	to	log-in)	to	the	requesting	member/country;
7.	 Requesting	party	should	secure	a	stable	internet	connection,	headset,	microphone,	mobile	phone	/
landline	at	least	3	days	before	the	online	meeting	and	a	day	before	the	practice	session;	and
8.	 The	requesting	party	secure	the	meeting’s	documentation	in	a	maximum	of	10	days	after	the	meeting	is
conducted.	
Terms	Of	Use	|	Privacy	Statement ©	2019	AeHIN
Home | About	Us | Resources | Members | Meetings | Contact	Us | Sponsorships
