  
P  roject Mwana – SMS for Early Infant 
 
Diagnosis of HIV 
 
 
B rief Overview 
 
In Zambia, where the HIV prevalence rate 
among the general population is 14.3 
percent, mother-to-child transmission 
accounts for 21 percent of all new HIV 
infections. Although the use of antiretroviral 
therapy (ART) in HIV-infected pregnant 
women can prevent mother-to-child 
transmission, when prevention fails, effective 
programs for early infant diagnosis (EID) of 
HIV are critical, because the evidence 
suggests that early initiation of ART in HIV-
infected children can substantially reduce 
HIV-related morbidity and mortality. 
 
Project Mwana is an innovative health initiative being implemented by the Zambian Ministry of Health with 
support from UNICEF and their collaborating partners (Zambia Center for Applied Health Research and 
Development; Zambia Prevention, Care and Treatment Partnership; and Clinton Health Access Initiative). 
Through the use of RapidSMS mobile technology, the project delivers test results for diagnosis of HIV in 
infants in real time to rural clinics and facilitates communications between clinics and community health 
workers. The community health workers then inform mothers that the results are ready for their collection.  
 
Begun as a pilot in 13 districts of Zambia in June 2010, the project has shown a reduction in turnaround time – 
from sample collection, to laboratory, to the return of test results, to the originating health facility – of more 
than 50 percent in the country’s rural and underserved communities. Zambia has since developed a national 
scale-up plan and implementation guide, and with UNICEF’s support, aims to achieve national scale by 2013. 
 
 
  Geographic Coverage: 
Zambia 
  
 Implementation Partners: 
                           UNICEF is supporting the Zambian Ministry of Health to lead a team of partners which 
                          includes: Zambia Center for Applied Health Research and Development  |  
                           Zambia Prevention, Care and Treatment Partnership | Clinton Health Access  
                          Initiative  
                          During the development and design phase of the pilot, UNICEF also partnered with: 
                          Johnson & Johnson | McKinsey & Company | frog™   
 
 Funder: 
      UNICEF 
 
 For More Information Contact: 
UNICEF  
 Nilda Lambo, Chief, Health & Nutrition;  
United Nations House, P.O. Box 33610, Lusaka, Zambia; 
Tel: +260.9787.79532 email: nlambo@unicef.org 
  69 
 
Service Delivery 
 
 Project Mwana – SMS for Early Infant Diagnosis of HIV 
 
About Project Mwana The ‘RemindMi’ application used to trace patients via 
Project Mwana uses RapidSMS, a free, open-source SMS to ensure that they receive key childhood 
programming framework that allows developers to build interventions now also provides community health 
their own SMS-based applications. The project consists of workers with a tool to register births. Its birth 
two applications. ‘Results160’, which speeds up the time registration component has been adopted enthusiastically 
it takes for health facilities where the samples are by community health workers, who now use it to 
collected to get the results back from the regional register the majority of births in their catchment areas. 
processing laboratories, fulfills the project’s primary  
objective of allowing test results to be communicated in It is too early to establish whether the faster turnaround 
a timely, efficient way. All dried blood spot (DBS) time for results leads to earlier ART access for exposed 
samples are sent to regional processing laboratories. The infants or if SMS reminders significantly increase 
communication of test results occurs via four text adherence to postnatal appointments. A full evaluation of 
messages: Project Mwana’s impact is planned for 2013. 
• When test results are ready, the central SMS system  
sends a message alerting the clinic workers;  Lessons Learned 
• The first clinic worker ready to record the results • Government leadership is critical to ensuring that 
sends their four digit pin to the server;  the project is integrated into long-term planning and 
• The results are sent to that phone for, formatted to the technical, physical, monitoring, and human 
be readable on different screen sizes; and finally, infrastructure and systems. 
• A second message reminds the user to write the • A permanent software development team and 
results down in the register and delete them off project manager should be sourced locally. 
their phone. • In order to control costs, the project should: 
 negotiate with telecom companies for scale, not 
The second application, ‘RemindMi’, serves a second pilots; utilize the phones people have rather than 
project objective, to improve the rate of postnatal purchasing and supporting a national phone system; 
follow-up, by reminding mothers to return for their six- and create district-level training teams. 
day, six-week and six-month postnatal visits in line with • The identified needs of end users should inform 
Zambia’s immunization schedule.  decision-making and the development of tools. 
 • Test early and often; don’t worry about failing and 
Evaluation and Results stay adaptable. Use open source tools that can be 
The Zambia Center for Applied Health Research and customized to local needs. 
Development (ZCHARD), a Boston University affiliate  
and one of the partners on Project Mwana, conducted an Conclusion 
evaluation of the pilot phase of the project.  The team SMS technology is a powerful innovation that in Zambia 
selected ten public health facilities within two districts in has reduced delays in receiving EID DBS HIV test results, 
Zambia’s southern provinces for inclusion in the study.  improved communication among health care providers 
Overall, 1,009 DBS were collected from infants for HIV and community volunteers, and more importantly, 
testing in the ten study sites over the 19 months before encouraged patients to return to the clinic for their test 
the SMS system was implemented. In the 7.5 months results with greater confidence. The experiences from 
after implementation, 406 such samples were collected at development of the Project Mwana system can serve as 
the same sites. The mean turnaround time for delivery of the basis for future mHealth projects. The system could 
a test result to the relevant health facility fell from potentially be extended to maternal and child health 
44.2 days pre-implementation to 26.7 days post- areas such as the prevention of mother-to-child 
implementation. In addition, the results delivered through transmission (PMTCT) of HIV and nutrition, as well to 
SMS texting were highly accurate by comparison with the other results delivery and diagnostic mechanisms or 
results recorded on paper. national health program for women and children.  
Information was excerpted from: 
70 http://www.unicef.org/partners/Partnership_profile_2012_Mwana_Zambia_V2_approved.pdf   http://www.who.int/bulletin/volumes/90/5/11-100032/en/index.html 
http://projectmwana.posterous.com/ 
http://www.unicef.org/equity/index 65314.html 
 
