 
OPENHDS 
BRIEF 
OVERVIEW 
Decision makers in many 
low-income countries lack 
the required data for 
evidence-based health 
system management. One 
reason for this lack of data 
is the fact that the routine 
n a t i o n a l  h e a l t h 
management information 
systems (HMIS) do not 
extend to the ‘last mile’—
the communities and the 
informal setting of villages, 
where a  s igni f i cant 
proportion of health-
related events occur. In 
Nigeria, only 35 percent of 
people access health 
services (Nigeria DHS, 2008). Health issues faced by 65 2.0 database. Health program administrators and policy 
percent of the population may never be accounted for in makers can thus have real time access to health and 
the facility-based HMIS. As in most countries, demographic information in the community.     
community-based HMIS data collection is often either 
poor, or non-existent, in low resource settings. The web-enabled, tablet-based OpenHDS application 
allows users to efficiently select previously registered 
The OpenHDS (Open Health and Demographic System) individuals and launch various OpenDataKit (ODK) 
uses an Android tablet application to collect individual forms to collect additional demographic, morbidity, and 
level health and demographic data in rural areas. service delivery information. 
Community field workers periodically visit households 
to collect information about births, deaths, migrations, The mobile application facilitates the collection, through 
pregnancies, deliveries, immunization and other household interviews, of many health events that occur 
pertinent health information. in the community (or outside the formal health system). 
Even with a relatively small target population, accurate 
and statistically significant health and demographic rates 
ABOUT OPENHDS can be computed when health events are combined with 
OpenHDS is an open source Android tablet application ongoing population demographic information. In addition 
that enables community field workers to collect births, to computing rates needed for MDGs 4 and 5, health 
deaths, migrations, pregnancies, deliveries, immunization administrators and researchers are able to assess health 
and other pertinent health information. Field workers system utilization and the burden of disease for these 
can collect data "offline" and upload data to the rural communities over time.  
OpenHDS server when they have mobile connectivity. 
Data validation checks were built into the mobile data 
The OpenHDS server application has functionality to 
forms. Identifying most errors during interviews allowed 
aggregate data by location, time period, and indicators, 
for more accurate resolution of the inconsistencies.   
and to export this aggregate information to the DHIS 
36 mHEALTH COMPENDIUM   │    VOLUME 2 
 
 DATA COLLECTION 
EVALUATION AND RESULTS CONCLUSION 
The project adopted an implementation research The OpenHDS application is addressed to the 
approach founded on participatory action research information needs of frontline health workers, and 
principles, where researchers were directly involved in district health managers. This work is a first step in an 
iteratively designing and implementing organizational iterative process of health information systems 
change in collaboration with the stakeholders.  The improvement in poor, rural regions around the world. 
guiding research question was: Can mobile technology 
reduce the complexity of community data collection for Ultimately, providing timely and accessible health 
state and national HMIS?  information to the key stakeholders of the health care 
system will have a transformative impact on the 
Trained field workers used the application to collect effectiveness of health care delivery. While building 
health and demographic data from a population of 4,445 these systems requires advanced software development 
individuals (from 1251 households). The project skills, attention to standards based specifications and 
successfully replaced a paper-based community health configurable design will make these systems more 
reporting system with the OpenHDS tablet application. readily available to groups that can make use of them. 
As a result of implementing OpenHDS, printing, copying, 
distributing, transporting and storing of paper forms was GEOGRAPHIC COVERAGE 
no longer needed.  Data entry clerks were also not Nigeria (Akpabuyo district in Cross River State) and 
required and workers involved in the paper supply chain Tanzania (Ifakara)  
(including printers and driver person-hours) were 
eliminated. Not surprisingly, resistance to change was 
IMPLEMENTATION PARTNERS 
encountered as the mobile system introduced some 
redundancies in the function of the data entry staff. The University of Calabar (Nigeria), the Ifakara Health 
work of data entry staff had to be reorganized to data Institute (Tanzania), the Swiss Tropical Institute in Basel 
collection and supervisory tasks. (Switzerland), and the Columbia University School of 
Public Health (USA)  
LESSONS LEARNED FUNDER 
 Mobile data collection is much more efficient that Canadian International Development Agency (CIDA), 
using paper and, ultimately, it has made collecting Canada’s International Development Research Centre 
accurate community health information viable. (IDRC) 
Mobile data collection eliminates many of the time 
consuming and organizationally messy steps of CONTACT INFORMATION 
handling paper, including printing, distribution, data University of Southern Maine  
entry, and error correction.  Professor Bruce MacLeod, University of 
Southern Maine  
 The project found little guidance on country specific 
Email: macleod@usm.maine.edu  
guidelines for securely managing health information.  
University of Calabar  
 Compared to Android smart phones, the screen  Professor Martin Meremikwu, University 
real estate and battery life of Android tablets made of Calabar  
a significant improvement in data collection. Email: mmeremiku@yahoo.co.uk  
IDRC 
  Dr. Sharmila Mhatre, Program Leader  
Email: smhatre@idrc.ca  
 
  MHEALTH COMPENDIUM  |  VOLUME 2 37 
 
FINANCE 
 
