An intervention combining 
breastfeeding education, 
cell phone messaging, and 
microcredit programs 
improved breastfeeding 
practices.
ALIVE & THRIVE
IMPLEMENTATION DATE:  November 2011 to August 2012
Integrating breastfeeding education, cell phones, and microcredit 
to improve breastfeeding practices in Nigeria
Alive & Thrive (A&T) is an initiative to save lives, prevent illness, and ensure healthy growth and 
development through improved breastfeeding and complementary feeding practices. Good nutrition in 
the first 1,000 days, from conception to two years of age, is critical to enable all children to lead healthier 
and more productive lives.
A&T tested the effect of an intervention—combining breastfeeding education, cell phone messaging, and 
microcredit programs—on breastfeeding practices in urban and rural areas of Bauchi State in northern 
Nigeria. The University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill collaborated with Partners for Development to 
implement the project with funding from A&T’s small grants program. The goal of the small grants program, 
managed by the University of California, Davis, was to identify new solutions for scaling up effective and 
sustainable interventions to improve infant and young child feeding by linking research to program delivery.
The project promoted optimal breastfeeding behaviors—early initiation of breastfeeding (within the first 
hour after birth) and exclusive breastfeeding (giving babies only breast milk with no additional foods or 
fluids for the first six months). Exclusive breastfeeding improves child survival, growth, and development, 
yet only one-third of infants less than six months of age are exclusively breastfed in sub-Saharan Africa.1 
The rate is even lower in Nigeria, declining from 17 percent in 2003 to 13 percent in 2008.2,3 
About Alive & Thrive
F rom 2010 to 2011, the project encouraged pregnant during regular microcredit meetings over 10 months. Each women involved in microcredit programs to practice early 20 to 30-minute session contained one to three key messages 
initiation of breastfeeding and exclusive breastfeeding. Trained and included counseling cards, posters, and leaflets. To extend 
credit officers led monthly breastfeeding learning sessions breastfeeding support between monthly microcredit meetings, 
22  n  BEHAVIOR CHANGE COMMUNICATION
Partners for Development
Participation among pregnant women (ages 15 to 45) involved 
in microcredit programs rates of early initiation of breastfeeding and higher rates of 
n 69% of participants attended all seven breastfeeding exclusive breastfeeding at three and six months. Intervention 
learning sessions participants were also less likely to give fluids other than 
breast milk in the first three days of life (see Table 1 below).4
n 96% of cell phones received all text and voice messages 
n 85% of small groups presented a song or drama at least 
once per month Lessons Learned
n A program that integrates breastfeeding promotion 
the project gave each small group of borrowers (five to six into women’s microcredit using face-to-face counsel-
women) a single mobile phone. The project sent weekly text ing and cell phone messaging can successfully improve 
and voice messages prompting each small group to discuss the breastfeeding norms and behaviors.
messages and create a song or a drama based on the breastfeed- n Providing a group cell phone was feasible. Many 
ing content to present at the next meeting. participants said that sharing a phone worked well or 
The phone was usually given to the leader of the small group. very well. 
She was instructed to share the messages with her group mem- n Qualitative data collected at the end of the intervention 
bers weekly, by either visiting them individually or inviting indicated that participants spread the messages to 
them to listen as a group. Women in the small groups lived other women in their communities and they were 
in close proximity, which offered opportunities for them to interested in extending the program to other maternal 
interact and discuss the messages frequently, even outside their and child health topics. 
regular meetings.
Conclusion
Evaluation and Results 
An intervention integrating breastfeeding education, cell 
The intervention successfully improved breastfeeding phones, and microcredit improved breastfeeding practices. 
practices among participants. Using a cluster-randomized This intervention could be scaled up in Nigeria, where local 
controlled study design, the project compared breastfeeding organizations provide microcredit to more than 500,000 
practices in women receiving microcredit plus breastfeeding clients. With more than 150 million women, many of 
promotion with a microcredit-only control group. Among childbearing age, involved in microfinance globally, other 
the 390 pregnant women interviewed during the final countries and programs can adopt the approach to promote 
survey, those participating in the intervention had higher healthy growth and development of children.  n
Table 1. Breastfeeding outcomes for each study group
Breastfeeding 
Control  education plus 
group cell phones
Early initiation of 48% 70%
breastfeeding*
Geographic Coverage: Bauchi State, Nigeria
Exclusive breastfeeding at  61% 73%
1 month Implementation Partners: Alive & Thrive (Managed by FHI 360); 
University of California, Davis; University of North Carolina 
Exclusive breastfeeding at  58% 71% at Chapel Hill; Partners for Development/Nigeria; Gerewa 
3 months* Women Multipurpose Cooperative Society; Rahama Women’s 
Exclusive breastfeeding at  43% 64% Development Program; Women Development Association for 
6 months* Self-Sustainers; and Wurno Kowanaka Community Develop-
ment Centre (Nigeria)
Gave only colostrum in the 71% 86%
first three days* Donor: Bill & Melinda Gates Foundation
Gave water before six 49% 24% Contact Information: Jean Baker, Project Director, Alive & Thrive, jbaker@fhi360.org
months*
* Significant difference between groups
mHEALTH COMPENDIUM  VOLUME 5  n  23
