Building Partnerships that Work:
Practical Learning on Partnering in mHealth
A Message from Pam Bolton
Vice President, Membership & Advisory Services
ver the decade that GBCHealth has mobi- “can’t be friends.”  When it comes 
Olized business action in global health, we to joining forces to advance have repeatedly confirmed the value of shared public health objectives, partnerships in driving measurable results. we have seen even fierce com-
GBCHealth plays a unique role as partnership facilitator petitors work together in partner-
to the private sector, linking companies with strategic ship. If each company assumes 
partners including other corporations, governments, clear and fair responsibilities, and remains transparent 
UN agencies, NGOs and grassroots community groups. about expectations, there are great gains to be reaped 
Partnerships increase health impact through several by all actors. 
mechanisms:  greater efficiencies, shared risk and re-
sponsibility, easier scalability and strategic blending of When forging partnerships around health goals, it is 
assets.  GBCHealth’s role is to create and nurture stra- helpful to think broadly and creatively about what 
tegic partnerships and collaborative actions where the each player can contribute. In mHealth, for example, 
unique skills and assets of corporations can be tapped a common misconception is that the technology and 
and targeted to areas of need where business can make healthcare sectors are the only ones who can play. Yet 
a real difference. in our experience that is quite untrue; there are oppor-
tunities for companies in many industries to contribute 
The strongest partnerships establish clearly-defined meaningfully—in ways that extend beyond their com-
goals to meet a clearly defined problem. They may mercial focus.  Business can lend expertise in marketing, 
be focused in geographies of shared interest, such as management, operations, communications—the core 
a specific market or region, or can stem from shared functions that all companies cultivate to support their 
priorities in particular issue areas, such as economic ability to compete in the business they are in.
empowerment among women or access to medicines in 
low-income settings. Clarifying each partner’s priorities As the development world increasingly applies tech-
as early as possible helps increase the odds that the nology to solve global health challenges, GBCHealth is 
partnership will advance those priorities.  accumulating case examples and data to support the 
notion that mHealth partnerships can produce cutting-
At GBCHealth, we have facilitated many public-private edge results. And companies across all industries will 
partnerships that defy the conventional wisdom that have meaningful roles to play in getting there. 
competitors and companies within the same industry 
Co-authors
Vicky Hausman, Associate Partner, Dalberg Global Development Advisors
Kelly Keisling, Co-Chair, mHealth Working Group
 
Contributors
Frédéric Chenais – Rio Tinto; Paul Ellingstad – HP; Arun Gowda – Nokia; Erica Kochi - UNICEF Tech4Dev; Daniela Mo-
haupt – Stop TB Partnership; Erin Mote – USAID Global Broadband and Innovations Alliance; Chinwe Okala – Chev-
ron Nigeria Ltd.; Sunday Okegbemiro – Chevron Nigeria Ltd.; Sandhya Rao - USAID Bureau for Global Health; Sarah 
Sanders – Vodafone; Rodrigo Saucedo – Carlos Slim Health Institute; Karen Spencer – Intel Education Transformation; 
Mathew Taylor – Intel World Ahead; Jon Tigges – Deloitte
 
Special Thanks
Rich Scarfo and Peggy Diab – mHealth Summit/FNIH
 
GBCHealth Staff
Project Lead: Beth Breslauer
Writing and Editing: Dean Mudgett, Jill Berman
Research, Layout and Support: Helen Marks, Hinna Khan
Graphic Design: Helene Coulson
Additional Staff Contributors: Pam Bolton, Jimmy Lee, Ilze Melngailis, Shuma Panse
2
Table of Contents
A Message from Pam Bolton  2
Introduction 3
Realizing the Global mHealth Opportunity:  4
The Role of Partnerships 
Building Partnerships in mHealth:  6
Approaches and Challenges 
Partnership Fundamentals 8
Partnership Best Practices in mHealth 9  
Carlos Slim Health Institute, Deloitte, HP, Intel 
Corporation World Ahead, Nokia Life Tools, 
Novartis, Stop TB Partnership, UNICEF Tech-
4Dev, USAID, Vodafone
Partnership Insights Beyond Mobile 17
Chevron Nigeria Limited, Intel Corporation 
Education Transformation, Rio Tinto
Business Action on Health 2011 Award Winners 19
Introduction
Partnerships have long served as a critical tool for actors to amplify and maximize 
their health impact. The field of mHealth—the use of mobile technologies to improve 
health—is a nascent sector, but one with tremendous promise and potential.  As play-
ers investing in mHealth seek to move beyond existing, small pilots and create main-
stream, global opportunities, partnerships will play an essential role.  Existing part-
nerships - both those in mHealth or global health more broadly - serve as excellent 
reference points for anyone looking to inform and shape future opportunities in ways 
that ensure success. 
In this publication, GBCHealth, along with stakeholders across multiple sectors, ex-
plores the experience of companies, non-governmental organizations and multilateral 
institutions in partnering to increase impact.  Contributors share their unique perspec-
tives on the role of partnerships to advance mHealth goals. Touching upon the chal-
lenges of building strong partnerships and providing best practices based on real life 
experiences, the expert advice of our contributors is intended to serve as a practical 
guide on key topics: identifying the best partners, structuring partnerships for success, 
considering factors for scaling and sustaining programs, and avoiding common pitfalls. 
3
Realizing the Global mHealth Opportunity: 
The Role of Partnerships 
Vicky Hausman, Associate Partner,  Creation of new products or services.   Businesses have 
Dalberg Global Development Advisors also partnered in situations where they can contribute 
complementary expertise or assets to create a new 
Mobile technology has created more than five billion product or service offering.  Mobile presents a new 
points of possible contact across health systems.  Busi- platform – not only for health service delivery – but also 
nesses have been quick to recognize the opportunities to marry health services with other mobile offerings, 
this presents for both social innovation and new com- including financial services.  Changamka Microhealth 
mercial ventures. With the unprecedented information Ltd., based in Kenya, has partnered with GA Insurance 
flow via mobile, companies can know the preferences of to meet regulatory requirements on underwriting and 
their consumers or beneficiaries better, can secure and utilizes the M-PESA platform to provide a savings card 
drive accountability throughout their supply chains and for pregnant women to receive more consistent and 
can create leaner systems for service delivery. affordable care.
Overall, the use of mobile technology has tremendous Reaching new customers or markets.   Partnerships 
potential to improve access, affordability and quality have formed where there are opportunities to work 
of healthcare delivery in the developing world.  Grow- together to enter a new market or reach new customer 
ing amounts of attention over the past three years have segments that were previously either difficult or com-
resulted in an increasing amount of experimentation mercially unattractive.  An example of this is Sproxil’s 
and commitments from funders and backers of global work with BIOFEM Pharmaceuticals in Nigeria, and now 
health.  GlaxoSmithKline in Nigeria as well.  Sproxil provides 
For businesses to effectively operate in the mHealth Mobile Product Authentication (MPA), an SMS-based 
sector, an area that is still very much in its infancy, part- solution that individuals can use to authenticate drugs 
nerships have become a key tool.  Illustrating this point, and know immediately whether they are counterfeit.  
major companies, including African operator giants With this end-user empowerment, companies are also 
MTN and Telefonica, recently cited partnerships as criti- better able to protect their supply chain and revenue in 
cal components to move mHealth beyond small scale markets in which counterfeits are a significant threat.  It 
pilots into a mainstream global opportunity1.  also allows companies to connect directly to consumers 
through customized message responses, which might 
Through our work in the mHealth sector, we have ob- include health tips or advertisements. 
served partnerships with three primary objectives: 
In the developed world, mobile technology presents 
Philanthropic or pre-commercial investments. Many a market opportunity and has been attracting com-
partnerships have emerged with focus on “social in- mercial investment, as evidenced by the more than 20 
novation” using the core capabilities or assets of a venture capital deals that closed in just July, August 
company and its partners to address core social needs and September of this year2.  However, in the develop-
in a philanthropic or pre-commercial capacity.   These ing world, the opportunities and partnerships are still 
investments are often driven by corporate foundations primarily in the philanthropic category, with the major-
or corporate social responsibility (CSR) groups.  Other ity of partnerships focused on social impact, many at 
times they might reside with a business unit, and be fairly small scale, and without commercial interests or 
used as a pre-commercial investment with the aim returns. Based on a cataloguing of recent partnerships, 
of better understanding a market, testing the ability we estimate that nearly 80 percent are focused on 
to work with a partner or improving relations with a social innovation, with either philanthropic or pre-com-
government. A recent example of a partnership focused mercial interests, with 20 percent focused on creating 
on social innovation is the Mobile Alliance for Maternal new products or services for commercial purposes or 
Action (MAMA), bringing together Johnson & Johnson, reaching new customers or markets.  Notably, a number 
USAID, the mHealth Alliance and Baby Center LLC to of partnerships with commercial purposes anchor either 
deliver health information to pregnant women in the with a developing country based company, such as 
developing world.   Sproxil and Changamka noted above, or involve mul-
tiple players based in the global south.
2   Mobihealthnews, Three Notable Mobile Health Investments, October 13, 2011 - http://
1   GSMA Mobile Health Live, 2011 mobihealthnews.com/13834/three-notable-recent-mobile-health-investments/
4
As new entrants consider which type of partnership Scale and sustainability: What will be required to reach 
would be appropriate to meet their objectives, there are desired scale?  How will the partnership be maintained 
a number of questions to consider: over time?  Is there a path to smoothly exit to another 
partner – be it via a sale to another company, or a hand 
Partner identification:   What types of partners are 
off to government or an NGO?  If the latter, what are 
needed and who should be considered?  What is 
plans to build capacity and transfer knowledge and 
required to vet partner contributions (e.g. technology, 
skills?
capabilities) What are the risks of partnering, and how 
can they be mitigated? As the number of mHealth partnerships grows, there 
is learning across these dimensions.  The experiences 
Structuring for success:  What partnership structure 
of those who have been active in this space can help 
would be appropriate in terms of roles and contribu-
inform the strategies and operations of newer entrants.  
tions?   Does the partnership leverage core competen-
Taking stock of this experience will be important not 
cies of the partners involved?  How should incentives 
only to inform the success of future partnerships, but 
be structured?  What are key success factors from a 
also at the sector level, to identify some of the common 
structural perspective?  
challenges and barriers that have been limiting scale 
and sustainability.
1 Philanthropic or 2 Creation of new 3 Reaching new 
Objective pre-commercial products or services customers and 
investments markets
Leverage assets or core Partner to create a new Utilize mobile model-based 
Description capabilities to address a social product or service offering that models to reach new 
need; this includes pre- uses mobile technology as a customers or markets
commercial investments to test delivery platform
a new market or potential 
partner
Example
Bangladesh, India, South Africa Kenya Nigeria, Kenya, Ghana, India
Goal: Improve maternal and child Goal:  Improve maternal access Goal: Provide a means for 
health by harnessing the power of to care by providing health individuals to authenticate drugs 
mobile technology to deliver vital savings accounts to pregnant by SMS and avoid counterfeits; 
health information mothers using a smart card that allows pharma companies to 
can be filled using m-PESA protect their brand and increase 
revenue
Source: Dalberg research, interviews and analysis, 2010-2011.
5
Building Partnerships in mHealth: 
Approaches and Challenges
Kelly Keisling, Co-Chair, mHealth Partnership Structure for Product Development
Working Group In the early stages of product development, partner-
The mHealth Working Group is a collaborative forum for ship goals can be supported by formative research or 
sharing knowledge, promoting promising practices and market research. Partners should clarify their goals 
building capacity for mHealth in developing countries.  to avoid uncertainty at later stages, since both health 
Guidance on public private partnerships for mHealth and commercial interests are evolving in mHealth. The 
was gained from the Working Group’s monthly meet- responsible office should be clear, since a philanthropic 
ings since 2009, as well as interviews with FHI 360, division may have different metrics than a marketing di-
the Institute for Reproductive Health at Georgetown vision. Partner differences can be accommodated, such 
University, Johnson & Johnson, Novartis and USAID. as protections for user anonymity or for proprietary 
Materials from previous monthly meetings are available information. 
at http://www.k4health.org/toolkits/mhealth/mhealth- Product development is iterative. The diversity of skills 
working-group-1. and degree of unknown in mHealth require adaption 
Public health organizations and private companies seek and communication. Intensive approaches like agile 
complementary partners to create mHealth programs software development can require full-time staff.  For 
that are effective, scalable and sustainable. These organizations seeking clear commitments and deliver-
partnerships are based on various criteria, stages and ables, contracts can offset staff turnover. For organiza-
structures, with considerations for program design and tions that are deterred by public commitments to fluid 
ownership. deliverables, informal arrangements and budgets may 
be preferable. In either case, clear time limits can speed 
Partner Selection product development and the transition of roles. 
Public health organizations value private partners with Designing Platforms, Pilots and Partnerships for  
local presence and local familiarity. Similar values can Scale-Up
be demonstrated by experience with health or social 
problems. Public health organizations appreciate large In the scale-up stage, partnerships may evolve to 
companies’ sophisticated product development pro- emphasize organizations with the capacity for national 
cesses and project management, breadth of experience, or international reach. Partnerships may require more 
quality products and access to resources. formal terms as commitments grow and procedures are 
standardized. This can include training, distribution of 
Private companies appreciate public health organiza- material and equipment, maintenance and oversight. 
tions with relevant expertise, reach and reputation. Pub-
lic health partners may not require mHealth experience Platforms and pilots in mHealth should be designed 
if skills can be transferred to them. Private partners face for national reach and international replication. Early 
challenges finding public health partners in a fragment- involvement of scaling and sustaining partners can 
ed market. This fragmentation, the numerous requests ensure appropriate pricing. Public health organizations 
for minor donations and a lack of familiarity with health may have difficulty funding scale-up, and donor fund-
partners pose a bottleneck to investment for scale-up. ing for mHealth scale-up is scarce. Private investment 
One possible solution is an official channel or accreditor is an alternate source, but health organizations need 
of mHealth proposals, supporting linkages between all introduction to these companies and guidance on their 
complementary partners. The speed and transparency negotiation terms. 
of this process could be supported by clear criteria for Addressing Ownership for Scalability and  
participation or accreditation. Sustainability
Stages of Partnership Development In the sustainability stage, partnerships can transition to 
Partnerships proceed through stages, generally includ- local ownership or commercialization through entities 
ing formative research, product development, pilot, with a long-term interest and presence. Early involve-
scale-up and transition to local ownership or commer- ment of local ministries or stable companies can facili-
cialization. tate their commitment to an mHealth program. 
6
Ownership of an mHealth program can influence the and register users without health partners, it can be 
balance of sustainability and scalability. In programs more expensive and risky. To help address these chal-
owned by public health organizations, private part- lenges and size imbalances, a partner with interests in 
ners may lack long-term incentives to invest in scale- mutual benefit may help coordinate partnerships. 
up. Beyond financial investment, mobile operators 
As partnerships transition through stages, documenta-
can leverage significant resources at moderate cost, 
tion of efforts can assist any transition of responsibili-
including marketing, points of sale, transmission and 
ties. Documentation can also assist training of local 
complementary applications. In programs owned by a 
staff, since mHealth procedures are not well-known. 
mobile operator, however, requirements for exclusiv-
Adaptability can be built into the design of the mHealth 
ity can limit access to only its customers and this can 
system and the development process to encourage 
reduce geographic reach and access to target popula-
flexibility between stages, as well as translation to other 
tions. Exclusivity restrictions in one market may deter 
countries or other social aims. 
health organizations from partnering in other markets. If 
mobile operators attempt to develop their own content 
7
Partnership Fundamentals
PARTNERSHIP SELECTION Roles and Responsibilities
Ensure that each partner has unique core competencies 
Shared Agenda and Vision to contribute. Doing so avoids potential conflict among 
Look for partners whose vision is aligned with yours.  If partners by setting clear expectations around roles and 
the vision and values are shared, a partnership will form responsibilities.  “Outlining roles and responsibilities at 
almost naturally.  Trust and respect among partners the most granular level possible from the outset helped 
“should not be underestimated in terms of effectiveness to alleviate a lot of grey areas that could have led to 
of working partnerships and decision-making therein.” further confusion or frustration.” 
Organizational Capacity Shared Value
Make sure that your prospective partner will be able Create shared value by ensuring a “win-win” for all 
to adequately support the initiative at all stages of rel- partners. A partnership will only be sustainable if every 
evant involvement – from development and implemen- party has a vested interest in the partnership.  Partner-
tation to scale-up.  They must also have the capacity to ships will typically break down if there is not a clear 
adapt to changes in the project at all stages. “mHealth gain that is acceptable for a party, or if they do not 
forces organizations to think ‘out of the box’—forces have sign-off from their organization. 
companies to try or implement novel solutions that are 
out of their comfort zone.” Leadership
Identify a “champion” in each of the partner organiza-
Local Expertise tions to lead the campaign within their organization.  
Work with partners who are already working in-country Within the partnership, establish a single coordinating 
and possess relevant local expertise.  To build local body, or lead partner, to drive the project to conclusion 
capacity, seek partners with a commitment to the com- and thereafter.
munities in which they work.  Doing so locally defines 
the initiative, and facilitates successful adoption and National Priorities and Programs
long-term sustainability. Align projects with government priorities at the outset 
to help with scale and rollout. The private sector should 
Complementary Assets not take over the work of the government. Instead, en-
Identify partners who can bridge gaps in your organiza- courage and secure buy-in from government to support 
tion's expertise and knowledge.  Meaningful partners existing government efforts and sustainability.  
do not always need to have technology experience to 
contribute to the mHealth space. Community Involvement
Engage the end-users in the design and on-going 
Reputation and Integrity feedback loop to continually refine the program.  A top-
Consider referrals from trusted partners to identify new down approach is rarely effective in achieving wide-
partners with a good reputation in the market. One con- spread adoption.  Work directly with the communities 
tributor stated that, “from a cost-benefit perspective, to identify their unique needs in a participatory way to 
the cost of leaving a project in terms of the organiza- guide local strategy and rollout.
tions’ reputation in mHealth is far more important than 
the cost of continuing the partnership in an mHealth Multi-stage Planning
venture”.   Establish a clear and committed plan for funding, imple-
mentation and maintenance among partners, from the 
STRUCTURING FOR SUCCESS beginning.  This ensures continuity of commitment to 
Clearly-Defined Problem and Solution projects and partnerships beyond the immediate finan-
Solidify and remain transparent about objectives from cial quarter or year, or current leadership team. 
the beginning of your conversations with potential 
partners.  A well-defined project scope helps “match” Strict Project Management Process
partner competencies to the needs and requirements of Develop a structured project management plan with 
the project. Begin with a clear definition of the problem supporting documentation.  Embrace an agenda that 
that you seek to address.  considers the whole spectrum – design, development, 
evaluation, business model creation, implementation 
and consolidation, and measurement. Define clear time-
lines and milestones as part of the plan.
8
Partnership Best Practices
In order to provide practical guidance to players who delivery in governmental primary care health centers, 
are interested in exploring mHealth or who would like to illustrates how ICSS aims to demonstrate the potential 
fine tune their existing partnerships, GBCHealth sought of wireless technologies to shift the paradigm of care, 
the advice of leaders who have been harnessing the decrease the cost and accelerate their introduction as 
power of mobile to address health issues and increase public health interventions. In partnership with state 
impact.  It quickly became very clear that there were governments, non-profit organizations such as the 
several consistent themes, and some “must-have” com- West Wireless Health Institute and corporations such 
ponents, critical to effectively working with partners on as América Móvil, the largest mobile operator in Latin 
mHealth initiatives. A snapshot of these fundamentals is America, Johnson & Johnson, Sanofi-aventis, Eli Lilly 
outlined on page 8. and GSK, ICSS implements solutions like Diabediario, 
a diabetes management tool, and Mi Bebé®, a Wireless 
What follows is a series of vignettes highlighting indi-
Remote Monitoring Kit. Through such projects, ICSS 
vidual mHealth-focused initiatives and the best practic-
helps transform the standard of care in the region. 
es and lessons learned from working with partners.The 
contributors offer candid advice across each stage of Partner to Shape Public Health Policy 
a partnership – starting with identifying opportunities 
Evaluation is a critical stepping stone and a core princi-
– and the types of partners required to capture those 
pal of ICSS initiatives, to integrate its solutions into the 
opportunities, through partner selection, alignment 
“standard of care.” ICSS strongly considers M&E in its 
on goals and roles, and structuring and planning for 
evaluation criteria of potential partners. For example, 
success. Though every partnership represents a unique 
ICSS commented on its Diabediario project that “com-
relationship, we hope the insights provided here will 
bined with our expertise in operating health models in 
help you establish a solid foundation in your work with 
the field and our expertise in evaluation, our partnership 
partners as you use mHealth to advance your goals. with Johnson & Johnson strengthened our capacity to 
excel a robust evaluation.” The evaluation will include a 
cost-effectiveness analysis, which will facilitate integra-
CARLOS SLIM HEALTH INSTITUTE tion into the public sector in the near future. This evalu-
www.salud.carlosslim.org ation will be performed by the Public Health Institute.
The Carlos Slim Institute (ICSS) is a Mexican non-profit Similarly, in the Mi Bebé® project, ICSS partnered with 
organization founded in 2007 by Mr. Carlos Slim Helú, a West Wireless Health Institute to develop the Wire-
global business leader and entrepreneur. ICSS leverages less Remote Monitoring Kit in a way that benefits both 
innovation to develop, design, implement and evaluate organizations and simultaneously impacts public health. 
integrated and innovative health solutions that respond According to Roberto Tapia-Conyer, President and 
to the most pressing public health issues in Mexico and CEO of ICSS, “If the Mi Bebé project is successful, ICSS 
Latin America. Program Casalud, a model of healthcare will be able to incorporate this solution as a non-profit 
intervention in public health centers throughout the 
country, whereas WWHI will demonstrate the potential 
of wireless medical devices to decrease healthcare cost 
and thus will push the agenda.” ICSS demonstrates how 
strategic partnerships involving both corporations and 
non-profits can support public health goals, as well as 
provide benefits to each partner. This project will also 
be evaluated by a third partner, Ernst & Young, whose 
thought evaluation knowledge will ease pushing the 
agenda to make it a public policy.
Integrate Solutions Into Existing Health Models 
ICSS works within the belief that “mHealth solutions can 
only work if they are incorporated into integrated health 
models. Standalone solutions usually do not work.” 
Many organizations are new to the mHealth field, and 
there is often a lack of understanding of the benefits 
and potential of mHealth solutions. ICSS overcomes this 
challenge by developing programs within established 
9
health structures and models that include a ubiquitous spirit of collaboration that will benefit future efforts. 
educational platform and technological transfer to state 
Understand Government Funding Challenges
governments. These models provide clarity and possess 
clear benefits for both the partners and the beneficia- In its work with government, Deloitte observed a key 
ries. Additionally, integrating mHealth solutions into point of frustration relating to the issue of program 
existing health models significantly enhances sustain- funding. Since government does not have the financial 
ability. For example, to operate Mi Bebé, ICSS partnered resources, its role is often limited to that of a broker 
with state governments in Mexico, deploying maternal between the donor and the private sector. This places 
and child networks within public health systems. Shift- government in the awkward position of needing to 
ing ownership of the project to a public entity facilitates convince donors that bringing the private sector to the 
long-term sustainability and impact. table is ultimately in the donors’ best interest and that, 
to do so, does not mean a loss of control or authority 
over their programs. Until donors give their money di-
DELOITTE rectly to government and allow them to make decisions, 
www.deloitte.com this will continue to be an issue.  
In 2011, Deloitte embarked on a project with the Tan- Change the Game via New Financial Models 
zanian Ministry of Health, the Association of Private Sustainable business models in mHealth remain elusive 
Health Facilities of Tanzania and a Tanzania-based given the sector’s youth, and many barriers exist to 
development firm to support the integration of best-of- establishing leaner, more cost efficient health offerings 
breed technologies and business solutions to address in the mHealth space. The different players in mHealth 
health systems challenges. Specifically, Deloitte worked partnerships face significant and diverse barriers, from 
with these partners to implement a technically suc- profit motives to regulatory priorities, which hinder suc-
cessful and financially sustainable mobile clinic solution cessful adoption and utilization of mHealth solutions. 
for antenatal care. Leveraging local resources, Deloitte Therefore, in establishing mHealth partnerships, “it’s 
tested a mobile services unit utilizing mHealth systems imperative that healthcare providers are connected with 
and point-of-care diagnostic tools to deliver antenatal mHealth applications so they view them as tools to help 
care outside of traditional medical facilities. drive down their own cost of delivery and not threats to 
Deloitte established a highly-effective partnership with their current means of business.”
the Tanzanian Ministry of Health, and the Chief Medical Jon Tigges, (mHealth Initiative Program Manager) De-
Officer specifically, who saw the benefits of the rela- loitte, believes that the key to sustainable health models 
tionship and showed a commitment to innovative ways is to introduce demand-side ‘pull’ into what is now a 
to think about and identify potential solutions to the ‘push’ system.  “To illustrate, a person can get a Coke in 
country’s health problems. Deloitte’s efforts benefited the most remote jungles but can’t find basic medicines 
from having the support of the Tanzanian government in many of the urban public hospitals. This contrasts 
behind them, in particular, the participation of senior the difference between a distributed supply chain that 
leadership from the Ministry of Health. rewards consumer-friendly response and one that is 
Bring the Public and Private Sectors Together centrally controlled without proper incentives for meet-
ing consumer needs. If some of the funding for health 
Through its in-country work, Deloitte directly observed care was put into the hands of consumers in the form of 
the limited relationship between the private sector and ‘health credits’, we believe that they could have a similar 
Tanzania’s NGO community. The two sides rarely meet effect on health care that they have on Coca-Cola.” Em-
or have the opportunity to learn about the value and power consumers to have agency over their purchases, 
assets the other can bring to a common cause. and mHealth solutions can then meet the demand of 
Through its work with the Tanzanian government, De- an eager market, rather than pushing supply without 
loitte brought private sector and NGO representatives first fostering a market to adopt these innovative and 
together to participate in a strategy workshop. The transformative technologies.  He believes that mobile 
workshop provided a unique and much-needed chance platforms can create a new approach that enables the 
to share concerns frankly and identify areas where there use of this approach.
were clear mutual benefits for all involved. Private sec-
tor involvement in these types of activities would foster 
goodwill for the businesses involved, while also allowing 
the groups to share knowledge and further cultivate a 
10
HP Avoid the Pressure to Do Too Much, Too Soon
http://www.hp.com/hpinfo/globalcitizenship/global_is- Organizations experience enormous pressure to solidify 
sues/global_health.html partnerships and develop programs quickly.  This 
HP believes technology plays an integral enabling role proves particularly challenging to the mHealth sec-
in the improvement of access, quality and efficient tor because of the industry’s relative immaturity.  To 
delivery of global health.  The company is focused circumvent this, Paul suggests companies and organiza-
on initiatives that drive sustainable transformation of tions build on existing partnerships, such as expanding 
health systems and processes at scale.  Working collab- bilateral partnerships into multilateral ones, or seek re-
oratively within the ecosystem is fundamental to HP’s ferrals and recommendations from established partners. 
approach.  HP contributes its expertise through system- When structuring a partnership model, partners should 
atic problem solving and appropriate use of technology establish clarity around the schedules and timing of 
at all stages of the healthcare continuum, recogniz- project milestones and evaluation of deliverables early 
ing the need and the opportunity to drive innovation to diminish time pressure later. Paul suggests, “Avoid 
and improvement throughout the cycle.  Examples of trying to do too much too fast with too many partners. 
programmatic work include:  accelerating genomic Do not over-estimate the capabilities and capacity of 
research and personalized medicine; patient and health your own organization or prospective partners. Weigh 
worker education and information access; disease sur- the opportunity costs of any partnership and avoid 
veillance and early warning systems; infant HIV testing; leaping into what appear to be opportunistic ’quick win’ 
health information systems design and implementation, situations. Lunches are rarely, if ever, free.” 
state-of-the-art hospital design and construction; and 
improved health insurance processing.   
INTEL CORPORATION 
Plan for All Stages of Impact 
WORLD AHEAD
When identifying partners, companies and organi- www.intel.com/intel/worldahead
zations must consider capacity and responsibilities 
required at all stages of impact: 1) problem and needs With over 300 programs in more than 70 nations, the 
definition; 2) scoping; 3) solution design; 4) implemen- Intel World Ahead team is actively engaged in acceler-
tation; 5) maintenance; and, 6) funding. According to ating access to relevant technologies and broadband in-
Paul Ellingstad, Global Health Director of HP’s Office of frastructure. Intel World Ahead works with governments 
Global Social Innovation, partnership formation should and non-government organizations to maximize the 
abide by the ‘P5 rule,’ which states that “Proper Plan- value of their technology investments to realize both 
ning Prevents Poor Performance.” social and economic benefits. Focused on practical 
solutions, Intel collaborates with technology companies, 
While some prospective partners may be adept at government agencies, policy makers, banks, telecom-
developing high-impact solutions, these same partners munication operators, health authorities, the develop-
may not have the capacity or expertise to implement ment community and others to establish successful, 
the solution. Thus, some partnerships demand different highly scalable and achievable results.
partners at different stages to maximize success. Inevi-
tably, even with the most thorough planning, partner- In healthcare, Intel World Ahead collaborates on efforts 
ships face setbacks, and partners must be able to adapt ranging from educating medical students and health 
to failure or barriers at any stage.  “Partners should be workers, increasing health worker productivity, improv-
vetted along the lines of prior work – results/outcomes ing and enabling a continuity of care, to architecting re-
as well as how they work in collaborative situations and gional and national health information networks. These 
under pressurized, volatile and ambiguous situations” approaches facilitate the adoption of mobile and fixed 
to ensure that they will be able to overcome obstacles. computing technology, but also render significant and 
Paul expressed, “We’ve learned not to take failure per- sustainable social and economic impact in rapid fashion.
sonally. Failure is part of a healthy innovation process, Effective Private Sector Engagement Requires an  
but try not to make the same mistakes twice. Be very Effective Process
open about failure and success, and the insights and 
explanation behind both.” The private sector thrives through innovation, opti-
mized use of resources and scaling to new customers 
to maximize revenue. Intel is known for innovations that 
scale and consistently delivering better technology 
that’s more affordable. In countries like India, Nigeria, 
11
China and Mexico, mobile health solutions are provid- Jawahar Kanjilal, Global Head of Nokia Life Tools, talks 
ing multimedia education, field diagnostics and data about the inclusion of health into the portfolio, “When 
acquisition and analytics functions in both connected Nokia first launched Life Tools, Agriculture Information 
and disconnected locations. and Education Services formed the core of the liveli-
hood and life improvement portfolio. Internal research 
Tapping into the skills of the private sector to innovate, 
had established that staying healthy had universal ap-
optimize resource and scale in ways that maximize 
peal. We were in search of the right ecosystem partners 
revenue can be invaluable to governments and non-
to lend credibility and local knowledge to the health-
government organizations trying to accelerate the 
care content as the focus was to deliver personalized 
impact of their leadership and missions. While Intel has 
and locally relevant content. By pairing our consumer 
put a lot of effort into education and broadband, the 
research with data on disease prevalence and informa-
ability of the public sector to take advantage of private 
tion need gaps, we were able to create a set of health-
sector strengths in health is not clearly understood. For 
related services relevant to specific geographies.”
public-private partnerships to take center stage in this 
sector, it is critical to identify engagement models that The content featured on Nokia Life Tools focuses on 
effectively streamline the path to achieving scalable prevention and wellness information across three main 
and sustainable benefit. Engaging at the initial stage of content areas: Mother and Child (pregnancy and child-
any project with a “technology acceleration plan” can care advice); Health and Fitness (men’s and women’s 
significantly reduce time and cost of most programs. health); and relevant Health Topic Areas (e.g. diabetes, 
respiratory health, heart, hepatitis, digestive, HIV/AIDS). 
Engage Early
In keeping with the industry practices, Nokia avoids 
Intel exemplifies how the private sector can play a role, providing diagnostic and prescriptive information.
outside of its short term commercial interest, to create 
Partnership Selection Calls for Careful Evaluation
very positive impact for nations, customers and part-
ners. Intel’s priority through the World Ahead Program Emerging markets suffer from a critical shortage of 
is to act as partner and advisor to help customers de- content providers engaged in the mHealth space. 
sign and execute ICT programs. Intel invests in acceler- Considering the level of personalized local content that 
ating a country’s or other organization’s ICT success be- Nokia Life Tools intends to provide, there are challenges 
cause driving benefit ultimately leads to ICT expansion identifying and partnering with the right experts well-
and technology adoption”, said Mathew Taylor, Senior versed in the space. In order to ensure that Nokia Life 
ICT Strategist and Architect. “Organizations looking to Tools is able to provide ongoing and seamless delivery 
forge an effective partnership with companies that have of relevant content sought by the majority of its users, 
broad technology experience like Intel realize great- Nokia has implemented a knowledge management sys-
est value when they engage at the very beginning of tem that helps keep the development of all resources 
their effort - during the initial Program Definition stage on track. 
where we can help them understand what’s possible in 
The actual work of identifying and selecting partners 
today’s world of constant innovation.”
is managed through a well-structured process, with 
initial screenings of potential partners undertaken by 
the respective country teams. Potential partners are 
NOKIA LIFE TOOLS  reviewed during a workshop where the team uses ten 
INTERNET FOR THE NEXT BILLION review areas established by the Nokia Life Tools domain 
http://www.nokia.co.id/aplikasi-peta-dan-lainnya/nokia- and sourcing experts to gauge their presence and 
ovi-life-tools/utama experience in the mHealth or eHealth space, as well as 
Nokia Life Tools services offer personalized and local how positively they are perceived by the public for their 
health information based on consumer defined profiles. work.
Through the Nokia Life Tools platform, Nokia aims to Partner with Government for Mutual Benefit 
address the information gaps in the lives of consum-
ers in emerging markets.  Launched in 2009 with a Nokia Life Tools has established partnerships with vari-
mandate to provide the first internet–like experience ous Government agencies and NGO’s. The partnerships 
for the next billion, Life Tools focused on livelihood and work to mutual benefit with Life Tools being used as a 
Life Improvement services. It is currently available in platform to reach a targeted population with important 
China, India, Nigeria and Indonesia with over 35 million information around managing endemics, informing 
consumers having used the services to-date. users about Government schemes and subsidies, etc. 
Anyone looking to engage with mHealth in geography 
12
can maximize impact by synergizing their activities with Relevant Partners May Extend Beyond Company’s 
the local government agencies and NGO’s wherever Commercial Application
possible. 
Novartis established the project under the leadership 
Knowledge - A Powerful Resource of RBM to take ownership away from Novartis and 
give credibility and legitimacy to the program. Novar-
People living in emerging markets face a dearth of per-
tis then considered other industry partners that could 
sonalized, relevant and local information. Though they 
provide logistics, IT and telecommunications expertise.  
are hungry for information, they do not know where 
Potential partners included Sara Lee and P&G, which 
to look for it; where to find the best, most accurate 
expressed initial interest based on their logistics experi-
sources.  As Nokia has seen, when people have access 
ence in African countries, and Google for its mapping 
to good information and find that information of value 
service. Though some of the initial interest did not 
to them in their lives, they are willing to pay for it. Nev-
translate into partnership, Novartis’ approach illustrates 
ertheless, for the benefits to reach millions, the service 
the importance of considering partners for their unique 
could be made free to users by sponsors who want to 
business acumen, which may extend beyond the typical 
reach and engage this targeted set of users.
players.  
Feel Connection to the Cause
NOVARTIS Ultimately, the smaller partnership meant that each 
www.smsforlife.com partner was truly invested, both emotionally and finan-
Although malaria is a treatable and preventable disease cially, which enhanced accountability across the part-
with tools available to fight it, life-saving medications nership.  According to Jim Barrington, Director of “SMS 
do not always reach the patients who need them. This is for Life”, the successful execution of the program was 
particularly true in rural health facilities where poor in- due in part to the emotional connection that each of 
formation and communications infrastructure can cause the partners shared in what they were trying to achieve. 
stock-outs. In order to reduce stock-outs and ensure “[The partners] know that they are involved in a project 
malaria patients have immediate access to treatment, that is directly contributing to saving people’s lives.  
Novartis developed the “SMS for Life” program.  That’s what drives us and keeps us all together.”
“SMS for Life” consists of an SMS management applica-
tion and a web-based reporting tool for health workers STOP TB PARTNERSHIP
to report on stock levels of anti-malarial medications. 
www.stoptb.org
The program was piloted in Tanzania in 2009, in part-
nership with IBM, Vodafone, Roll Back Malaria Partner- The Stop TB Partnership is an international body that 
ship (RBM) and the Ministry of Health, the program brings together partners across the world to fight TB. 
proved immediately effective. In a 2010 evaluation, The Partnership’s TB REACH program has provided 
Novartis found that only 0.8 percent of facilities in “SMS seed capital to implement innovative approaches 
for Life” program areas had no stock of any dosage of to finding and treating people with TB. Already, five 
its anti-malarial drug Coartem, compared to 26 percent grantees have developed mHealth components in their 
at the beginning of the pilot. projects, and the experience gained is paving the way 
to scale these initiatives. As Daniela Mohaupt, Private 
Consider Using Outside Partners to Develop the  
Sector and Corporate Relations Officer, says, “to stop 
Solution
TB we need to connect patients with the care providers 
Novartis leveraged their internal expertise in IT, the that will provide accurate diagnosis, quality care and 
Malaria Initiative department and the Novartis Founda- the right drugs. mHealth is a simple and effective way 
tion. They utilized a cohort at IMD in Lausanne and, also of making those connections.”
to help research already defined solutions and search 
The Partnership supports programs that are outcome-
for potentially new ideas, made the unorthodox move 
focused, not technology-driven. Daniela advises, “the 
of assembling a diverse team of eight undergraduates 
reason for choosing mHealth shouldn’t be because you 
and graduates to identify potential improvements to the 
want to test a particular technology. It’s about looking 
supply chain in Nigeria and Tanzania, working under the 
at the health problem and deciding which mobile tech-
guidance of IBM.
nology could improve it. This is where working in part-
nership helps. Together we can see what has worked in 
other settings, and work out the best solution.”  
13
Think Out-of-the-Box: Crossing Over of mHealth and developed a robust mission for its new line of work that 
mBanking Initiatives Enable New Solutions governs every partnership it pursues. 
Consistent with the Stop TB Partnership’s aim to cata- Communicate Goals Up Front 
lyze innovation for greater effectiveness and impact, 
In the years since UNICEF first became involved in the 
TB REACH gave Indus Hospital in Pakistan a Wave 1 
technology space, the players and the partnerships 
grant that integrates a real-time mobile phone enabled 
have changed. At first, UNICEF found that the tech-
database, TB treatment compliance and case holding 
nology companies were primarily interested in selling 
scheme with cash incentives distributed via mobile 
or donating hardware, but UNICEF did not see the 
phones. The X out TB technology, developed at MIT, is 
sustainable impact in such an approach. According to 
one element in this project. It uses strips, which reveal 
Erica Kochi, UNICEF Tech Innovation Co-Lead, com-
a code when exposed to the urine of patients who have 
panies, “wanted to do charity vs. development. It was 
taken TB medication. When texting these codes back 
our job to swing the pendulum to actual development.” 
to the hospital, patients are rewarded via an mBanking 
To enact this shift, UNICEF developed principles for its 
model – cash can be collected or forwarded to other 
engagement in partnerships and communicates these 
phone customers anywhere in the country.  Another 
principles upfront to ensure alignment with potential 
incentive scheme pays out to doctors that identify 
partners. The principle of openness is an important 
additional cases and hold TB patients throughout the 
underpinning to every UNICEF partnership. Ensuring 
necessary treatment cycle. This innovative scheme 
an open-source framework facilitates scalability as the 
that leverages the expertise and technologies of each 
solution is then more transferrable to another geogra-
of its partners has led to a four-fold increase in case-
phy. UNICEF engages with companies on solutions that 
detection in the catchment area and pushed treatment 
become “global public goods” – re-usable and valuable 
adherence to over 90 percent – all of this at lower cost 
to each new community. Clearly delineating and com-
per case than the existing public health solution.   
municating their core mission to potential partners is 
Learn From All Partners also imperative. UNICEF only enters into partnerships 
that support their overarching goal: to improve the 
Projects that have a top-down approach or are single-
quality of life for marginalized populations, especially 
partner-led often fail to bring about the expected 
those in rural and underserved areas.  
results and long-term impact. There needs to be room 
to learn from all partners, not just as initial input, but Aim for Core Business Unit Partners 
also in the form of continuous feedback throughout 
After developing such specific principles for partner-
implementation. A note of caution: the public sector 
ships, the right partners “came out of the woodwork.”  
is often incentivized to spend its technology budget 
Mid-size partners such as consulting companies were 
within the year and might prefer a premature roll-out. A 
more interested in working with UNICEF because the 
corporate roll-out approach that includes “testing the 
work provided opportunities to gain insight and advise 
waters” with a small pilot project and tweaking it after 
their big corporate clients to pursue the next market 
feedback before bringing it to scale might be a key ele-
ment that businesses can bring to these partnerships, 
Daniela said.  
UNICEF TECH4DEV
www.unicef.org
UNICEF Tech4Dev bridges the practice of social devel-
opment and the disciplines of technology and design. 
Through the use of technology, UNICEF aims to: 1) 
improve the quality of UNICEF programs, 2) increase 
feedback loops of existing systems, and 3) extend 
systems (education, healthcare, etc.). When UNICEF 
first took an interest in technology, the organization had 
expertise in health and development but lacked experi-
ence in technology and web development. To fill these 
gaps in knowledge, UNICEF turned to partnerships and 
14
opportunity. Erica stresses the value in working with a to work together and still gain value by expanding 
company’s core business units, rather than CSR arm, in the overall market. For example, USAID partners with 
order to create “game changers” that could be rolled several consumer products companies on a public 
out at scale. The “CSR arm is so far removed from core health hand washing campaign, illustrating how private 
business units” that CSR-led initiatives can result in a sector cooperation under generic campaigns can help 
cycle of “pilotitis.” This strategy aligns with UNICEF’s increase market share for all companies in a given sec-
biggest partners, consulting and design firms that tor. Private sector companies can consider partnerships 
engage with a company’s core business strategists to in the mHealth space similarly, to “grow the pie” and 
augment business development. Through such partner- significantly expand a relatively young market. To fully 
ships, businesses prioritize mobile solutions as integral explore the breadth of business opportunities, USAID 
to market access and development. and its partners also use “market segmentation” to 
identify appropriate niches for private sector involve-
While many industry organizations, such as GSMA, 
ment. If the market is segmented appropriately, price 
have made global pronouncements about the value of 
discrimination among these different segments attracts 
technology solutions, companies have not yet trans-
the right customers to each segment and can increase 
lated those words into significant action. Mobile initia-
overall market growth.  Through its pioneering mHealth 
tives currently face barriers in appeasing both private 
partnership, the Mobile Alliance for Maternal Action 
companies who seek profits and governments who 
(MAMA), USAID and its partners are using both market 
want to protect tax dollars.  Partners in all sectors must 
segmentation and generic category campaigns to at-
collaborate to find a pricing model that incentivizes 
tract a diversity of private sector investors and generate 
partnerships for mobile solutions. UNICEF is one of the 
the multiple revenue streams needed to support the de-
many players that sees the potential in renegotiating 
velopment of sustainable financial models for mHealth 
the pricing model for mobile initiatives, in order to en-
solutions. More information about MAMA can be found 
able programs to take off at scale.
at www.mobilemamaalliance.org.
Continue to Share and Collaborate 
USAID USAID recognizes that the broader development com-
www.usaid.gov munity has unfairly placed accelerated demand on 
USAID leverages the private sector through strategic mHealth evidence, scale and sustainability in an indus-
partnerships that complement its portfolio of current try that is just getting its feet wet. mHealth partnerships 
initiatives and investments. To engage the private sec- face the same challenges that have prevented other 
tor, USAID considers opportunities across the value partnerships from scaling for years. Ms. Rao is optimis-
chain of health activities, from research and develop- tic that mHealth partnerships are poised to do more 
ment to demand generation and service provision. together given the sector’s unique openness and will-
USAID works in-country from the policy level down to ingness to share. Open collaboration and a willingness 
the last mile of delivery and identifies existing partner- to share knowledge have been hallmarks of the nascent 
ships in the private sector that could be expanded to global mHealth community; these traits will accelerate 
fill gaps in its diverse portfolio. Extending beyond CSR success in mHealth by a willingness to “fail fast” and 
into broader collaboration on companies’ business quickly iterate to find models that work. 
side, USAID partnerships leverage private sector assets 
including management, operations and business exper-
tise through employee engagement. As the develop- VODAFONE
ment world increasingly applies technology to health www.mhealth.vodafone.com
needs, USAID identifies unique business opportunities 
Vodafone’s implementation of mHealth solutions span 
for private sector companies to engage in technology 
mature and developing markets and support a full spec-
solutions that create impact. 
trum of health delivery by enabling health care workers 
Explore Innovative Business Opportunities with information and support patient care/management 
to enable greater flexibility and freedom.  Vodafone 
According to Sandhya Rao, Senior Advisor for Private 
solutions include Mobile Flexible Working, Remote Care 
Sector Partnerships, USAID supports “generic cat-
Services, Access to Medicine and Clinical Research and 
egory campaigns” that address important public health 
Marketing & Engagement.  To deliver these solutions, 
issues and involve multiple private sector partners. 
Vodafone partners with multiple stakeholders through-
Category campaigns are a good way for competitors 
out the health ecosystem including government/minis-
15
tries of health, NGOs, patient groups and the pharma- critical baseline criteria extend beyond technical and 
ceutical/medtech industry. In 2009, Vodafone began an commercial aspects such as human rights, environmen-
R&D pilot with 129 health facilities in Tanzania to track tal responsibility and employee working conditions. 
stocks of malaria drugs. In 2011, the program rolled out Though there are limited commercial mHealth solutions, 
in a commercial capacity to 5,070 sites and expanded Vodafone demonstrates through its Tanzanian scale-up 
its services to tracking stocks of TB and leprosy items, the first mHealth full country rollout. Perhaps as the 
and bed nets in addition to the malaria drugs. mHealth business model continues to evolve, private 
sector companies and mobile providers will increasingly 
Draw Market Landscape Before Identifying Partners
prioritize mHealth solutions as commercially viable 
The implementations from Vodafone mHealth Solu- routes to market. 
tions, including the Tanzanian model, are commercial; 
Collaborate to Identify Barriers in mHealth Adoption 
however they incorporate an R&D department within 
the team undertaking research and pilots to establish Existing barriers inhibit the development of viable busi-
new markets and solutions/services. Before identify- ness models for mHealth solutions, and these barriers 
ing prospective partners, Vodafone takes certain steps differ from the developed world to the developing 
to draw the market landscape. Sarah Sanders, Head of world and from region to region. Vodafone seeks to 
mHealth Marketing & Commercial at Vodafone, explains, identify obstacles through its ‘Health Debate’ initiative 
“once we have a target area and market, we need to in which the company brings together stakeholders 
understand the potential routes to market, the possible throughout the health industry to facilitate discussion 
opportunity and the customer needs and requirements around mHealth with thought leaders. Through these 
of this area.” After these integral steps, Vodafone can discussions, Vodafone and others have identified three 
identify partners that are “commercially viable, techni- main groups of mHealth adoption barriers: human 
cally capable, roadmap aligned, driven and capable of behavior; policy and regulatory; and security, privacy 
covering all baseline requirements.” Though the initial and interoperability. As mHealth stakeholders work to 
groundwork may differ slightly, the process of choosing clarify specific roadblocks relevant to their companies’ 
partners follows similar guidelines to non-commercial and organizations’ priority markets, a “business case” 
mHealth solutions. While Vodafone carefully consid- will coalesce that aligns with profit-seeking goals, and 
ers partners who align with their business model, other commercial partnerships will take off. 
16
Partnership Insights Beyond Mobile
mHealth is a burgeoning sector for partnership devel- Select Partners with Similar Core Values
opment. Given the sector’s relative youth, organizations 
A key criterion in determining the best partnerships was 
considering engaging in mHealth should learn from suc-
to choose partners with a commitment to sustainabil-
cessful partnership models outside of mHealth. For de-
ity and respect for one another and the communities. 
cades, companies, multi-laterals and non-governmental 
Dr.  Okala stated, “we identified partners who, though 
organizations have established deep roots in public-pri-
different from us, respected, understood and accepted 
vate partnerships to meet a multitude of global health 
our Chevron Way Values: we conduct our business in 
needs.  GBCHealth gathered insights and perspectives 
a socially responsible and ethical manner, respect the 
from a handful of its member companies who have 
rule of law, support universal human rights, protect 
leveraged their business expertise in longstanding suc-
the environment and benefit the communities”.  While 
cessful partnerships around the world. The pearls of 
working with partners from different backgrounds can 
wisdom from veteran partnership experts complement 
present challenges due to differences in work culture 
the insights from our mHealth contributors to offer you 
“this difference also presents opportunities and certain 
a holistic and in-depth resource as you expand your 
richness in outcome, which having people with similar 
engagement in the mobile development world. 
backgrounds would not have”.  
CHEVRON NIGERIA LIMITED Partner for the Long-Term
http://www.chevron.com/countries/nigeria As a company, Chevron believes that its social invest-
ments are a strategic business function.  Dr. Okala 
Chevron is the third largest oil producer in Nigeria with 
noted, “Our presence in our communities is for the 
a workforce of more than 6,500 people and a deep 
long term, producing bigger, better and longer–lasting 
commitment to the health and well-being of the com-
benefits for those involved. We’ve been in Nigeria for 
munity through many social investment programs. One 
50 years and we plan to continue to be there for a long 
such program is a partnership designed to assist Small 
time.”
and Medium Scale Enterprises (SMEs) in Lagos State, 
Nigeria, in managing and implementing HIV, TB and 
malaria policies in their workplaces. Many SMEs simply INTEL CORPORATION 
don’t have the resources or, in some cases, see the need EDUCATION TRANSFORMATION
to implement social programs. Chevron identified an http://www.intel.com/about/corporateresponsibility/
opportunity to not only improve the health of those education/transformation/index.htm
in the community, but to educate and mentor small 
For over a decade, Intel has worked with countries, 
business leaders about the economic benefits of social 
communities and schools worldwide to provide the 
investment programs. 
resources and solutions needed to advance education. 
Key components of the program include advocacy, The company is committed to bringing quality educa-
prevention and awareness training by peer educators, tion to more people, while sustaining local communities 
access to treatment and support services. Chevron and economies and partners with governments, policy-
Nigeria worked with a strong network of partners makers and local vendors to act on this commitment.
(National Agency for the Control of AIDS, UNAIDS, the 
Strengthen Programs via Corporate Collaboration
Women’s Right & Health Project and others) to develop 
programmatic materials and ensure alignment with During the course of its work, Intel has found that 
national strategies. bringing together multiple corporate partners can 
present greater challenges than partnering solely with 
Engage Local Community in Program Design 
government and NGOs. However, corporate partner-
Chevron does not believe in a top-down approach for ships can be more fruitful as they bring together more 
community investment and worked closely with local diverse resources. When working with multiple corpo-
organizations and the community to incorporate local rate partners, Intel has found it most valuable and ef-
perspectives and needs into the program.  Dr. Chinwe fective to differentiate roles and identify ways for each 
Okala, a public health physician at Chevron Nigeria, partner to contribute in ways that play off their core 
claimed the success of the program was mainly due to strengths and resources.
the fact that the project itself was conceptualized with 
the community, so they took ownership and scaled it in One such example of Intel’s success in this approach is 
other communities. According to Dr. Okala, the program its work with Cisco and Microsoft. Based on extensive 
had a ripple effect that shows once “you get the infor- research, Cisco, Intel and Microsoft concluded that 
mation out there, it drives itself.” most education systems have not kept pace with the 
17
dramatic changes in the economy, and are not provid- to engage the community through various HIV and ma-
ing students with the skill sets required for them to laria outreach activities.  Together, the programs have 
succeed. These skills include critical thinking; creative trained 180 community educators, reaching over 3,000 
problem solving; working cooperatively; and adapting people.
to the evolving use of technology in business and soci-
Encourage Transparency
ety. The three technology leaders undertook a multi-
sector research project to develop new assessment While a program may look good on paper, it may not 
approaches, methods and technologies for measuring prove to be successful in the field.  Rio Tinto believes 
the success of 21st-century teaching and learning in that it is important that a culture of openness exist in 
classrooms around the world. To ensure their efforts the partnership so that partners do not hide problems 
would achieve maximum impact, the partners carefully and constraints in the implementation phase.  Accord-
established defined roles and responsibilities upfront. ing to Frederic Chenais, Principal Advisor of Health & 
This helped avoid misunderstanding and ensure the Safety Communities, it is not uncommon for organiza-
project would move forward smoothly. tions to want to look good about the work they are 
doing, but they must understand that misstating results 
Forge Strong Government Relationships
could harm the reputation of both the partner and the 
A well-planned partnership involving multiple corporate company.  Rio Tinto accepts that some programs might 
partners has a strong appeal to governments, helping not be effective, and encourages transparency from 
government partners feel more positive and confident their partners.  “It is better to lose money rather than 
because they are working with several business leaders lose reputation and trust”.
on one issue. Karen Spencer, Director of Global Educa-
Strenghthen Local Capacity
tion Integration at Intel, leverages partnerships that 
include government to help broaden the reach of Intel Rio Tinto requires that partners have additional 
Education’s global work. She believes the key to devel- sources of funding to ensure sustainability of not only 
oping strong and lasting relationships with government the programs but of the organization itself when the 
officials is to continually nurture the relationship, “par- project comes to an end.  The company is committed 
ticipate, show up where invited, show a strong interest to strengthening the organizational capacity of the 
in their actual goals, do your research and spend time partners with whom they work to help ensure the long-
mapping out what you want to do based on the ‘sweet term stability of these organizations.  Also, it is part of 
spot’, the intersection between their needs and your Rio Tinto’s vision to provide added value and reinforce 
solution”. the local economy. 
Foster Goodwill Between Public and Private Sectors
RIO TINTO Many organizations refuse to work with Rio Tinto – they 
www.riotintosimandou.com are not only wary of working with the private sector but 
have a particularly harsh view of the mining industry.  
Rio Tinto is a leading international mining group head-
To help change the opinions of potential partners, Rio 
quartered in the UK.  Activities span the world but are 
Tinto actively engages in awareness-raising activities 
strongly represented in Australia and North America, 
that communicate the positive impact their programs 
with significant businesses in South America, Asia, Eu-
have on the economy overall and the general well-being 
rope and Southern Africa.
of the communities in which they work.
Rio Tinto is deeply committed to improving the health 
of the communities in which they work through target-
ed programs that address the most pressing regional 
health issues. One such program, implemented at a 
mine in South Eastern Guinea, helps prevent the spread 
of both malaria and HIV/AIDS, two diseases with a high 
prevalence rate in the region.  In partnership with the 
government, German Technical Cooperation, Faisons 
Ensemble and others, Rio Tinto trains peer educators 
18
Business Action On Health 2011 Award Winners
Each year, the GBCHealth Business Action on Health Awards honor companies that exemplify the spirit of innova-
tion and dedication to outstanding achievements in global health.  Here are two exemplary mHealth programs that 
GBCHealth honored in 2011.  For more information on the awards, visit www.gbchealth.org.
Hewlett-Packard Company 
Award Winner in Category: Application of Core Competence
Kenya has a mother-to-child HIV transmission rate as high as 45 percent, and one half of all 
HIV-positive infants likely will not live past age two unless they receive immediate antiretroviral 
treatment. Rural clinics in this region can wait up to four  months to for HIV test results to come 
back—often far too long to allow for effective use of ARV treatment. In partnership with the Kenyan government and 
the Clinton Health Access Initiative, HP helped to automate and digitize Kenya’s HIV-testing process, shortening the 
time between testing and result delivery so HIV-positive infants can begin ARV treatment in a matter of days instead 
of months.
Thanks to this new system, the number of HIV-positive children receiving treatment will approximately double from 
45,000 in 2009 (pre-introduction) to an expected 70,000 in 2011 (fully operational).
HP’s process improvement culture: an essential complement to technologic ingenuity
HP entered this project and identified the ways in which it could use its core assets to address a problem and add 
value.  The company’s broad experience in IT infrastructure, business process re-engineering and its innovation ex-
pertise strengthened the testing solution being developed.  Along with its data management expertise, HP brought a 
strong process improvement discipline to this work, which allowed the partners to assess and shorten the HIV testing 
process to deliver meaningful and measurable improvement.
Innovative Solution; Significant Results
The collaboration between the Ministry of Health and Sanitation, CHAI and HP achieved process improvements and 
an innovative application of technologies that is expected to significantly increase ARV treatments for infants and, 
ultimately, reduce under-5 year mortality. Further, the system was designed with reliability and scalability in mind, it 
can be leveraged for similar impact by other nations and in other instances where timely diagnosis is critical to effec-
tive treatment.
Novartis Pharma AG 
Award Winner in Category: Technology for Health
SMS for Life is an innovative public-private partnership led by the Novartis Malaria Initiative that uses a combination 
of mobile phones, Short Messaging Service (SMS) technology and electronic mapping to monitor weekly stock levels 
of key anti-malarial medicines in health facilities in remote rural communities of Tanzania. The goals are to eliminate 
“stock-outs”, increase access to essential malaria medicines and ultimately reduce the number of deaths from malaria.
The SMS for Life pilot was conducted in three highly malaria-endemic rural districts in Tanzania where the disease was 
the leading cause of death.  The three-region pilot comprised 129 health facilities, reaching a population of 1.2 million. 
Health workers at these facilities would be sent an automated inventory request and would text their responses to a 
central, web-based database. The development of SMS for Life was supported by the Government of Tanzania, Voda-
fone, IBM, and Google, all under the umbrella of the global Roll Back Malaria Partnership.
Using existing tech to get brand new results
Using texting, web-based technology, and Google mapping, SMS for Life provides stock visibility in rural health cen-
ters working in heavily affected areas. During the entire program, the health facility response rate never went below 
an average of 95 percent. The proportion of health facilities with all five anti-malarial products increased from 25 
percent to 75 percent. In one of the pilot regions, stock-outs were eliminated by the eighth week of the program.
Affordable replication of the program
SMS for Life was designed to be scalable, generic and highly flexible so that, as a solution to an issue pervasive in 
sub-Saharan Africa, it can be readily applied to any existing health system and to additional conditions and dis-
eases. In Tanzania, each partner funded their own activities. Per-district implementation costs in Tanzania averaged 
US$5000, with per-facility annual costs below US$100 to sustain the effort. These very modest costs, coupled with 
the unique partner funding model add to the ease with which SMS for Life can be adapted to other parts of the world 
or health issues.
19
GBCHealth
GBCHealth is a global coalition of over 200 private sector companies and top NGOs leading the business fight or 
improved global health. GBCHealth supports members in developing comprehensive workplace policies; design-
ing   community programs; leveraging core competencies; facilitating health leadership and advocacy by business; 
and brokering partnerships. GBCHealth also manages the private sector delegation to the Global Fund to Fight AIDS, 
Tuberculosis and Malaria. GBCHealth has offies in New York, Johannesburg, Beijing, Nairobi and Moscow.  For further 
information, contact GBCHealth at info@gbcheatlh.org.
Dalberg Global Development Advisors 
Dalberg Global Development Advisors is a strategic consulting firm that works exclusively to raise living standards in 
developing countries and address global issues like climate change.  The firm’s work helps governments, foundations, 
international agencies, non-governmental organizations, and Fortune 500 companies to make sustainable improve-
ments in the lives of disadvantaged and underserved populations around the world.  Founded in 2001, Dalberg now 
has a diverse global team with 10 offices around the world.  They bring expertise gained in the private sector to bear 
on problems commonly dealt with in the public and non-profit spheres. For more information, please visit www.dal-
berg.com. 
mHealth Working Group
mHealth Working Group is a collaborative forum composed of 150 global organizations and more than 500 individu-
als, for sharing and synthesizing knowledge on mHealth. Founded in 2009, the Working Group works to frame mobile 
technology within the larger global health strategy and promote approaches that are evidence-based, interoperable, 
and scalable in resource-poor settings. Supported and facilitated by the USAID’s K4Health Project, we hold regular 
meetings in Washington, DC to discuss promising practices, with recent member meetings held at USAID, PAHO, 
World Bank, Jhpiego, JSI, FHI 360, PSI and MSH. More information about the group can be found at http://www.
k4health.org/toolkits/mhealth/mhealth-working-group-0
Photography Credits
Cover: © 2005 Eric Thompson, Courtesy of Photoshare
p3: Courtesy of UNICEF/Frog Design
p7: © 2009 Urvish Joshi, Courtesy of Photoshare
p9: Courtesy of Intel
p14: Courtesy of UNICEF/Frog Design
p16: © 2006 Joitske Hulsebosch, Courtesy of Photoshare
The mHealth Working Group
110 William Street, Suite 1800 | New York, NY 10038 | P: (212) 584-1600 | F: (212)584-1699 | www.gbchealth.org
