EMERGENCY TRIAGE ASSESSMENT AND 
TREATMENT (ETAT) 
Decision support tools to triage children in outpatient departments in Malawi 
SERVICE DELIVERY 
Implementation date: July 2012 to September 2014 
Despite major breakthroughs in high and middle income countries, meningitis remains a huge problem in Africa and especially in 
Malawi. There is an exceptionally high fatality rate and the young are especially at risk. An aggressive infection, meningitis can kill 
within hours of the first symptoms. Recognizing the disease early-on can mean the difference between life and death and improve 
outcomes for survivors, who are often left with life-altering conditions (e.g. deafness, brain damage). 
More than half the babies and children who get meningitis in Malawi will die from the illness, while others are left with serious 
disabilities. Formative research carried out by Malawi-Liverpool-Wellcome Trust (MLW) in the second biggest city, Blantyre, 
showed limited knowledge about the symptoms of the disease among health professionals and the public. Meningitis Research 
Foundation’s solution is Action Meningitis, a project which focuses on the faster identification of sick children by using mobile 
phone technology (mHealth) and educating health care workers and the public to the dangers.  
About ETAT 
Long lines to see the health care workers are very common D-tree International and partners have worked together to 
i n many health facilities in Malawi, and the delay in navigating introduce the ETAT system into urban health centers using 
these queues can be the difference between full recovery mobile phone technology to track referrals to QECH. 
and death. Action Meningitis has introduced the concept of Health workers were provided a  half-day orientation on the 
E mergency Triage Assessment and Treatment (ETAT), at use of the device and application and then moved into a half-
Queen Elizabeth Central Hospital (QECH) in Blantyre, and day on the job training in their respective outpatient 
at five peri-urban health centers in Blantyre. The name of the department, with follow-up visits then performed by Action 
 
initiative is ‘Chipatala Robots’, drawing from the local use of Meningitis and D-tree staff. 
the word robot, meaning traffic light. Health Surveillance 
Assistants (HSAs) and nurses are trained on the ETAT Using mobile phone technology (mHealth) application, HSAs  
protocol to rank sick children in the queue as E(mergency), scan through the queues at the health centers assessing each 
P(riority) or Q(ueue). Children as ‘E’ are taken straight to a child’s for the level of acuity and identifying children who 
c linician, those classified as ‘P’ are taken to the front of the need immediate assessment. The tool tracks a child from 
queue and those classified as ‘Q’ wait their turn in the assessment in the queue, assessment by the clinician and, if 
queue.  applicable, through arrival at the hospital. Since inception, 
 over 200,000 cases have been triaged using this system, with 
 90 HSAs in seven health facilities trained on it use. 
 
60  |  mHealth Compendium Volume 4 
Evaluation and Results 
An evaluation was conducted in five peri-urban health centers in Blantyre, between December 2012 and May 2013.  Close to 
over 41,000 cases were observed, during peak traffic times throughout the week. The existing system in place was simply a 
first-come, first-served model. Pre- and post-patient journey modelling with health staff from each clinic identified waiting 
times to be noticeably shorter post intervention with the most significant time differences reported in the waiting bay and 
consultation room.    
The triage intervention reduced the mean waiting times between arrival at the clinic and consultation from 74 minutes to 34 
minutes for any child attending the clinics. There was a significant difference (p<0.05) indicating a noteworthy drop in the 
average time spent waiting post-intervention. Data captured through the phones also indicated shorter waiting times 
between triage and consultation for emergency cases (28 minutes), priority cases (45 minutes) and non-urgent cases (59 
minutes).  
Analysis is ongoing comparing the agreement between the HSA’s assessment and that of the clinician. This will allow us to 
demonstrate the accuracy of the assessment made by the triage system and the mHealth tool. 
Lessons Learned 
 Health center staff reported that the system had a positive change 
in separating under-five monitoring visits from those in need of 
clinical assistance Geographic Coverage: Blantyre, Malawi  
 Patient guardians perceived the Chipatala Robot system Implementation Partners: D-tree 
intervention positively International, Meningitis Research Foundation, 
Malawi Liverpool Wellcome Trust  
 The intervention contributed to improved recognition of severe 
illness amongst both health workers and patient’s guardians; Most Funder: Action Meningitis (an initiative of the 
of the health facilities reported that very few deaths occurred on Meningitis Research Foundation principally funded 
the queues while patients were waiting to be seen by clinicians  by the Scottish Government and Deutsche Bank) 
Contact Information: 
Conclusion D-tree International | Steve Ollis (+1-410-443-
This study has shown that mHealth technologies have the potential to 3916, sollis@d-tree.org) 
improve primary level services with high patient numbers and 
Action Meningitis | Thomasena O’Byrne 
overburdened staff, one step in the right direction to helping improve 
(tobyrne@mlw.medcol.mw) 
early recognition and response to severe illness in children in Malawi. 
The tools can be effectively deployed even in a busy clinical setting Malawi Liverpool Wellcome Trust | Nicola 
such as an urban hospital’s outpatient department and proved to Desmond (n.desmond@liverpool.ac.uk) 
dramatically reduce the time to access care for the sickest children 
who are most at risk.  
 
mHealth Compendium Volume 4  |  61 
