 
BABY MONITOR 
Preventing maternal and newborn deaths through mobile phone-based screening 
Despite significant global progress in reducing When fully operational, Baby Monitor will include an 
maternal and infant mortality rates, nearly 300,000 “action” component that uses screening results to 
maternal deaths and an estimated 5 million infant trigger automated referrals and emergency dispatch.   
deaths occur each year. Prenatal care and a series of 
proven interventions delivered by a skilled attendant Baby Monitor uses Verboice, a free IVR platform, 
could prevent nearly 80% of maternal deaths and 66% installed on an Amazon Elastic Compute Cloud (EC2) 
of newborn deaths.  However, many women and server connected to a Voice over IP (VOIP) provider in 
infants are never assessed and connected to Kenya.  Each call costs Baby Monitor USD $0.04 per 
healthcare. Baby Monitor, a new mHealth platform minute, which could be reduced through bulk pricing.  
that takes clinical screening directly to pregnant 
women, aims to change this.  
Evaluation and Results 
The goal of Baby Monitor is to save lives, improve health The initial study conducted in Nairobi in 2012 allowed 
outcomes, and optimize the use of community health Baby Monitor developers to: 
workers (CHWs) in rural and remote regions where 
access to health systems is limited and clinical 1. evaluate the feasibility and acceptability of Baby 
assessment often occurs too late or not at all. With Monitor through interviews and focus group 
seed funding from the Saving Lives at Birth Grand discussions with study participants and consultations 
Challenge, Population Council and its partners with our clinical partner and 
developed and tested a beta version of Baby Monitor, a 
2. assess reliability and accuracy of the mobile 
mobile-phone based screening, referral and patient 
screening protocols by comparing results from 
management service that targets hard-to-reach pregnant 
mobile screenings to follow-up, in-person clinical 
women as end-users. The formative study was 
assessments. 
conducted in a periurban catchment area in Nairobi, 
Kenya in 2012. Baby Monitor is currently being further Four health screening protocols were developed for 
refined and tested in a second study in Bungoma East different stages of the birth continuum. The antenatal 
District, Kenya.    protocol included screening questions about maternal 
physical and mental health. The postnatal protocol, used 
Implementation date: October 2011 
one and three days after delivery, assessed maternal and 
infant physical health (but not mental health or infant 
development). The postnatal protocol, used seven days 
About  Baby Monitor 
after delivery, assessed maternal physical health, 
Baby Monitor is an open source mobile phone perinatal depression and infant physical health, and the 
application that uses interactive voice response (IVR) postnatal screenings, delivered at 6, 10 and 14 weeks, 
technology to offer free mobile screenings to pregnant assessed maternal physical health, perinatal depression, 
women and new mothers. When it is time for a prenatal infant physical health and infant development. 
or postnatal exam, a registered user receives a text 
message with a code that can be redeemed by “flashing” Ninety-five (95) women in their second trimester were 
the Baby Monitor phone number to trigger a free call enrolled for the study.  Women completed automated 
back. The woman selects her preferred language, listens screenings and, one day later, completed the same 
to recorded audio prompts asking her how she and her screening with a nurse.   
baby are feeling, and presses keys on her phone’s 
number pad to respond. All of her responses are logged In the prenatal period, Baby Monitor correctly identified 
in an electronic medical record. The analysis engine 88.5% of positive cases—those classified by the nurse as 
determines whether the woman is likely to need referral having “any problems”.  The screening tool was less 
to a medical facility or more immediate assistance.  successful in the postnatal period, only correctly 
52 mHEALTH COMPENDIUM   |   VOLUME 3 
 
BABY MONITOR 
Preventing maternal and newborn deaths through mobile phone-based screening  SERVICE DELIVERY 
integration with existing electronic medical records 
systems, the developers of Baby Monitor will be able to 
build an interoperable service that encourages women 
to seek healthcare, optimizes the use of health system 
resources, tracks outcomes and offers women a more 
personalized health experience.  
-------------------------------------------------------- 
Geographic Coverage: Kenya (initial study in Nairobi, 
current study in Bungoma East District) 
Implementation Partners: Population Council, in 
partnership with InSTEDD, Jacaranda Health and Moi 
University 
Funder: Saving Lives at Birth Grand Challenge partners, 
including USAID, the Government of Norway, the Bill & 
identifying 23.8% of positive cases. The tool Melinda Gates Foundation, Grand Challenges Canada, and 
demonstrated high specificity, positive predictive value the World Bank 
and negative predictive value in both periods. Contact Information:  
Overall, the screening tool proved to be a valid Population Council: Eric Green, Principal Investigator, 
assessment of medical need. It also had acceptable initial Population Council (+1919-666-7111, 
measures of reliability, meaning that the women largely eric.green@duke.edu) 
provided the same responses to the automated service  
as they did to the live nurse. Reliability can be improved References: 
as the system moves to production by increasing the 1. Green, Bellows, di Tada and Pearson (2013).  “Baby Monitor: 
stability of the platform and enhancing the audio quality Developing and testing a mHealth screening service for pregnant 
of the phone connection.  women and new mothers in Kenya.”  Preliminary Working 
Draft. 
2. Baby Monitor Slide Deck, Tech’n’Talk session, Women Deliver 
Lessons Learned 2013. 
 3. http://www.babymonitor.co  The Baby Monitor system is feasible to implement 
and acceptable to users. 
 Automated screening can be used as a tool to 
identify women and infants with medical needs. 
Conclusion 
For many women in rural and remote settings, a mobile 
phone signal is more likely to reach their home than a 
community health worker. The formative study of Baby 
Monitor demonstrates the potential of using an 
automated IVR screening on mobile phones to identify 
women and infants with medical needs. Through 
  mHEALTH COMPENDIUM   |   VOLUME 3 53 
