TC105:	Mobiles	for	International	Development
Share	this:
 Tweet  Share 0  Share 0
All	courses > TC105:	Mobiles	for	International	Development
 	$495.00
 	4	weeks
The	mobile	phone	is	rapidly	bringing	communication	to	the	most	remote	areas	of	the	world.	NGOs,	governments
and	companies	alike	are	beginning	to	realize	the	potential	of	this	ubiquitous	tool	to	address	social	challenges.	This
four-week	online	professional	development	certificate	course	will	explore	successful	applications	of	mobile	phone
use	that	facilitate	economic	transactions,	support	public	health	campaigns	and	connect	learners	to	educational
content.
Course	Description
The	mobile	phone	is	rapidly	bringing	communication	to	the	most	remote	areas	of	the	world.	NGOs,	governments
and	companies	alike	are	beginning	to	realize	the	potential	of	this	ubiquitous	tool	to	address	a	variety	of	global
challenges.	This	four-week	online	professional	development	certificate	course,	which	has	been	featured	in	the	New
York	Times	and	Fast	Company,	will	explore	successful	applications	that	facilitate	economic	transactions,	transform
agricultural	processes,	support	public	health	campaigns	and	connect	learners	to	educational	content.	It	will	also
critically	engage	with	issues	of	equity,	privacy	and	access.	Participants	can	expect	a	dynamic	learning	environment
with	a	number	of	real-world	case	studies,	custom	animations	and	video	tutorials,	interactions	with	leading	experts
in	the	field	and	practical	simulations	to	apply	new	skills	and	strategies.
Want	more	information?	Over	400	professionals	from	over	60	countries	have	taken	it	already:	read	a	blog	post
review	by	a	former	participant	here,	and	the	success	story	of	another	alum	who	got	a	job	after	taking	this
course	here.
Course	Topics	and	Featured	Tech
Mobile	Platforms	and	Strategies	to	Collect,	Manage,	and	Analyze	Data	(Magpi,	OpenDataKit,	FrontlineSMS)
Banking	the	Unbanked:	the	Promise	of	Mobile	Money	Systems	and	Looking	Beyond	M-PESA
mAgri:	The	Potential	for	Mobile	Phones	to	Transform	Agriculture	(mFarm,	Nokia	Life	Services)
mHealth:	Mobile	Tools	for	Diagnostics,	Point	of	Care	Support,	Patient	Adherence,	and	Other	Public	Health
Purposes	(D-Tree,	Medic	Mobile)
New	Approaches	to	Mobile	Surveys	&	Polling	(formhub,	GeoPoll)
Mobile	Learning:	Best	Practices	for	Education	on	the	Move
Course	Objectives
Participants	will	be	able	to…
Critically	analyze	opportunities	and	challenges	when	working	with	mobile	technology	to	address	social
problems	in	agriculture,	public	health,	education	and	finance	sectors
Connect	relevant	development,	humanitarian	and	peacebuilding	theories	to	application	of	mobile	technology
strategies	and	tools
Identify	and	apply	appropriate	tools	and	design	effective	strategies	to	incorporate	mobile	technology	in
global	response	to	social	challenges
Course	Methodology
This	course	is	delivered	entirely	online	over	a	period	of	four	weeks.
This	course	features	several	live	interactive	expert	presentations	each	week	with	leading	practitioners,
software	developers,	academics,	and	donors.
Every	live	event	is	recorded	and	archived	for	you	to	watch	later.
This	course	also	features	a	unique	hands-on	learning	environment	with	animated	videos,	technology	demos,
practical	activities,	networking	events,	office	hours,	participant	presentations,	immersive	simulations,	and
more.
TechChange	recommends	budgeting	a	minimum	commitment	of	5-7	hours	per	week	and	scheduling	time	for
the	course	around	your	existing	obligations.
Participants	will	have	access	to	all	course	content	for	at	least	4	months	after	course	completion	so	the
material	can	be	completed	and	revisited	later.
Price
$395	if	application	and	payment	is	submitted	by	June	18,	2017
$445	if	application	and	payment	is	submitted	by	July	9,	2017
$495	if	application	and	payment	is	submitted	by	course	start	date
Group	discount	rates	available.	For	more	details,	please	contact	us	at	social	[at]	techchange.org.	If	you	are	not
happy	with	your	course	experience	for	any	reason,	TechChange	is	happy	to	discuss	refunds.
Next	Session
TC105:	Mobiles	for	International	Development
Change
JOIN	COURSE
Contact:	techsupport	[at]	techchange.org
Terms	of	Use
Privacy	Policy
Policies
©	2012-2019	TechChange
