W   orkplace-ba sed SMS Awareness 
C ampaign 
  
B rief Overview 
 
More than 120,000 people are estimated to 
be receiving antiretroviral therapy in Uganda, 
and HIV/AIDS prevalence is estimated at 
nearly six percent. Despite tremendous 
success in treating the epidemic, HIV 
transmission continues unabated.  Through a 
pilot partnership, Text to Change (TTC) 
collaborated with Health Initiatives for the 
Private Sector Project (HIPS) to provide key 
prevention messages and education on 
HIV/AIDS to employees and community 
networks at three neighboring companies in 
Masindi, Uganda: Kakira Sugar Works, 
Kinyara Sugar Works, and Kasese Cobalt 
Company Limited.  
 
Participants opted-in to the program by sending a SMS to a four digit number and began receiving daily texts, 
which were primarily interactive questions. The questions were designed to spark conversation and thought 
on both conventional and controversial topics, and included basic information such as age and gender. 
 
The pilot project ran from June to August 2009. Due to its popularity and success, HIPS and Text to Change 
planned to expand the joint program to employees and neighboring communities of eight of the companies 
HIPS partners with in Uganda. Companies that are participating in the follow-up program include: Kinyara 
Sugar Works, Kasese Cobalt Company Limited (KCCL), Eskom (one of Uganda’s largest energy companies), 
and Kakira Sugar Works Limited. 
  Geographic Coverage: 
 Four private sector companies in Uganda 
 
  Implementation Partners: 
Health Initiatives for the Private Sector project (HIPS-USAID) partnered with Text to 
Change (TTC) 
 
 Funder: 
      USAID 
 
 For More Information Contact: 
HIPS  
 Dr. Dithan Kiragga, Chief of Party; 
Tel: +256-772-444194  
 Linllian Nakato, Communications Advisor; 
Windsor Crescent, Off Acasia Avenue, 
Kololo, Kampala, Uganda; 
Tel: +256-414-347590   
TTC  
 Veronica Yow, Program Manager, Uganda;  
Katali Rise, Plot nr. 4a Naguru, P.O. Box 40187, 
 Nakawa, Kampala, Uganda; 23 
Tel: +256-754-157659; email: vyow@texttochange.com 
 
 
Behavior Change Communication 
  
 Workplace-based SMS Awareness Campaign 
 
About Workplace-based SMS Awareness 
Campaign 
SMS messages on various selected health issues that 
include family planning as well as HIV counseling and 
testing are sent to company employees, their families 
and members of the neighboring communities. The aim 
of the program is to provide people with accurate 
health information, encourage people to change their 
attitudes and behavior, and promote the adoption of 
healthy practices into people’s daily lives. As part of the 
efforts to motivate employees to join the program and 
use available health services, simple gifts that included 
airtime, phones, and t-shirts are given out to Lessons Learned 
participants. These are lucky winners who participated • Include local radio to promote the SMS 
in a quiz, answered questions correctly, or took up campaign. This was not included in the pilot 
services for the first time.  budget, but the combination of radio and SMS 
 has proven to be very effective. 
In addition to providing information, text responses • Encourage involvement from the company. 
have generated baseline data on knowledge, attitudes, Although each company had a platform at hand 
and practices (KAP) concerning safe sex, medical male and was encouraged to use this platform for 
circumcision (MMC), family planning, and HIV/AIDS company related messages, the platforms were 
transmission from 1,380 respondents in the three not used for this. 
partner companies during the pilot period. 
• Organize brief interactive meetings between 
 peer educators and participants to evaluate the 
Evaluation and Results SMS quiz and participation among workers.  
In order to understand the impact of the program on • Due to knowledge gaps, some of the topics 
knowledge levels, TTC conducted a quiz via text might require more attention in future 
message with 3,099 participants in the program.  In awareness campaigns. 
2010, a total of 35 health related questions were sent to • The human resource manager at Eskom has 
the group.  TCC identified three questions which indicated that some questions were too easy 
participants had difficulty answering correctly and resent for the participants at Eskom. However, results 
them to the same cohort one year later in 2011.  do not show that participants at ESKOM have 
 more correct answers on all topics, so this may 
Participants replied free of charge to the toll free be something interesting to feedback to the 
shortcode with their true or false answer. If the company. 
participant replied incorrectly, he or she would receive  
a new message with the right answer and some Conclusion 
additional information. For all three questions there was The HIPS and TTC SMS program has shown many 
a significant increase in knowledge levels. On the malaria interesting results and promise for health interventions. 
related question, there was a 41 percent increase in the In addition to HIV/AIDS and family planning, workplace-
number of correct responses, while on the TB and based text messaging can be used to encourage healthy 
family planning questions, correct responses increased behaviors and treatment-seeking for malaria, 
by nearly ten percent and 12 percent, respectively. tuberculosis, childhood illnesses, and others. Early 
 experiences from the initiative indicate the vast 
 potential to expand health text messaging in the 
 workplace and elsewhere.  
24  Information was excerpted from: http://www.texttochange.org/sites/default/files/newsfiles/TTC%20HIPS.pdf 
http://www.texttochange.org/news/research-shows-health-knowledge-levels-rural-uganda-increase-simple-sms 
