 
MALARIA CONTROL PROGRAM  
A mobile rapid reporting system to strengthen surveillance in support of malaria 
elimination 
In Zambia, malaria affects over 4 million people each of community health workers (CHWs). A specially 
year, accounting for 30% of outpatient visits and 8,000 trained Data Community Health Worker (DCHW)  is 
annual deaths. Over 50% of these deaths are children given the responsibility for reporting data into the 
under five years of age and about 20% of maternal DHIS2 server for groups of CHWs to improve on the 
mortality is attributable to malaria. However, in the disaggregation of focal transmission sites. The DCHW 
last several years, advances in prevention and receives reports from the other CHWs on a monthly 
treatment have resulted in marked reductions in basis, concentrating data entry training to a smaller 
illness and deaths from malaria. The National Malaria group of health workers and creating a cluster of data 
Control Program set a goal of malaria elimination in collectors around one reporter.  
five zones.  
Only the DCHW is given a reporting mobile phone at 
Through the use of both new and existing tools and a the start of the project, but by consistently reporting 
more focused strategy, The Malaria Control and timely data over a period of time, the other CHWs are 
Evaluation Partnership in Africa (MACEPA), a program able to work towards a cheaper non-Java-enabled 
at PATH, is partnering with the Government of Zambia phone. Both the DCHW and CHW receive an incentive 
to chart its way toward this goal. MACEPA has in the form of airtime to mobile phones, improving 
supported the Ministry of Health in designing and communication channels locally for responding to 
introducing a rapid reporting system that records malaria infections and the ability to report by DCHW. 
specific points of malaria burden and commodity data The phone and credits earned are used as a work tool, 
each week and sends the data to a central server by making it easier for clinic staff to reach individual health 
mobile phone. The information is immediately available workers to alert them to malaria cases that require 
to program managers at district, provincial, and national their attention. The DCHW and CHWs are also given a 
levels, allowing them to monitor and respond faster to small financial incentive for completing the reporting 
prevailing conditions on the ground, avoid stock outs, work, based on timely reporting.  
and better target interventions.  
Implementation date: January 2011 Evaluation and Results 
Over 800 mobile phones in 23 southern Zambian 
districts have been equipped with DHIS2 software. 
About MACEPA 
Nearly 600 facilities have been trained, and an additional 
Using District Health Information 1,200 CHWs report data through their catchment area’s 
System (DHIS2) open source DCHW. Interactive dashboards of malaria surveillance 
software and its Java-based Mobile and commodity data are available online. Data audits 
Client, staff at the clinics report were conducted against the national health management 
weekly on small carefully chosen information system (HMIS) and the malaria system also 
data sets that includes the number running on DHIS2 to identify process barriers to better 
of tests done, number of positive data. An assessment was done on the use of these data. 
tests, number of people given It revealed that the Rapid Report system to be a good 
malaria treatment and stock monitoring tool for acquisition of timely data being used 
information. Low-cost mobile by district managers to improve malaria control in their 
phones and prepaid SIM cards are areas, including identification of mentorship needs, 
supplied to the health workers. indoor residual spraying and insecticide-treated nets 
The system also extends distribution, focal testing and treating, as well as stock 
surveillance into the communities management. 
within the health facility’s 
catchment area through a network 
26 mHEALTH COMPENDIUM   |   VOLUME 3 
 
MALARIA CONTROL PROGRAM  
A mobile rapid reporting system to strengthen surveillance in support of malaria 
elimination  DATA COLLECTION 
 Providing low-end phones with ‘just 
enough’ capabilities reduces costs and 
risks of investments in the phones 
provided. 
 Training is critical for supporting 
DHIS2 nationally and requires finding a 
training partner for the system. 
 Tying reporting of data to talk time 
allocations encourages reporting and 
accountability at the end user level. 
Conclusion 
The malaria surveillance system delivers 
real time data for monitoring the disease 
burden and can be used as an evidence-
based decision-making tool for eliminating 
malaria in Zambia’s five targeted zones.  
-------------------------------------------------------- 
Geographic Coverage: Southern half of 
Zambia 
Lessons Learned Implementation Partners: PATH MACEPA, Zambia 
 Integrating within the national HMIS system allows Ministry of Health, Akros Research, Inc.  
wider stakeholder buy-in. Rolling out the mobile 
platform helped leverage additional developments Funder: The Bill & Melinda Gates Foundation 
on the main HMIS system, including establishing the 
Contact Information:  
community level HMIS system. 
PATH: John Miller, Senior Malaria Technical Advisor, 
 DHIS2 is a complex system. Having a large and MACEPA (jmiller@path.org) 
consistent user base in-country is the best way to 
References: 
develop communities of practice for data sharing, 
1. Unicef. Zambia Fact Sheets: Malaria. No Date. Web. 
problem solving and learning 
2. DHIS2. Mobile community reporting. Using DHIS2 Java clients 
 The cost of hosting a local server can be expensive for Malaria community reporting in Zambia. No Date. Web.  
and may require dedicated technical skills that also  
are expensive. A hosted server option, such as Photo credits: Anne Jennings (opposite page); Todd Jennings (same 
Amazon Web Services or Linode.com, minimizes page) 
server deployment and maintenance costs and 
works well for these efforts. 
 Using a platform such as DHIS2 that works across 
cellular network providers allows local users to use 
the network with the best local coverage. 
  mHEALTH COMPENDIUM   |   VOLUME 3 27 
