 
mSAKHI 
An interactive mobile phone-based job aid for accredited social health activists 
(ASHAs) 
operations research (OR) studies were carried out 
between April 2012 and June 2013 in Uttar Pradesh.  
Implementation date: April 2012 to June 2013 
About mSakhi 
mSakhi, ('a friend' in Hindi) is an interactive audio/video-
guided application that provides support to ASHAs in 
conducting routine activities across the continuum of 
MNCH care. It combines the functions of existing paper-
based tools, thereby eliminating the need for difficult-to-
use-and-carry flipbooks, manuals, registers, and other 
job aids. mSakhi content is based on the NRHM ASHA 
manuals and home-based newborn care (HBNC) 
guidelines and formats. 
The Manthan Project initially developed mSakhi on the 
open-source CommCare platform using Java-enabled, 
keypad-based mobile phones. Based on ASHA and 
beneficiary feedback for more intuitive and multimedia-
With 56,0001 maternal and 876,0002 newborn deaths 
enabled applications, the Project modified mSakhi for 
each year, India accounts for 19% of all maternal and 
touch phones using an open-source Android platform 
29% of newborn deaths globally. Accredited social 
available on Google Play. 
health activists (ASHAs), instituted as part of India's 
National Rural Health Mission (NRHM)3, can prevent ASHAs register pregnant women and/or newborns into 
many of these deaths by helping women and their mSakhi during home visits. Upon registration, mSakhi 
families recognize maternal and neonatal danger signs generates a home visit schedule for each beneficiary and 
and promptly seek care. However, a majority of these provides a set of audio-video guided instructions for 
community health workers (CHWs) are low-literate counseling, assessment and referral specific to each visit. 
village women and face significant operational Auxiliary nurse midwife (ANM) supervisors receive the 
challenges in conducting routine maternal, newborn, data, which is stored in the mSakhi central database, 
and child health (MNCH) activities and in keeping allowing for real-time tracking of both ASHAs and 
their skills updated. In particular, ASHAs' lack of beneficiaries. The database is designed for seamless 
access to healthcare information, refresher training, integration with existing government information and 
supportive supervision and user-friendly job aids communication technology (ICT) systems such as the 
compromise their ability to contribute to improve Mother-Child Tracking System (MCTS) and the Health 
maternal and newborn health outcomes4,5.  Management Information System (HMIS), saving time 
and reducing delays.  
The near ubiquity of mobile phones throughout the 
developing world, including India, has led to the 
emergence of mHealth applications that are potentially 
Evaluation and Results 
effective tools for supporting CHWs across a range of 
activities. The Manthan Project, funded by the Bill & The Manthan Project conducted two OR studies, in 
Melinda Gates Foundation and led by IntraHealth collaboration with the Government of Uttar Pradesh 
International, developed and tested mSakhi, a mobile (GOUP), to compare the feasibility and effectiveness of 
phone-based multimedia job aid for ASHAs. Two mSakhi against existing paper-based tools. The pre-test/
60 mHEALTH COMPENDIUM   |   VOLUME 3 
c IntraHealth International, Inc._Nahid 
 
mSAKHI 
An interactive mobile phone-based job aid for accredited social health activists 
(ASHAs)  SERVICE DELIVERY 
post-test quasi-experimental design involved a total of  ICT support is critical for sustained support on 
143 ASHAs. The first study was conducted from April mobile maintenance and application updates to 
to December 2012 in Bahraich District. The feasibility CHWs. ASHAs also need regular supervisory 
and effectiveness of mSakhi was tested as a self-learning feedback to ensure high and effective use of the 
and counseling tool. A total of 86 ASHAs (46 application. 
experimental, 40 comparison) participated, covering a 
population of 46,000. The second study was conducted  mHealth interventions require initial and recurring 
from November 2012 to June 2013 in Jhansi District.  costs, with the mSakhi program costing INR 10,280 
IntraHealth evaluated the effectiveness of mSakhi as an and INR 4,680 per ASHA, respectively. This outlay 
integrated tool (self-learning, beneficiary registration, needs to be compared with the benefit of 
counseling, decision-support and real-time monitoring) potentially improved newborn health outcomes.  
for the postnatal period. Fifty-seven ASHAs (29 
experimental, 28 comparison) participated, covering a 
population of 39,000. Conclusion 
The two operational research studies demonstrated 
ASHAs reported that mSakhi enabled them to articulate that, compared with existing paper-based job aids, 
correct and complete counseling messages due to the mSakhi is a more user-friendly and effective ASHA tool 
voice-enabled and video-supported guided instructions, for a range of activities, including self-learning, 
without having to carry manuals and flipbooks during counseling, and newborn assessment. Although the two 
home visits. Beneficiaries found mSakhi to be engaging studies' limited sample size and short duration do not 
and also reported other family members' interest in the permit measurement of mSakhi's effect on community-
counseling messages because of the multimedia mobile level health outcomes, these promising data suggest that 
content. mobile applications may be an important tool to support 
ASHAs in improving MNCH outcomes and for 
mSakhi users also demonstrated greater recall of at least 
implementing and evaluating mSakhi at scale.  
six critical newborn conditions warranting referral 
compared to paper-based ASHAs. mSakhi users in the -------------------------------------------------------- 
first study delivered complete messages for several 
MNCH topics significantly better than those not using Geographic Coverage: Bahraich and Jhansi districts in 
the application. Lastly, observations of ASHAs using Uttar Pradesh, India 
mSakhi showed them to have significantly better 
Implementation Partners: IntraHealth International | 
newborn assessment skills while also being able to 
Government of Uttar Pradesh, India 
register more births and identify more sick newborns 
needing referral for both immediate and home-based Funder: Bill & Melinda Gates Foundation 
treatment.  
Contact Information:  
IntraHealth International: Madhuri Narayanan, 
Lessons Learned Country Representative (+91(11)4601-9999, 
 mSakhi can help ASHAs identify and make correct mnarayanan@intrahealth.org) 
referrals of sick newborns.  Bill & Melinda Gates Foundation: France Donnay, MD,  
MPH, Senior Program Officer, Maternal, Neonatal and 
 mHealth applications can improve CHW knowledge Child Health on the Family Health team (206-709-3100, 
and skills, but require periodic refresher training and France.Donnay@gatesfoundation.org) 
supervision to support acquisition and retention. 
 A simple, intuitive and voice navigated user interface 
is important for uptake of mHealth applications. 
  mHEALTH COMPENDIUM   |   VOLUME 3 61 
