 
THE LAST 10 KILOMETERS:  WHAT IT 
TAKES TO IMPROVE HEALTH OUTCOMES 
IN RURAL ETHIOPIA 
Health Outcomes in Rural Ethiopia” project implements 
and tests innovative community-based strategies to 
strengthen the link between the Primary Health Care 
Unit (PHCU) and its beneficiaries in order to improve 
reproductive, maternal, newborn and child health 
(RMNCH) in rural Ethiopia, at scale. 
To achieve its objectives, L10K provides grants and 
technical support to 12 regional-level civil society 
organizations (CSOs) in 115 districts in four of the most 
populous regions of Ethiopia. Using the mobile phone-
based data collection platform MagPi to monitor the 
implementation of L10K community strategies, 80 field 
coordinators (FCs) from the CSO implementing partner 
agencies routinely conduct supportive supervisory visits 
to the health posts. They also observe and obtain vital 
information on program performance output and 
outcome indicators. The data gathered from the 
supportive supervisory visits are aggregated to monitor 
and evaluate program performance, thus creating the 
backbone of the L10K management information system 
(MIS).  
The Last 10 Kilometers was implemented in 2008.  
BRIEF OVERVIEW 
Ethiopia is the second most-populous country in sub-
Saharan Africa, with an estimated population of 77.9 ABOUT L10K 
million, 85% of whom live in rural areas. Ethiopia has 
In order to improve the data quality and the efficiency of 
achieved major strides is child survival. Recent estimates 
its MIS for data-based decision-making, L10K is 
indicate the country is on track towards achieving its 
implementing mobile phone technology called MagPi 
target for MDG 4 – reduce under-5 mortality rate to 68 
(formerly EpiSurveyor), developed by DataDyne. The 
deaths per 1,000 live births by 2015. However, similar 
supportive supervision checklist is transformed into a 
to many other low-income countries, the reduction in 
web-based data collection instrument. The data 
neonatal mortality over the past decade has slowed 
collection tool is downloaded to mobile phones which 
down while the maternal mortality ratio during the same 
are used by field officers to collect data during 
period remained relatively unchanged. At 37 deaths per 
supportive supervision visits. The data collection is done 
1,000 live births, neonatal deaths now account for 63 
offline and when mobile network is available, the data 
percent of all infant deaths and 42 percent of all under-5 
are uploaded to the MagPi website where it is archived, 
deaths. The maternal mortality ratio in Ethiopia has 
compiled, and analyzed to give feedback (Figure 1).  
remained at 676 deaths per 100 thousand live births 
Currently, this mobile phone-based data collection is 
which leads to 19,000 maternal deaths annually.  
being implemented in all of the project’s 115 districts. 
Because approximately 90% of births occur in the home, 
a community-based approach to maternal and newborn 
care is essential. EVALUATION AND RESULTS 
The system allows data collection via smart phones 
Funded by the Bill & Melinda Gates Foundation, the which is transmitted to a remote server via web, 
“Last 10 Kilometers (L10K): What it Takes to Improve allowing data-based decision making as soon as the data 
32 mHEALTH COMPENDIUM   │    VOLUME 2 
 
 DATA COLLECTION 
are being collected volume of data from remote areas of Ethiopia 
(Figure 1). 
To ensure the CONCLUSION 
quality of the MIS 
Since its inception in 2008, L10K has increased its 
data, the L10K M&E 
coverage, scope and intensity of its different community-
O f f i c e r s  a r e 
based strategies. The use of mHealth has made it 
randomly revisiting 
possible to closely monitor the implementation of the 
at least five health 
changes and scale-up of those strategies. Data from the 
posts each month 
mHealth MIS is also complementing and supplementing 
to validate the data 
the special studies for evaluating the specific community-
o b t a i n e d  a n d 
based strategies that are being piloted. Thus, the 
transmitted by the 
information produced by mHealth has improved data-
FCs. Since June of 
based decision-making within all levels of project 
2012, the L10K MIS 
management, improved reporting to donors and other 
is processing data 
stakeholder by providing more detailed evidence on the 
from more than 
performance of the project, and will be generating 
700 supportive 
evidence to demonstrate which community-based 
supervisory visits 
strategies are effective in improving MNCH and which 
each month to 
are not. 
provide program performance status and gap updates to 
the L10K and grantee (CSO) program managers. The  
system improved the capacity and efficiency of the  
central, regional, zonal, and district-level program GEOGRAPHIC COVERAGE 
managers to make data-based decision making. The 115 districts of Ethiopia  
decision making cycle was reduced from every three 
months to every month or less.  IMPLEMENTATION PARTNERS 
This mHealth strategy identified program coverage gaps JSI Research & Training Institute, Inc.  
which were unnoticed before, improved the capacity of 
the grantees to conduct M&E, and improved the FUNDER 
technical support provided by L10K to the grantee staff. Bill & Melinda Gates Foundation  
The major cost to the project was purchasing the smart 
phones; training took twelve hours and was integrated CONTACT INFORMATION 
into staff development efforts. The implementation and JSI Research & Training Institute, Inc., Ethio-
management of the digital data collection was possible pia  
using its existing M&E team members who were not  Wuleta Betemariam, Project Director, 
information technology specialists. JSI Research & Training Institute, Inc./
L10K Project  
Tel: +251-11-662-0066,         
LESSONS LEARNED Email: wuleta_betemariam@jsi.com  
Bill & Melinda Gates Foundation  
 mHealth can be used for MIS for monitoring real 
 Mary Taylor, Senior Program Officer  
time program activities in remote areas of Ethiopia 
Email: mary.taylor@gatesfoundation.org  
 Health workers of various educational levels can 
easily use smart phones to transmit substantial 
  MHEALTH COMPENDIUM  |  VOLUME 2 33 
