 
mHEALTH FOR SAFER DELIVERIES: EZY 
PESA MOBILE BANKING SERVICE 
A mobile money transfer service for traditional birth attendants 
related transportation for the pregnant 
woman to a health facility where she 
can receive appropriate care.  
Implementation date: October 
2011 to December 2014 
About Ezy Pesa 
The application provides a step-by-step 
protocol for the following: identifying 
dangers signs during labor and delivery, 
the phone number of vehicle owners 
who can transport the patient on an 
emergency basis, access to money on 
the phone to pay the vehicle owner for 
transportation, a record of permissions 
needed from the family or local 
decision makers to transport mother 
and infant in case of emergency, and 
the ability to contact the referral 
facility so they can be prepared for the 
patient’s arrival. 
Mobile banking accounts were established for the TBAs 
Most women, especially in low-income countries, 
working with the project. After registering them with 
continue to deliver at home for a variety of reasons, 
their mobile banking accounts, Zantel assisted with the 
including cost, preference, culture and lack of 
project by opening pay points in the project areas and 
information. In Zanzibar, half of all pregnant women 
by providing training to the TBAs on Ezy Pesa. 
deliver from home and only one-third of mothers and 
Additionally, D-tree worked with the health facilities and 
newborns receive timely postnatal checkups. Home 
the villages to identify appropriate transport providers, 
deliveries can, in part, be made safer by assuring the 
enroll them in the program and pre-negotiate rates. 
provision of adequate care.  
Once a month, D-tree calculated cost estimates based 
In response D-tree International, in collaboration with 
on the TBAs’ total expected delivery estimates for the 
Etisalat Group telecommunications and their local 
month. This was transferred to the D-tree Ezy Pesa 
mobile service provider, Zantel, is utilizing mobile 
account, and then using either a mobile phone or the 
technology to meet this challenge through the 
Internet, the money was transferred to the TBAs’ 
combination of mobile decision support, data storage, 
mobile banking accounts.  
on-line banking and communications on a single device 
at the point of care. mHealth for Safer Deliveries is a 
complete suite of services enabling traditional birth 
Evaluation and Results 
attendants (TBAs) and midwives to ensure safer 
pregnancies and deliveries. It not only enables health The Zanzibar Ministry of Health and Social Welfare 
workers to quickly and accurately identify obstetric (MoHSW) helped develop the project and select two 
emergencies, but also features Ezy Pesa, a mobile pilot areas, the North A District of Unguja and the 
banking service that assists them in arranging obstetric- Micheweni District of Pemba, based on their low facility 
36 mHEALTH COMPENDIUM   |   VOLUME 3 
 
mHEALTH FOR SAFER DELIVERIES: EZY 
PESA MOBILE BANKING SERVICE 
A mobile money transfer service for traditional birth attendants  FINANCE 
delivery rates. Twenty-four TBAs were also trained to money (financial) and mobile health (programmatic) 
use the mHealth application. data, while time consuming, can greatly facilitate 
scale up.  
During the first phase, which ran until April 2012, these 
TBAs successfully registered 682 pregnant mothers, of 
which 211 delivered during the implementation period. Conclusion 
Health facilities and hospitals in the project areas also The combination of mobile decision support, data 
saw their in-facility delivery rates more than double on storage, on-line banking and communications on a single 
average, and there were no maternal deaths recorded device at the point of care will lead to more successful 
among the registered mothers. maternal health outcomes and a greater potential for 
In the second phase, the project is now being used by meeting MDG5.  
over 200 TBAs and CHWs who have registered nearly -------------------------------------------------------- 
7,000 women, and the facility delivery rate stands at 
over 70%. Geographic Coverage: Zanzibar, United Republic of 
Tanzania 
As referrals and post-partum visits are made, the TBAs 
withdraw funds from the pay points and pay themselves Implementation Partners: D-tree International, Etisalat, 
and/or the drivers. Timely transfers of the money lead Ministry of Health, Zanzibar 
to smooth transactions and fast turnaround of 
payments. Lastly, the average cost per delivery Funder: The Bill & Melinda Gates Foundation 
amounted to $22.26, a minimal expense for ensuring the 
Contact Information:  
safety of a mother during her pregnancy.  
D-tree International: Marc Mitchell, President (+1-617-
432-6322, mmitchel@hsph.harvard.edu) 
Etisalat: George Held, Vice President – Commerce, 
Lessons Learned (+971506171225, gheld@etisalat.ae) 
 It is important to take into account local cultural The Bill & Melinda Gates Foundation: Ken Warman, 
preferences and sensitivities during the application (+1-206-369-9083, Ken.Warman@gatesfoundation.org) 
development process. 
References: 
 When possible, provide a vertical integration of 1. Etisalat. Mobile Baby: Building Scalable Sustainable Business 
various mobile services, such as mHealth and mobile Together. No Date. PowerPoint Presentation. 
money, to enhance program impact. 2. Group Corporate Communications. Etisalat CSR & Sustainability 
 Report 2012.   mHealth program models should be scalable and 
3. International Business Awards: Etisalat Group CSR Program. 
sustainable, creating incentive and/or revenue for all 
Stevie Awards. 2013. Web. 
parties involved. 
4. Joan Justice. Mobile Health Around the Globe: mHealth and 
 There should be an educational and training Social Networking in Rural Tanzania. Healthworks Collective. 16 
component, as well as opportunities for end-users April 2012. Web. 
to provide feedback which can be applied to 5. Mojca Cargo. What is the role for Mobile Operators in MDG 4? 
ongoing application optimization. A look at Etisalat’s Mobile Baby service. GSMA: mHealth. 20 
September 2012.  
 Closely collaborate with various stakeholders and 
engage the government from the early stages of 
product development. 
 Investment in systems to reconcile the mobile 
  mHEALTH COMPENDIUM   |   VOLUME 3 37 
