GSMA Intelligence Title
ANALYSIS
Scaling Mobile for Development
August 2013
© GSMA Intelligence gsmaintelligence.com/m4d • info@gsmaintelligence.com • @GSMAi
Mobile for
Development Impact
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
The mobile phone holds the power of ubiquity.  Across the developing world, around 40% of 
people now actively subscribe to mobile services.  Well over 50% have access to a mobile, 
despite not owning one. Access to mobile services in the developing world has outpaced the 
rate at which much of the population is gaining access to basic services such as electricity, 
sanitation, and banking.   
 
As the one technology that is becoming widely accessible to all populations, including those 
at the bottom of the economic pyramid (BOP), there has been increased focus on the 
invaluable role mobile technology can play in improving social, economic and environmental 
development in emerging markets. As the remaining unconnected populations get access to 
mobile technology and the capabilities it provides, the lives of these populations will 
fundamentally shift. The simple increase in access to information at a faster pace, from new 
sources, will influence everything.  Affordable mobile phones and the opportunities they 
usher in for the poor will be one of the most dramatic game-changing technologies the world 
has ever seen. Industry growth will happen with or without our intervention; the role of MDI 
will be to educate all those interested in harnessing the power of mobile for good.  
 
This confluence underlines the opportunity held by Mobile for Development, which seeks to 
draw investment and partnership to scale mobile-enabled services that can help to facilitate 
service delivery in the absence of traditional modes of infrastructure that would otherwise do 
this. Indeed, Mobile for Development is a growing sector, with well over 1,000 live services 
now tracked by the GSMA across the developing world in verticals such as money, health, 
education and entrepreneurship. The problem is that while the sector has enjoyed continued 
growth in the number of services over the last 5-7 years, scaling up services still proves to 
be a challenge and sustainable business models continue to be elusive. 
 
This work is designed to inform and add insight to help address these challenges.  It has 
been developed by Mobile for Development Intelligence with support from the Rockefeller 
Foundation. Our inclusive approach included a research process and production of an 
interim and final report in April and May 2013 respectively, with a series of peer review 
workshops held in Nairobi, Kenya and Washington DC to drive collaboration and thought 
leadership across stakeholder groups. 
 
 
 
 
 
Tim Hatt  thatt@gsma.com  
Corina Gardner cgardner@gsma.com  
Adam Wills  awills@gsma.com  
Martin Harris  mharris@gsma.com  
 
 
 
 
 
 
A unique opportunity 
 
The mobile device category is the nearest to ubiquity in ownership. Penetration has 
increased steadily over the last 5 years, with ownership between 40-50% on average across 
the developing world (see Figure 1). By contrast, ownership of PCs remains much lower 
(under 10%) given the widespread lack of fixed broadband infrastructure across many 
emerging markets. Of course, households that own a computer are likely to share it amongst 
several members, implying that access to a PC will be higher than that shown. However, the 
same is true of mobile (with increasingly innovative solutions which encourage this 
behaviour), so the gap between the two is unlikely to change. 
 
Figure 1. Penetration of population (developing world) 
50%
39% 
40% 36% 
33% 
30% 
30% 27% Mobile
24% 
Smartphone
20% PC
10% 3% 4% 8% Tablet
2% 3% 5% 3% 5% 
1% 2% 2% 0% 0% 1% 1% 0% 2% 
0%
2007 2008 2009 2010 2011 2012  
Note: mobile is proportion of people that subscribe to mobile services 
Source: MDI estimates based on GSMA Intelligence, Strategy Analytics, Telegeography 
 
In mature markets such as Europe and the United States, the barriers to access of mobile 
communications (e.g. political stability, defined and stable state funding regimes, economic 
growth to drive formation of a middle class, infrastructure rollout, and technological 
advances) were gradually overcome by the 1980s. While mobile penetration rates continue 
to rise in the developing world, access to basic services in banking, utilities and education 
continue to fall short. The lack of access to these services in the developing world means 
that mobile can act as an enabler in the absence of traditional delivery modes (see Figure 2). 
 
Figure 2. Access to basic services 
 
Western Europe Sub Saharan Africa* 
100% >90% >90% >90% 100%
83% Don’t own, but have access to 
80% 65-70% mobile in household (indicative) 80%
60% 60% 15-20% Ownership 
40% 40%
20% 49% 20% 26% 33% 31% 
0% 0%
Mobile Financial Electricity Sanitation
Mobile Financial ElectricitySanitation
services
services  
*Mobile and financial services includes select countries 
Source: GSMA Intelligence, GSMA Mobile Money program, IEA, World Bank, MDI Analysis 
 
 
 
Healthy economic growth, even better in mobile 
Growth in the actual number of people subscribed to mobile services has averaged over 
10% across the developing world since 2008, with these countries still firmly on the upward 
slope of a classic technology adoption curve. At a regional level, the markets in South Asia 
(e.g. India, Bangladesh) and Africa have experienced the headiest pace, with user growth at 
nearly 20% a year (see Figure 3). The subscriber growth in these regions has buttressed 
several global operator groups otherwise hurt by weak macro environments and stiff 
regulation in Europe, with mobile revenue growth in the BRICs and key African markets 
outpacing the wider economy despite airtime prices declining (see Figure 4). 
  
Figure 3. Mobile user growth 
19% 
20%
16% 
15% 11% 
10% 
10% 8% 9% 7% 
3% 4% 4% 4% 5% 2% 
0%
Central Latam East Middle East South Asia Africa
/Eastern Asia/Pacific
Europe
2007-12 2012-17 (f)
 
Figure 4. Mobile vs. economic growth 
20% 16% 
14% 
15% 11% 11% Mobile
10% 9% 7% revenue
4% 5% 
5% 3% 2% 2% 1% 0% Real GDP
0%
-5%
-4% 
-10%
Brazil China India Kenya US UK Italy
 
Note: Growth is for 2011 
Source: GSMA Intelligence, IMF 
 
Mobile market growth has been driven by improvements in network coverage, competition 
(with falling prices), and personal income growth. 
 
Spectrum acquired by the mobile operators carries coverage conditions over a set period of 
time (e.g. 98% population coverage 5 years after acquiring spectrum), placing an obligation 
on coverage rollout. As a result, coverage for basic mobile services (voice and text) has 
increased from around 80% to near universal availability over the last 4-5 years (although it 
remains lower in some countries).  
 
Despite this rise, there remains a persistent demographic gap, with mobile ownership levels 
in rural areas well below those of cities (see Figure 5). While this has been limited by a lack 
of coverage for rural communities off national electricity grids, a combination of continued 
 
 
rollout led by operators and supported by Universal Service Funds1, and cheaper power 
sources (including switching from dependence on diesel fuel to renewable energy sources) 
for off-grid base stations has mitigated this factor. Other factors such as distribution networks 
and education (both language and technological literacy) are likely to impact mobile take up 
in this regard over the next 3-5 years.   
 
Figure 5. Population with access to 2G (GSM) coverage 
100%
100%
80%
80%
62% 63% 
60% 60%
40% Urban
40% 40% 32% 30% 
20% 
20% 20% Rural
0% 0%
Kenya Brazil Western South Ghana India
Europe Africa
2008 2012
  
Source: GSMA Intelligence, regulators, MDI analysis 
Competition has improved over the last 5 years (see figure 6) due to the establishment of 
new entrants as opposed to markets dominated by former state monopolies. The principal 
impact of this has been falling prices, mainly voice and SMS, with handset prices also 
declining. Individual wealth in emerging markets has grown healthily (see Figure 7; China at 
nearly 10% per year since 2007), and while owning a mobile still eats up a higher proportion 
of income, the ratio has fallen (less so for the lowest income groups, suggesting mobile is 
seen more as a utility as opposed to a luxury). 
 
Figure 6. Mobile operator competition (HHI)* 
Rwanda
Mexico
China
Kenya
South Africa
Ghana
UK
Indonesia
Germany
Brazil
US
India
0 2,000 4,000 6,000 8,000 10,000
2007 2011  
Source: GSMA Intelligence, MDI Analysis 
                                                          
1
 USFs – a tax administered on mobile operators by national governments or regulators to fund 
coverage rollout to rural regions 
 
Mobile penetration 
 
Figure 7. Income per capita growth (CAGR)** 
10% 9% 
8% 
5% 5% 5% 
4% 
5% 4% 4% 3% 
2% 3% 2% 2% 
1% 
0%
0% 
-1% 
-5%
China India Indonesia Nigeria Brazil South Africa US UK
2007-12 2012-17 (f)
 
*Herfindahl Hirschman Index – measured as the sum of the square of market share for each operator in a 
country. Higher HHI’s suggest weaker competitiveness 
**Compound Annual Growth Rate 
Source: GSMA Intelligence, IMF, MDI analysis 
 
As adoption approaches a natural ceiling (around 80-90% on a human user basis), growth 
will inevitably decline. This has already happened in most mature markets (e.g. Europe, 
Japan, United States), where saturation was reached by the late 2000s, with the remaining 
growth since then largely driven by connecting older age groups (e.g. over 65s) (see Figure 
8). The same will occur in developing markets, although their relatively large populations 
mean that even with growth of 3-5% over the next 5 years, an incremental 130 million people 
will adopt mobile each year across the developing world through to 2017. 
 
Figure 8. Mobile user growth 
130 million new mobile users each 
25%
year 
20% in the developing world 16% 
15% 13% 12% 
11% 
10% 8% 8% 6% 
4% 5% 
5% 4% 3% 
4% 3% 
2% 2% 1% 1% 1% 1% 1% 
0%
2008 2009 2010 2011 2012 2013 2014 2015 2016 2017
Developed Developing  
Source: GSMA Intelligence, MDI analysis 
 
Outlook: moving to a data world 
 
If the last 5 years were about getting people connected, the next 5 years are likely to focus 
augmenting the user experience with mobile. Whilst basic voice and text services can be 
handled through GSM coverage, the use of data services and access to the mobile internet 
necessitates further rollout of 3G equipment (operators can run these services using 
2G/GPRS, but speeds are slower and will deteriorate as more people use the network). 
 
 
Operators are well aware of this, with investment in networks designated to expand 3G 
coverage to a firm majority of the population (see Figure 9). 
 
 
Figure 9. Network coverage forecast – APAC 
 
100% 90% 90% 
85% 
80%
60% 
60% 50% 
40%
20%
2% 
0%
2G 3G 4G LTE
2011 2017 (f)   
Source: Ericsson 
While 3G coverage will expand to cover a higher proportion of emerging market populations, 
the pace of rollout is likely to be much slower for rural areas. Network economics are more 
challenging in rural areas given the harsher nature of the terrain and lack of power sources 
for base station sites. As a result, even countries with high numbers of their potential 
customer base in rural areas still have lower 3G coverage rates, with some considerably 
lower (e.g. India, see Figure 10). Rural dwelling rates will likely lessen, but this will take 
several years (China-like mass migrations from rural to urban areas at a rapid pace are 
unique), implying the need for either increased operator investment in rural networks, some 
form of subsidy to enhance operators to do this, or both. We believe the latter is the most 
likely outcome, based on a prospective virtuous circle of enhanced mobile access driving 
increases in economic growth, in turn driving increases in consumer spend on mobile (and in 
turn operator returns from network rollout).  
 
Figure 10. 3G coverage – a rural problem 
100%
80% Would rely on 
network 
expansion to 
60% rural areas 
40%
20% India 
0%
0% 20% 40% 60% 80% 100%
Population living in urban area 
 
Source: Ericsson (coverage), Enders Analysis (data economics), MDI Analysis 
Perhaps most interesting is the battle emerging to connect customers to the internet though 
mobile. In the developed world, smartphones now account for over 50% of handset sales, 
 
3G coverage (population) 
 
with the numbers closer to 80-90% for contract customers (actual smartphone penetration in 
the base is lower at around 45-50%). This will continue to rise, with the priority for mobile 
operators shifting from acquiring smartphone customers to retaining them – both against 
direct competitors and, increasingly, internet players.  
 
The situation is significantly different in developing markets. Smartphones are owned by less 
than 10% of people (with some, but not appreciable regional variation), making them still 
niche and the preserve of mid and high income groups, not a mass market device (see 
Figure 11).  
 
Figure 11. Smartphone penetration in emerging markets 
100%
77% 
80% 68% 
60% 52% 
43% 42% Smartphone
33% 
40% 29% 
Basic/featurephone
20%
0%
Central Latam Middle East Asia Africa South US
/Eastern East /Pacific Asia /Europe
Europe
 
Source: GSMA Intelligence, Strategy Analytics, MDI analysis 
It is not contentious to suggest smartphone ownership will continue to grow in the developing 
world over the next 5 to 10 years. The fact that technology adoption tends to follow by 
region, that many global handset vendors have steered their new product portfolio towards 
smartphones and that prices continue to decline (the iPhone being an exception), and the 
paucity of traditional fixed-line infrastructure to connect to the internet all make continued 
smartphone adoption predictable. 
 
However, there are several reasons to suggest that the implications of a smartphone 
revolution will be different in the developing as compared to the developed world.  
 
The first involves demographics. Despite heady economic growth over the last decade, 
many developing world countries still have large sections of their populations in lower 
income groups (often earning less than $2/day). As with coverage, the pace of this adoption 
is likely to be uneven, with lower income groups lagging behind the mid and upper brackets 
(even with falling device prices), creating a massive, yet latent, market for mobile-enabled 
services using apps and the mobile internet.  
 
On the face of it, this would suggest the more enhanced features available through IP-based 
mobile telephony would be out of reach of lower income populations. However, there is an 
increasing convergence in functionality and price between higher end feature phones and 
lower end smartphones, implying the distinction between these categories matters less in 
what they are called, and more around what they can do (see Figure 12).  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 12. Convergence between low end smartphones and featurephones? 
 
iPhone 4S X100 (China) Nokia Asha 305 
 (smartphone) (smartphone) (featurephone) 
OS iOS 5 Android 2.3 Series 40 
Screen Touch Touch Touch 
Price ($, wholesale) >$500 $99 $60-90 
Camera (MP) 8 5 2 
Processing power 
1,000 650 1,000 
(MHz) 
Note: prices indicative, as of January 2013 
Source: Strategy Analytics, company websites, MDI Analysis 
 
Handsets running Android make up the majority of smartphones in use in the developing 
world (around 50%, led by Samsung, but with an increasing number of these likely to be 
coming from lesser known manufacturers based in China – see Figure 13) (Apple, by 
contrast, has a much smaller presence in emerging markets relative to its US and European 
businesses, largely as its flagship device has remained around $600, placing it far out of 
reach of the average income in the developing world – and much of the developed world 
market relying on operator subsidisation).  
 
Figure 13. Handset sales in Asia-Pacific  
2008
2012
Nokia Samsung Apple ZTE Lenovo Other Long tail
Source: Strategy Analytics, MDI analysis 
But are lower smartphone prices an out and out boon?  In the sense that access to the 
internet is brought to a larger audience – yes.  However, in order to drive price down, the 
build quality will likely weaken. Specifically, the battery life of low-end smartphones is likely 
to be sacrificed, which means they are of less use to populations that struggle to pay for or 
access electricity (especially those off the electricity grid and therefore requiring alternate 
charging sources). The other place where handset specifications may have a lower quality 
will be in operating systems and data compression standards, all of which contribute to a 
less impressive experience for the end user, potentially decreasing the perceived value of 
gaining access to the internet through mobile.  
 
Of more importance is access to mobile data, on a smartphone or featurephone. Indeed, 
even as smartphone sales continue to increase (and with significant turnover in the 
secondary market), these take time to distil into the user base, meaning featurephones will 
continue to make up well over 50% of handsets in use for the next 2-3 years. This presents a 
large, as yet underserved target market for mobile data access, and the downstream 
services enabled therefrom (see Figure 14).   
 
Million 
 
 
 
Figure 14. Data democratisation 
Target audience Smart 
phone 
Bubble size = penetration 
Feature 
phone 
Handset cost 
 
Source: Google, Opera Software, Facebook, Wikipedia, mobile operator websites, MDI Analysis 
 
It is this democratisation of data that marks an important aim, namely in defining, shaping 
and ultimately owning the user experience on mobile.  Both protagonists – the mobile 
operators and internet players providing services over the top – are well aware of this. As 
such, new and innovative ways of getting lower income customers onto the mobile internet 
have come into play.  
 
Zero-rated data offers are perhaps most notable, with consumers getting (limited) access to 
the mobile internet for free. For instance, Google has partnered with mobile operators in the 
Philippines, South Africa and Indonesia to offer the Google Free Zone, which gives the 
customer access to Google’s web properties (search engine, Gmail, etc.) for free, but any 
browsing or access to other parts of the web are charged.  Facebook, Twitter and Wikipedia 
have all launched similar offers.  On the face of it, this bears resemblance to the walled 
garden approach used by several mobile operators in the 2000s, pre iPhone (2007), as they 
attempted (and largely failed) to realise the 3G opportunity through own-brand content 
portals.  However, we believe these models represent a fundamental recognition that it is 
worth subsidising data for low income customers in the developing world on the logic that 
collectively, this is a vast market opportunity (several times that of the US and western 
Europe markets), and as they grow richer and more aware of the utility afforded by the 
internet, that investment will more than be repaid through higher spend and customer loyalty 
down the road. 
 
From the operator perspective, the approaches are different in emerging markets because 
most customers are on a prepaid as opposed to contractual agreement – meaning that data 
must be sold as an add-on as opposed to another component of a bundle (on the flip side, 
this is also a key opportunity for the operators as including it makes it easier to justify higher 
bundle prices). As a result, hybrid data plans (with a commitment term in length, but not 
spend) and flexi data access plans (e.g. pay to access the internet for an hour) have become 
increasingly common. 
 
Operators have come under threat in mature markets given the ubiquitous presence of over-
the-top (OTT) services with the capability to substitute traditional operator-enabled modes of 
communication (e.g. voice).  While the true impact of this is debateable and largely still being 
assessed, emerging markets represent the next frontier of growth for all players, with much 
of that likely to be driven by communication over the internet.  The implications are that lines 
between the perceived role (and incentives) of operator and internet players are likely to 
become increasingly blurred. Increased access to various methods of customer self-
expression is one area of interest.  Historically, in the absence of internet connectivity, 
 
Likelihood of using 
data 
 
countries in the developing world have largely been on the receiving end of most content 
and lacking in the tools and infrastructure to support local content generation (see Figure 
15). 
 
Figure 15. Where does Google-indexed user generated content from? 
 
 2 
Source: Convoco report, Matthew Zook 
This has slowly started to change, driven by increasing mobile penetration, access to the 
internet and, in turn, social networks. Facebook’s growth over the last 3 years has largely 
been driven by developing world markets (see Figure 16), with the US/European PC-led 
boom of its early years slowly decelerating as these countries approach saturation. 
 
Figure 16. Facebook: expanding to emerging markets 
 
800
CAGR (2009-2012) 
600 66% 
US and
Canada
400 Europe
31% 
200 Rest of world
20% 
0
2009 2010 2011 2012
 
Note: monthly active users. CAGR is Compound Annual Growth Rate 
Source: Facebook, MDI Analysis 
 
The key implication of this is not that more people are using social networks, it is that they 
are doing so through mobile, many only through mobile (see Figure 17). We believe this 
mobile-only wave is primarily coming through emerging markets, such as in sub-Saharan 
Africa, where estimates suggest that in many markets around 70-80% of Facebook users 
are mobile-only, much higher than in the US or Europe. This is not surprising given the low 
PC penetration in these markets, increasing availability of mobile data, and a range of 
products that explicitly target low income customers on featurephones (e.g. Facebook for 
USSD, Facebook SMS, Facebook for Every Phone) which do not require access to a data 
plan. There are also a range of Facebook products that allow the customer to have a more 
                                                          
2
 User Generated Content in Google, Oxford Internet Institute, June 2011 
http://www.oii.ox.ac.uk/vis/?id=4e3c030d  
 
Million users 
 
heightened experience through their featurephone but that limit the offer to reduce the 
amount of data consumed (e.g. Facebook Zero). All of these are all separate from the vanilla 
mobile versions optimised for a smartphone app or browser.  The multiplicity of products that 
address the different mobile use cases speaks to Facebook’s recognition of the opportunity 
to reach scale in the developing world with an entire consumer base that is not currently 
online. 
 
Figure 17. Facebook users 
 
1,200 1,056 
1,000 845 157 
800 58 
608 
600 374 523 Mobile only
PC and mobile
400
PC only
200 413 376 
0
2010 2011 2012
 
Note: monthly active users. Disclosure of mobile-only users not available before 2011 
Source: Facebook, MDI analysis 
 
 
Facebook, of course, is the poster child of the social network generation. However, there are 
others, some large and some more niche services in emerging markets with similar mobile-
oriented approaches. All of these provide a platform for others to interact, with a 
multiplicative effect on content creation as penetration rises. Vanity and gossip aside, the 
potential for use as a medium for news creation and consumption, particularly in rural areas, 
is real. Brands (including M4D services) can also use this as a customer feedback 
mechanism in aiding user-centric design (see section 4: user-centric innovation). The wants, 
needs, and behaviours of low-end consumers in the developing world is an area of 
understanding that has previously eluded the companies that deliver products to them. 
Increased use of social networks will contribute to creating a voice for a consumer segment 
that previously did not have a public persona that they controlled. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Million users 
 
  
 
 
The mobile for development sector has enjoyed strong growth over the last 3 years, with 
over 1,300 services run by 600 separate organisations. While the health sector still accounts 
for the majority of services overall, recent growth has been driven by financial services, 
learning and entrepreneurship/employment (see Figure 18). 
 
Figure 18. Timeline of launches 
250 1000
200 800 Entrepreneur
150 600 Learning
Agriculture
100 400
Health
50 200 Money
0 0
Pre 2005 2006 2007 2008 2009 2010 2011
2005  
Note: figures based only on mobile-enabled products and services in  
developing world tracked by GSMA (including those merged/closed)  
Excludes services in pipeline with an impending launch 
Source: MDI Analysis 
 
Mobile operators are most active in the space, with the average country operating company 
running around two services, most of which fall under the Value Added Services (VAS) line 
of business (see figure 19). Governments have the lowest direct involvement in volume 
terms, with influence primarily focused on regulation and promoting a friendly investment 
climate (see M4D stakeholders: a diverse mix)  
  
 
Figure 19. Stakeholder investments in M4D 
2.3 
500 2.5
1.8 
400 2.0 Products and1.6 
1.4 services
300 1.2 1.5
Organisations**
200 1.0
100 0.5 Deployments
per organisation
0 0.0
MNO Vendor and Development Government Academic
entrepreneur organisation*
 
 *Includes donors, NGOs and other development groups 
**Number of unique organisations (country operating companies of MNOs each count as a unique organisation) 
Source: MDI analysis 
 
Launches per year 
Cumulative launches 
 
 
Despite growth in the market and a rising tide of interest from a range of stakeholders, there 
has been a general failure to achieve scale on sustainable basis. We believe this is broadly 
a result of three general factors – lack of defined value chains, sustainable business models, 
and market visibility (discussed in section 3: platforms, multiplicity and the drive for scale). 
Part of the scale challenge is rooted in a historical paradigm with mobile for development 
primarily a social cause as opposed to business opportunity. However, this is not a static 
environment and perhaps most interesting is to understand how the changes in technology 
and new emerging business models are currently rebalancing this perception. 
 
How are mobile services changing? 
 
Business models 
 
Around half of M4D solutions we track sell a product or service directly to consumers (see 
figure 20).  Models that rely on donor funding to supplement or replace revenue account for 
a similar share, but this is heavily skewed by the mHealth sector and the decided shift over 
the last 3 years is that away from donor funding and towards consumer-pay business 
models (see figure 21).  This could be a reflection of specific consumer driven business 
models in various sectors (e.g. mobile money), but is also likely due to a greater awareness 
throughout the industry that purely donor funded models should be phased out where 
commercially viable and sustainable business models can be deployed.  
 
Figure 20. Business models of M4D services3 
 
60%
45% 
42% 
40% 36% 
20% 13% 
10% 
5% 
1% 
0%
Consumer Donor Consumer Business Open source Government Advertising
(non MNO) (MNO) (B2B)
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
                                                          
3
 See companion slide presentation for an explanation of our methodology for analysing the sector 
 
 
 
 
Figure 21. The rise of commercial models over donor-dependent ones 
 
100%
74% 
80% Launch year 66% 
60% 53% 
Pre 2009
34% 
40% 25% 
20% 11% 2009-12
0%
Donor Consumer (non MNO) Non donor/government
 
Note: services can have more than one business model (e.g. receive donor funding and charge consumers), so 
percentages will add up to more than 100% 
Note: figures in this section are for mobile-enabled services in the developing world tracked by GSMA 
For definitions of business models, see glossary 
Source: MDI Analysis 
 
Looking more closely at specific sectors, business models are converging in different ways. 
In the health sector an early dependence on donor funding is becoming diffused to include 
both end user and B2B revenue models (see Figure 22). For example, Changamka builds its 
business model on M-Pesa’s mobile money system to create pre-paid health cards, while 
CommCare create data collection tools for community health workers built on per user 
subscriptions. In the entrepreneurship sector there has been a consolidation of B2B models 
in the last 3 years, with products increasingly targeting payments in the Small and Medium 
size Enterprises (SMEs) market. These provide good examples of how the entrepreneurship 
sector is well positioned to take advantage of markets with maturing mobile money services.   
 
Figure 22. Business model heatmap by sector  
 
 
Note: business models with the highest use across multiple sectors have deeper shades of red 
Source: MDI Analysis 
 
Devices – smartphones on the rise? 
 
Given the mobile focus of this work, it is helpful to give some context around the continuum 
of mobile handsets currently on offer to better understand the difference in technology and 
how it relates to the types of products and services they enable.  In the graphic below 
various delivery technologies like SMS, WAP and voice are mapped to range of handset 
types.  While core mobile services like voice and SMS work on any phone, others – including 
data-based protocols and the mobile web - are generally optimised for higher-end 
featurephones or smartphones (see Figure 23). 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 23. What works on different handsets? 
 
 
Note: for definitions of technologies (e.g. SMS, USSD), see glossary 
Source: MDI Analysis 
 
Despite smartphones continuing to take a larger share of sales, the vast majority of handsets 
in use in the developing world are basic or featurephones. This is reflected in the 
marketplace, with over 80% of mobile-enabled services targeting this handset class (see 
Figure 24). SMS and USSD are the most widely used form of mobile technology leveraged 
to deliver a product or service (see figure 25). 
 
Smartphones are targeted less (partly since there aren’t as many of them in circulation due 
to price, partly due to technological and language literacy barriers). However, this has 
started to change – particularly in the education and small business sectors (where owners 
are more likely to own higher end devices) – and we expect a continued rise over the next 2-
3 years as these barriers are gradually overcome. 
 
Figure 24. What devices are services designed for? 
 
100%
85% 
80%
60%
40% 33% 31% 
20% 9% 10% 
0%
Basic or Smartphone PC Tablet Other
featurephone
 
Source: MDI Analysis 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 25. SMS still most popular 
100%
85% 
76% 77% 80%
65% Launch year 
60% 52% 
Pre 2009
38% 
40%
25% 23% 
20% 2009-12
20% 13% 
0%
SMS USSD Native voice Featurephone Smartphones
 
Note: services can be designed for multiple devices or technologies, so percentages will add up to more than 
100% 
For definitions of devices and network technologies, see glossary 
Source: MDI Analysis 
 
While these trends are occurring at the market level across the developing world, it is also 
useful to look at individual sectors (see Figure 26), from which we observe two interesting 
points.  
First, despite the dominance of SMS and USSD as preferred modes of delivery for Value 
Added Services (VAS) in the developing world, there remain relatively unexplored 
opportunities for growth through integration of existing solutions. For example, combining 
mobile banking and agricultural information services for small-holder farmers globally could 
tap into a market estimated at $450 billion4. While SMS/USSD based information services in 
agriculture, and transactional systems within mobile money are well established, services 
that combine these solutions are less prevalent, providing further headroom for growth. 
The second concerns voice. Voice is a surprisingly underutilised technology in mobile 
services, with its popularity primarily in health and agricultural applications. Indeed, it has 
been declining over the last 3 years due to high up-front investment costs for voice-based 
business models such as call-centres and Interactive Voice Response (IVR) systems as 
compared to the lower cost of text-based communication methods, both telephony 
(SMS/USSD) and IP-based models (mobile internet).  However, we believe this represents a 
missed opportunity given the advantages for voice-based solutions to avoid literacy barriers 
and the potential to generate cost efficiencies with increased scale, unlike SMS (see Figure 
27). 
 
 
 
 
                                                          
4
 http://dalberg.com/documents/Catalyzing_Smallholder_Ag_Finance.pdf 
 
 
 
Figure 26. Delivery technology heatmap by sector 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
Note: technologies with the highest use across multiple sectors have deeper shades of red 
Source: MDI Analysis 
 
Figure 27. Cost benefits of using voice 
Both total users and profit are 
higher with IVR over time 
Time 
User base IVR User base SMS Profit IVR Profit SMS  
Source: GSMA – MDI analysis 
 
 
 
ASSUMPTIONS: 
 IVR 
 There are high upfront costs because IVR services are built from the start to accommodate a large user base 
 After the initial setup costs, the cost of scaling hardware and licences is absorbed by MNOs, as the service 
generates revenues for them  
 IVR services are pull oriented (i.e. users dial in) 
 No marketing costs have been considered 
SMS 
 User base is typically smaller compared to IVR services due to literacy rates 
5
 Mobile Originated (MO) is 60% of Mobile Terminated (MT) ; in SMS solutions the number of messages sent 
by the server is higher than the messages sent back by the user. In this case, for all messages sent by the 
service provider, 60% return from users. The service provider is charged for every message sent, in the 
majority of markets, it can only recoup revenue from messages sent back from users at a rate of 60% of the 
MT; there is a higher cost for the business and for the user, if the business has to recover SMS costs 
 
 
                                                          
5
 “Mobile (Handset) Originated" (MO) means an SMS was created and sent by a mobile user, "Mobile (Handset) 
Terminated" (MT) means a message which is terminated on a user’s mobile handset 
 
Number of Users/Profit 
 
 
The cross sector view 
 
Sectors such as mobile money, agriculture, and health represent unique opportunities in 
terms of the addressable markets they serve, their potential for re-use and recombination 
with other services, and their potential to achieve socio-economic impact. They each also 
face distinctive challenges (e.g. regulation, sourcing appropriate content providers). While 
accounting for the uniqueness of each sector, we can nevertheless take a view across all 
sectors to come to a more holistic view of common challenges and opportunities. Uncovering 
opportunities for leveraging existing technologies for more than their originally intended 
purpose and uncovering new efficiencies to ultimately increase the ability to achieve scale is 
the intended purpose of taking a ‘cross sector’ view. 
 
Another way of describing the situation is to say one – vertical – way of looking at the market 
partitions themes by sector (money, health, small business etc), while another – horizontal – 
view categorises services based on business model and underlying technology. Such a 
framework was earlier developed by MDI (published in MIT Innovations) to map out mobile 
services horizontally, looking at the potential for revenue generation and hence financial 
sustainability. The advantage of this horizontal (or cross sector) view is to reveal patterns 
and opportunities across sectors where services can be developed to serve multiple use 
cases.  
 
Opportunities 
 
On this cross-sector view we don’t think about interactive information content systems for 
agriculture or health, but simply as interactive content services. By considering a platform 
that is useable across multiple countries and sectors (e.g. agriculture and money), the 
scaling potential becomes clearer. Moreover, while the distinctive challenges of each sector 
must be considered and overcome, some of these challenges may be better addressed 
when looking across sectors, as knowledge gained in one sector can be utilised by another 
(e.g. knowledge built from content delivery in the agricultural sector, rolling out distribution 
networks in the mobile money sector). Ultimately, this vantage is helpful in identifying missed 
or future opportunities for achieving synergies in the design and roll-out of services – from 
the supply side, requisites for sustainable business models. 
  
Challenges 
 
As each sector represents a distinct range of use-cases (end users of information services in 
health and agriculture will have very different requirements), cross-sector tools must be 
adaptable and flexible. In particular, those who use the services to implement specific sector 
solutions must be able to do so easily. The value of cross sector tools will also take longer to 
demonstrate, as multiple implementations across different verticals will be required. 
Additionally, initial required investment in these tools is higher than in designing a bespoke 
service to serve a specific market in a specific country, and driving sufficient investment at 
an early stage represents a challenge for the mobile sector as a whole. 
 
 
Regardless of sector, what are services doing?  
 
MDI provides an extensive database of M4D products and services across the developing 
world, with 1320 live products and services as of May 2013. Africa remains one of the 
prominent areas of activity, with mobile money in particular concentrated in this region. Asia 
(particularly China) has also emerged as a key region, with mobile-based education 
applications driving growth (see Figure 28). 
 
 
 
Figure 28. Live M4D deployments by region 
600
500 Central/Eastern
Europe
400 Oceania
300 Africa
200 Latam
100
Asia
0
Money Health Agriculture Learning Entrepreneurship
 
Note: figures based on mobile-enabled products and services in the developing world tracked by GSMA  
As of September 2012; excludes services in pipeline with impending launch 
Source: MDI analysis 
 
Different services are developed in different geographic regions, and across different 
sectors. This means such services may appear – at a surface level – quite unrelated to each 
other aside from the fact that they use mobile to provide a development focused service of 
some kind. Despite this, services invariably share similar features in their underlying 
technology. To motivate this, consider the example of three different organisations below.  
 
YoungAfricaLive is a mobile community platform that engages young people around the 
topics of love, sex and relationships, and aims to promote healthy sexual behaviour in its 
users. It uses a peer to peer model, where users can seek each other out within a 
community, as well as engage with interactive content that includes daily news and celebrity 
stories. The service utilises a mixture of WAP and web technology, and targets users with 
basic or featurephone handsets6. The service was conceived and funded by the Praekelt 
Foundation, and is geographically concentrated around southern and eastern Africa.  
 
Esoko started in West Africa as a piece of software to push market prices out to farmers via 
SMS alerts. It has now evolved into an agricultural mobile service that provides a suite of 
applications that any business or organisation (including agribusinesses, smallholder 
farmers, mobile operators, NGOs, and ministries) can use to push and pull information to 
targeted and profiled users. Esoko aims at users with basic or featurephone handsets, and 
uses a range of underlying delivery technologies including SMS, WAP, and voice. 
 
SoukTel is a service connecting job seekers with employers via mobile in the Middle East. 
Job seekers can upload their CV via a basic phone, employers can create job adverts, and 
the two can connect using SoukTel’s peer to peer platform. In addition, SoukTel offers 
another service (AidLink) to get key information to and from communities in crisis. The 
service uses a range of delivery technologies including SMS, IVR and WAP.  
 
These three services span across Africa to the Middle East, and across areas of health, 
agriculture, and job creation. The interest is in the fact that seemingly disparate services use 
the same underlying delivery technology (e.g. SMS), and are based on a similar underlying 
                                                          
6
 See glossary for MDI definitions  
 
 
framework (YoungAfricaLive and SoukTel essentially provide peer-to-peer networks)(see 
figure 29). 
 
Figure 29. Hidden similarities in what lies beneath 
 
         Agriculture         Entrepreneurship           Health 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
Business model Business model Business model 
 Business Donor Donor 
 Targeted Device Targeted Device Targeted Device 
Basic/ Feature Phone Basic/ Feature Phone Basic/ Feature Phone 
 
Primary Delivery Primary Delivery Primary Delivery 
 Technology  Technology  
Technology  
SMS, Voice, WAP, Web SMS, WAP, IVR WAP, Web 
 Products & Services Products & Services Products & Services 
Data collection,  P2P, Interactive content,  P2P, Interactive content 
 Push content Push content   
  
   
Source: MDI analysis 
 
The full cross sector view is shown below (see Figure 30). Content-based services (either 
pushed or by hosting content that is accessible by users) currently have the greatest range. 
Moving forwards, we believe this will shift to payments as mobile money services 
increasingly take on re-use in adjacent sectors, with micro-insurance and utility access 
(water and electricity) well positioned. 
 
Figure 30. Type of technology used by sector 
      
 
Note: functionalities with the highest use across multiple sectors have deeper shades of red 
Source: MDI Analysis 
 
 
 
Investment over the last 5-7 years has largely been built on a bespoke service model (see 
section 3: platforms, multiplicity and the drive for scale). This is not unlike the journey other 
technology markets took before reaching mass adoption – the PC industry of the late 1970s 
in Silicon Valley is a germane example. As such, examples of technology frameworks in use 
that span across mobile verticals are rare, but increasing – Frontline SMS (featured below), 
Ushahidi, Freedomfone, and Motech provide good examples. It is this space of designing 
(and re-using existing) solutions across sectors that we believe offers the greatest potential 
for scale as mobile penetration continues to rise (providing demand-side stimulus) and 
investment providers seek business models that drive innovation but do not reinvent the 
wheel in underlying technology. 
 
 
 
  
 Spotlight 
  
Photo:  
   
 
   
 
   
 
  
  
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
FrontlineSMS (initially set up by Ken Banks in 2004) builds and distributes free 
open-source software, helping organisations in both economically developed 
and under-developed countries to overcome communication barriers they face. 
Their users have interests spanning healthcare to election monitoring, with a 
bottom line to drive transformative social change. In each case the software 
allows users to send, manage and receive text message interactions with 
communities of people. 
 
Photographer 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
The cross sector view and the concept of re-use 
The advantage of the cross sector view is to reveal patterns and opportunities across 
sectors where services can be developed to serve multiple use cases. These multiple use 
cases are valuable in the context of a service’s revenue generating potential and hence 
financial sustainability. This value can be described by the concept of ‘re-use’ – those 
solutions that are more re-useable and adaptable in catering for a wider range of end-user 
cases, which has emerged as a key driver to reaching scale.  
 
The concept of re-use and a platform 
Part of the problem is the language we all use to discuss mobile technology. In the mobile 
space the term “platform” can mean a range of things to different people: an operating 
system such as iOS, Android, or Linux; pieces of open source software with public APIs; a 
network technology like SMS; or simply a mobile service that scales to reach a large user 
base. In this way, the term doesn’t sufficiently indicate what can be re-used, and in what 
sorts of ways. 
 
The “platform” problem 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
A more helpful view: frameworks 
Given this lack of clarity, we want to make the issue of re-use more transparent by drawing a 
distinction between a platform, framework and application. Details of this distinction are 
outlined below. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
The reason we draw this distinction is that we see frameworks as best positioned to address 
the lost opportunities for re-use across the M4D service space (see Figure 31) – to take two 
sectors, there are enough common tools at the technology level that can be plugged into by 
a service targeting farmers as can be by one focused on mobile money. 
 
Figure 31. How re-usable are services? 
  
Scope for re-use (sector or geography) 
Low High 
Many 
Bespoke applications (e.g. • Designed for specific purpose 
KomKom, Cell Life) (few generic elements) 
• Built with many generic elements that 
Frameworks (e.g. Ushahidi, Motech, could be re-used (e.g. database, 
Fundamo) location engine, language) 
• Limited by need for customisability 
(e.g. identity, payment platforms) 
• Generic (e.g. built so that many 
Platforms (e.g. iOS, Android, Linux) services/applications can plug into) 
Few 
Specific Generic 
Source: MDI analysis 
 
 
 
What is needed to drive scale? 
 
There is no silver bullet, but it is worth adding perspective. The scale of the global mobile 
sector is now around $1.1 trillion per year, well above the handset market (around $250 
billion) and dwarfing the internet (see Figure 32 – unlike the mobile market, in which the 
average country supports 3-4 mobile operators, the internet business is dominated by a few 
players such as Google, Facebook and Amazon).   
 
Figure 32. Global revenue ($ billion), 2011 
1,200
1,000
800
600
400
200
0
Mobile Handset Google Facebook*
operators makers
 
 
*Estimated by eMarketer 
Source: GSMA Intelligence, Strategy Analytics, eMarketer, Google, MDI analysis 
 
The global mobile market is growing at around 7% per year, with this being driven 
predominantly by developing markets, and the gap between these and mature countries 
continuing to widen (see Figure 33). This is a growth story driven by subscriber growth, with 
still significant headroom given that less than 50% of people actually subscribe to mobile 
services. Given the experience of most developed countries, we believe penetration is likely 
to rise to around 80% of the population before beginning to plateau.  
 
Figure 33. Mobile revenue growth 
20%
15%
Developed
10%
Developing
5%
0%
2008 2009 2010 2011
 
Source: GSMA Intelligence, MDI analysis 
 
One of the key challenges is dealing with a shift in communication behaviours away from 
voice and towards data-based methods (e.g. email, social networking). Of course, shifts in 
human behaviour can rarely be predicted and almost never halted, they can only be 
managed. While this means services must be aligned with consumer communication 
behaviours, it also presents an opportunity for investment in mobile-enabled services (within 
the VAS line of business) to drive continued growth. However, to scale these services, three 
broad barriers must be overcome: cementing the value chains, driving more sustainable 
business models (that align entrepreneur and investor/donor interests), and increasing the 
visibility of players in the market so that partnerships are more easily formed. 
 
 
 
 
Defined value chains 
 
Much of the growth in the M4D sector has come from services designed to do a specific 
thing in a specific country (bespoke applications).  Part of this is likely due to the sector 
being rooted in social impact, with funding of services in the early and mid 2000’s largely 
donor driven and with a lot of duplication across countries, particularly in the mobile health 
sector (see figure 34). There is, however, one notable exception in mobile money. The 
majority of mobile money services (around 80%) are built on top of a limited number of 
frameworks, often developed and owned by vendors (e.g. Fundamo, Comviva) who occupy 
this distinct section of the value chain between the service provider (often mobile operators) 
and end customers. 
 
Figure 34. Does the mobile service use a framework? 
10% 3% 3% 6% 
100%
10% 
Open framework
13% 20% 20% 30% 15% 80%
13% 20% 17% 7% 25% Closed framework
60%
77% 
40% Foundation M4D
63% 57% 60% 63% 54% application
20% Bespoke M4D
13% application
0%
Money Health Agriculture Learning E&E Total
 
Source: MDI analysis 
 
The value of mobile money frameworks can already be seen by their re-use in other sectors 
– utilities (e.g. lighting access), agriculture (micro-insurance with mobile payments), and 
entrepreneurship (e.g. supply chain management) are some good examples. 
 
Due to the high upfront costs of developing frameworks, this approach is often not feasible 
for early-stage or even mid-size companies. However, joint investment both in financial and 
human capital from different stakeholder groups – including international development 
organisations, entrepreneurs, investors and mobile operators – is more viable given the 
shared interest, albeit with different incentives, in scaling mobile in the developing world. 
This is already happening – Motech (see Spotlight below) and Ushahidi are examples of this 
joint investment model – which we believe will be replicated as further success stories 
become more evident. 
  
 
 
 
 
Figure 35. Where is investment needed? 
 
  
  F oundation F oundation  Low 
 app app 
 cost 
 
 
  Bespoke  
 Framework app 
 Medium  Sweet spot 
 cost for 
 Tool Tool investment 
 Tool 
 
 
  
 High cost Platform 
 
 
 
 
 
Year launched 
Ghana v1 – 2010;  Spotlight 
India v2 - 2012  
Business model   
Dependent on  
implementation  
Targeted Device  
Basic phone and   
featurephone 
 
Primary Delivery 
 
Technology  
 
IVR; SMS; Java App 
Background and opportunity 
Products & Services 
MOTECH was developed out of frustration with an overabundance of pilot project 
Data Collection 
Inventory Management mHealth activity that has failed to deliver sustained impact at scale, placing a burden 
and Last-Mile Supply on health workers and systems and increasing costs and inefficiencies for government 
Chain ministries, donors and NGOs.  
Service support for 
 
behaviour Change & 
Demand Generation The first phase of this initiative was led by Grameen Foundation in Ghana. That work 
Managing Patient Data led to the development of the MOTECH Suite, also led by Grameen Foundation, along 
Agent/Worker with a consortium of interested partners in Dimagi, InSTEDD, OnMobile, OpenMRS, 
Performance support 
ThoughtWorks, University of Southern Maine and others. The MOTECH Suite 
Patient Adherence 
consortium has core funding from the Bill and Melinda Gates Foundation, as well as 
Markets deployed in project-specific funding from such organizations as Johnson & Johnson, USAID and 
Asia - India 
the government of Norway. 
Africa – Ghana, Zambia  
(more Sub-Saharan  
Africa in development) To help realize the promise of mHealth, the MOTECH Suite delivers an integrated 
Estimated number framework of complementary applications that are designed to be scalable, 
of users sustainable and readily deployed. 
Dependent on   
implementation Progress since launch  
MOTECH has evolved significantly since its inception in Ghana in 2010 in its version 1 
guise which focused on sending messages to pregnant parents and collecting data 
from community health workers. Version 2, developed for the TAMA and Ananya 
 
 
initiatives in India, saw the software framework overhauled to provide for scale and 
easier customization for a diverse set of use cases. Currently the team is working on a 
cloud based implementation which will allow for rapid setup for new implementations 
along with an easily scalable platform. 
 
This underlines the value of frameworks where each generation improves and learns 
from the last. As it goes through new implementations the framework will evolve and 
improve to support wider functionality, scalability and reliability. 
 
Scalability 
MOTECH has significantly changed in relation to supporting scale. The first version 
supported hundreds of health workers and around 25,000 patients in limited regions of 
Ghana with E1 connections to mobile operators. The second version has been 
designed to support tens of thousands of health workers and millions of patients in 
India. It is hosted in a commercial data centre linked into the service provider and 
mobile operators’ infrastructure. A planned cloud version will allow the depth of 
implementations to grow quickly and scale with relative ease. 
 
 
How does the organisation build itself around the end-user? 
The individual implementations of MOTECH will largely dictate how closely it can be 
aligned to end-user needs along with their ability to continue expanding coverage of 
mobile channels (SMS, IVR, apps etc) and devices. However, given the highly user-
centric implementations such as Grameen Foundation’s Mobile Midwife in Ghana and 
BBC Media Action’s services in Bihar for Maternal Health Care, this can only help to 
improve MOTECH’s ability to support user needs in future implementations. 
 
The flexibility of this framework approach allows elements to be developed which can 
be rapidly evolved to meet other user needs in separate implementations without the 
need to start from scratch again – all whilst growing the tools/features of the overall 
framework in a user-centric nature. 
 
Challenges: internal and external 
As the number of implementations grow (and with it their relative scale) the main 
challenges will be in managing the evolution of the core framework to make it sure it 
meets a wider set of requirements. 
 
As services supported by MOTECH become more prevalent and scaled there will be a 
greater pull on resources to give higher levels of support to commercial and NGO 
organisations where their users have come to rely on such services. 
 
Value of partnerships, particularly with mobile operators? 
Partnerships with implementers and supporting organisations such as NGOs, Service 
Providers, MNOs, etc. is a requirement to the on-going improvement of the framework, 
in order to push: 
 New functionality 
 Reliability 
 Scale 
 Support 
 Reducing risk and cost of framework use. 
 
An example could be in a specific implementation of MOTECH with BBC Media Action 
(Bihar) – MOTECH was used to support a number of services including a ”Mobile 
Academy” to allow health workers take a comprehensive, interactive IVR-based course 
designed to increase their knowledge of life-saving maternal-and child-health (MCH) 
behaviours and improve their communication skills. Secondly, a health worker mobile 
job aid called ”Mobile Kunji,” where health workers can use their phone to access IVR-
based messages promoting critical MCH behaviours, and play them to patients. 
Finally, a direct service to pregnant women and mothers of young children where they 
 
 
 can receive IVR calls that remind them of healthy behaviours, and encourage them 
 during their pregnancy and baby’s first year to follow the schedule of care prescribed 
 by the Bihar government. The services were designed to be available on any handset, 
 across all the major operators in Bihar, on a minimal or no cost basis. All content is 
available in the local language.  
 
 
 
For this MOTECH was used in combination with a number of complimentary systems 
 provided by a local service provider (OnMobile) and the Mobile Operators systems.  
  
 Any organisation undertaking the use of MOTECH as a core component will potentially 
 face issues around: 
 Potential complexity risk – there was a risk of 
 introducing a major component which under 
pinned the services which was “alien” to the 
contracted service provider and mobile operators. 
 
On the surface, taking a more direct approach of 
implementing the services entirely on the service 
 provider and MNO platforms could be seen as 
less risky and potentially less costly given the 
 lack of familiarity with the framework  
 Potential scale risk – as MOTECH is continually 
 being adapted and new implementations are 
being done, it is not always easy for early 
 adopters to understand whether the design is 
scalable. This is particularly true given there are 
still relatively few large scale deployments in a 
 commercial environment with all the support and 
liability issues entailed in such a system 
  
However, in taking the above risks each implementation helps reduce them for future 
 implementations through the improvements required in each new version. 
 
 
 
Sustainable business models 
 
In order to find the successful business models that are going to reach scale in the 
developing world we need the right kind of capital to support the development and 
deployment of these businesses to scale. So far, we have identified a number of barriers to 
success around understanding the market, the end user, and the technology. Another key 
area that will need to be addressed to reach scale is the behaviour of the investor. 
 
Beyond start-up funding from savings and family, much of the investment in mobile 
entrepreneurs and services in the developing world has come from social investors – who 
generally target both a financial and social return – and donor groups. The social investing 
market as a whole – including mobile, tech and other sectors – is still relatively small (a 
recent Global Impact Investing Network (GIIN)/JP Morgan survey of social investors 
suggested around $8bn was invested in 2012, with an expectation for a slight rise to $9bn in 
20137). While there is a general lack of disclosure in this area from private investors, we 
believe from discussions that much of the funding has been directed towards businesses 
                                                          
7
 Perspectives on Progress: The Impact Investor Survey; GIIN and JP Morgan, January 2013. Amount 
invested based on sample group, and as such is not meant to be exhaustive for the entire market 
http://www.thegiin.org/cgi-bin/iowa/download?row=489&field=gated_download_1 
 
 
that are mature and largely proven, with relatively little towards earlier stage entrepreneurs. 
While donors have provided funding for earlier stage ventures, relatively few have 
successfully transitioned to standalone, sustainable entities once funding comes to an end.        
 
To some extent we believe this is a result of a business skills gap – mobile, particularly in 
emerging markets, has attracted many bright young entrepreneurs with high potential for 
innovation but lacking the business know-how to deliver it (innovators, see Figure 36). 
However, we believe this is also a consequence of developed world investors attempting to 
port traditional risk/return relationships established over the last 30-40 years (and now 
entrenched in decision making) to developing markets. In addition, some investors are 
seeking to make investments an order of magnitude higher than is actually needed by the 
entrepreneur (e.g. $10m when $550k would be sufficient). Some of this will be the result of 
being bound by a fund’s term sheet (e.g. not allowing investments below a certain size), and 
some will be more secular given the cost and time of running due diligence make 
considering smaller investments less attractive. In this investment milieu, the risk profile of 
start-ups in emerging markets is considerably higher than similar companies in mature 
markets (e.g. US, UK, Germany), with political, economic and social risks all present and 
real in addition to those related to executing a business model.  
 
Figure 36. Reaching maturity 
Mature, proven 
Services that scale models (few) 
over time 
Low 
High risk innovators 
(many) 
Note: coloured spheres are 
Services that do indicative only, and do not 
not scale correspond to hard data points 
A B C D E F
Time since launch of service  High 
 
Source: Omidyar Network, MDI Analysis 
 
As a result, there is a significant slice of entrepreneurial talent with the potential for delivering 
innovation that has gone unfunded, leaving a funding gap. Looking at the problem through a 
traditional funding timeline used by VCs, the gap is roughly between the start-up (or ‘idea’) 
and ‘growth’ phases (see figure 37) – the period where a business goes from concept to 
commercial operations and relatively stable revenues.  
 
 
  
 
Scale 
Investment risk 
Investment risk 
 
Figure 37. Financing innovation – missed opportunity? 
 
 
 
 
 Funding gap 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Idea  Pre-seed Seed Growth Mature Stages of Growth 
From  From proof of From small Scale, sustainable Plateau, potential exit 
conception to concept in the scale of profits  Funding need: 
busine ss plan market place revenues to Funding need: Equity or debt stakes 
Fundin g need: to proof of profitability  $500k+ from VC’s, (e.g. to finance 
$1-10k  from value  (i.e. Funding need: more traditional expansion) from more 
donati ons, small amount $50-500k from investors traditional investors. 
compe titions of sales) grants, angels  Business undergoes 
family & Funding need: investors etc., IPOs, exits, trade sales  
friends , $10-100k from Company is (merges or gets 
saving s. savings, established.  acquired) 
 family, 
donors, grants Source: MDI Analysis 
 etc. 
 
 
There is growing recognition that this hole in the middle (sometimes called ‘the missing 
middle’) is a drag on progress and a barrier to scale. Funding attitudes among donors and 
impact investors alike must shift in three key ways. The first is to view investments more 
from a risk capital, as opposed to subsistence perspective, more in line with traditional VCs 
that fund innovation despite the high probability of failure of many firms. The second is in 
understanding that a degree of flexibility in the business plan and strategies pursued by 
entrepreneurs must be tolerated by donors and investors given the inherently different risk 
profile of the environment these mobile businesses are operating in. Short term returns are 
less likely, with a greater need to mentor talent to drive medium and longer term returns. 
Finally, businesses offering mobile-enabled services must design and modify around the end 
customer. This user-centric innovation is not itself a new concept but one of importance 
given the rapidly changing economic and social environment in many developing countries, 
with an opportunity for carrying this out much more efficiently using mobile than has been 
possible in the analogue past (see section 4: user-centric innovation). Buy-in from donors 
and investors of this iterative design-and-modify process is important not only in recognising 
this as part of operating a start-up or small business in the developing world, but also at the 
level of integrating it into the investment scanning and decision making process of the 
investing/funding organisations themselves.     
 
Innovation centres across emerging regions (notably sub-Saharan Africa) also play a part in 
mitigating this gap by connecting entrepreneurs and investors, especially to provide 
mentorship and the ability to incubate ideas from concept through to commercial deployment 
(see Figure 38). Mobile operators are increasingly aware of the benefits of generating a 
larger ecosystem (e.g. Orange Technocentre in Cote d’Ivoire was set up in this context) and 
as such aiming to partner with businesses that bring both innovative services to meet the 
 
Funding need 
 
needs of local customers beyond traditional mobile telephony services (mainly voice and 
SMS) (which there is no shortage of) and that offer sustainable business models (which 
there is).  
 
One of the most interesting emerging ways to do this is by hosting test networks within 
innovation centres, jointly run by mobile operators, entrepreneurs and innovation labs. This 
would involve a sandbox of APIs8 that allow developers to test out how their service would 
work on a mobile network in a lab setting before actually entering into a partnership with an 
operator – essentially taking the concept of an innovation lab to the next step. While this 
holds obvious technical benefits in terms of testing the performance of services pre-launch 
(e.g. to minimise latency), we think the real value is in developing deeper partnerships 
between entrepreneurs and operators, especially at the regional level where a VAS business 
can be spread across a much larger mobile network footprint.  
 
Figure 38. Innovation centres in Africa 
 
 
Source: iHub 
 
Market visibility 
 
The growth in mobile-enabled services across the developing world has attracted a large 
and growing network of organisations. MDI now tracks over 600 different players in this 
space (see our products and services tracker), from operators to entrepreneurs to investors. 
Indeed, this is in many ways representative of the value offered through mobile, particularly 
for a sector whose growth potential has only partly been realised. However, it also raises a 
challenge in the form of visibility. 
 
Who should I partner with? Why? And, how should I go about this? 
 
These questions become important in light of the sheer number of potential partners an 
entrepreneur (or investor, or operator) faces. Take an entrepreneur in the health sector 
whose service allows health workers on the front line to collect, upload and send data to a 
central location (e.g. laboratory of a university or private firm). The business first needs to 
                                                          
8
 Application Programming Interfaces (APIs) – these are specifications for how software should 
interact with other software  
 
 
have a good view of the competitive landscape and of customer needs (see section 4: user-
centric innovation). It also needs to determine the level of mobile coverage in the areas the 
business operates in to ensure reliability of service. This type of service could feasibly be run 
either through SMS/USSD or through an app with the data hosted in the cloud. If run over 
the mobile network, an operator partner would need to be selected. A business would need 
to approach an operator either at the country (op-co) or regional level. Following a 
successful business pitch (a milestone in it of itself), the question then becomes what type of 
financial agreement is made – most often this comes as a revenue share agreement – and 
for how long (if the business model changes from a margin play to, say, subscription 
revenue, an entrepreneur may wish to negotiate a shorter term agreement). 
 
This set of decisions is helped through experience and by an increasing presence and 
contact base in the mobile sector – as borne out by leading firms in the sector (see below). 
The big challenge is in the early stages. 
 
 
 
 
Spotlight: Attitudes to partnerships, especially with mobile 
operators? 
 
  
Enterprise partners are integral to Esoko’s business model, and are 
therefore of the highest value. All partners come with their specific set of 
needs and requirements, whether corporates, development projects, 
MNOs, or ministries. “They’re all potentially very exciting.” Esoko have 
found it difficult to work with MNOs to date because their terms of 
 revenue share haven’t yet been economically viable. They have also 
See full case study struggled to communicate the value of their agri service to MNOs, “it’s 
Sector: mAgri not a sector that’s represented real value to them in the past. You need 
Region: East & West to approach them in such a way as meets their business objectives, 
Africa which is client acquisition and declining ARPUs.” Even now, Esoko feel 
Launch: 2008 that because models aren’t yet proven, it is hard to interface with MNOs 
on a business and technical level. 
 
Frogtek’s project is complex enough to need collaboration of many 
different players including payment providers, mobile operators, 
hardware providers, integrators, banks, consumer-goods companies 
and shopkeeper associations. These partnerships are all clearly of 
value. With respect to mobile network operators, Frogtek conducted a 
pilot with Teléfonica in México during their trial period. This carrier now 
See full case study provides them with the data plans that go along with Tiendatek (flagship 
Sector: service). In addition, the team working on Frogtek’s products have 
mEntrepreneurship experience working in the telecoms industry. For example, David del Ser 
Region: Mexico, (the founder), Guillermo Caudevilla (the CTO) and some of the first 
Columbia engineers who worked on the prototype for Tiendatek had prior 
Launch: 2008 experience as Vodafone Group Research and Development employees. 
 In addition, Frogtek’s current CEO, Marcos Eshkenazi, manages the 
 Movistar distributor leader in México. “Obviously all this prior experience 
 does not mean we know everything we need to know about mobile 
 carriers in a complicated market such as Latam, but we have, at least, 
 the background.” 
 
 
 
  
Souktel has core partnerships with both MNOs and aid agencies, both of 
 which are valuable. These are clearly different in that MNOs are 
See full case study 
fundamentally commercial entities which focus on earning revenue, 
Sector: 
while non-profits have social concerns more explicitly woven into their 
mEntrepreneurship 
bottom lines. As a result, Souktel’s approach to partnerships between 
Region:  Africa, Asia, 
the two is very different. Even while trying to adopt a uniform method 
Latin America and the 
when approaching new MNOs, the reality is that these operators can be 
Caribbean 
very different. In some cases Souktel is directed to the Corporate Social 
Launch: 2006 
Responsibility (CSR) team, in others to the VAS (Value Added Services) 
 
team of a given MNO. “This being said, once you get a handle on the 
 
way a specific MNO works then you can typically apply the same 
 
approach in multiple countries.” The interesting thing that the aid 
agencies bring is insight into the needs of job seekers. “These agencies 
provide a lot of information that helps optimise the service to meet the 
needs of end users.” 
 
 
 
Mobile operators have the largest footprint in the sector, but it is not evenly spread. Mobile 
money services remain the most popular, with around two thirds being led by a mobile 
operator (as opposed to the operator partnering with another service provider and branding 
with the partner’s name). While this reflects the relative maturity and proven value 
proposition of mobile financial services in emerging markets, it underlines the as-yet 
unexploited opportunity in other verticals, particularly health, agriculture and small business 
applications. As with the challenge in bridging the funding gap for early stage entrepreneurs, 
scaling mobile services in these verticals will come down to an increasing focus on clear 
business models that are clearly communicated between potential partners – this will allow 
entrepreneurs, donors/investors and operators to use their comparative advantage (what 
they do best).  
 
Figure 39. M4D services led by MNOs 
 
Money 70% 
Learning 49% 
Health 35% 
Agriculture 27% 
 
Source: MDI analysis  
 
 
 
What do we mean by user-centric design? 
 
A paradigm of putting the user first in problem formulation 
 
The basic principle underlying user-centric design is not new, and is simply stated: “the 
customer is the most important part of the production line” (Deming: 1982). In other words, it 
involves putting the user at the heart of framing problems in such a way that their needs are 
being served first. This can often involve the subtle restatement of a problem, such as 
shifting from “how can we get farmers to use our information about market prices via 
mobile?” to “how can we create information services for farmers through their accessible 
means (e.g. mobile), in such a way that serves their agricultural needs?” In other words, 
user-centric thinking is better represented as a general paradigm rather than a fixed set of 
practices. It essentially changes the focus when looking at problems and opportunities. 
 
‘Design’ covers a wide variety of processes 
 
We should also stress that “design” here refers to a wide range of processes. For example, it 
could refer to a concrete product or service solution itself, or perhaps the development of a 
business model, or even creating organisational culture. In the more obvious product design 
case designers should ask: what are the genuine problems that users face and how should 
we design concrete solutions that meet them? Below is a sketch of the IDEO HDC process 
that guides designers through the process of initially taking observations (hearing), to a 
phase of ideation in which stories are crafted into solutions (creating), and then a phase in 
which concrete solutions are prototyped and implemented (delivery; see figure 40). 
 
Figure 40. IDEO HDC user-centric design process 
 
Source: IDEO HCD Toolkit 
Design also covers the design of strategies, business models and other business activities. 
For example, the ‘design’ section of Business Model Generation covers business model 
design techniques including Visual Thinking, Prototyping and Storytelling. Design can even 
refer to a process as broad as creating organisational culture. This may well depend on 
designing the entire lifecycle of a customer, from learning about an organisation to ending 
 
 
the relationship with that organisation. By actively designing a customer lifecycle the 
organisation can align its culture, strategy and other business activities around it.9 
A common characteristic: user first, keep learning and improving 
 
What we here call ‘user-centric design’ goes by different names. For example, IDEO call it 
Human-centred design, defined as “a process and a set of techniques used to create new 
solutions for the world… [including] products, services, environments, organizations, and 
modes of interaction.” Here the process of design starts with the question ‘what do people 
desire?’ and moves onto explorations of technically feasible and financially viable solutions 
subsequently.10 Notably, IDEO’s toolkit shares many features with other widely adopted and 
much discussed design and business model generation tools (e.g., business model 
generation, or the lean startup method). Each of these emphasise their focus on end users, 
and the need to create a plan for on-going learning and iteration (e.g. design doesn’t cease). 
 
Why are we interested in this with respect to scaling M4D services? 
 
From a development perspective, mobile focused or otherwise, services should always be 
designed around end users. While this has always been the 'ideal', it has historically been 
very difficult to implement due to resource limitations in developing markets and the lack of 
an efficient process for doing it. This has been particularly difficult with respect to data 
collection, monitoring and evaluation. Mobile changes this. It represents an opportunity 
through connecting businesses to end users; enabling them to better collect, understand and 
utilise end user requirements. In other words, mobile helps illuminate behaviours and 
information about the end user that was previously unavailable. Moreover, the interest in 
better illuminating end user behaviour represents a key area of overlap between the mobile 
industry and international development organisations. Therefore the topic of user centric 
design provides opportunities for partnership between these larger players in the M4D 
ecosystem. 
 
The basic reason that all such players are interested in user-centric design is that it reduces 
waste.  User-centred design (UCD) is critical in unearthing genuine value propositions for 
M4D services and business models, which ultimately reduces the failure rate of M4D 
ventures, and thereby increases the overall return on investment in the sector; both socially 
and financially.  More specifically, consider some of the cases below: 
 
UCD can expose critical flaws early on 
 
Such information (e.g., customer vernacular, user habits, etc.) might otherwise cause M4D 
services to fail, or cause severely impaired uptake. While missing critical information about 
customers will likely impair any product, the problem is more acute for BoP focused 
companies as these are not run by the individuals living at the BoP. This acts as an 
automatic hurdle for connecting with end users, and so increases the likelihood that basic 
critical information is missed. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
                                                          
9
 Interesting article on this topic http://www.nextbillion.net/blogpost.aspx?blogid=3100 
10
 IDEO’s Human-centred design toolkit is a great resource for further exploring these ideas on a 
more practical level 
 
 
Spotlight 
 
While MTN Uganda had theoretically mapped out the process of converting a customer who 
had never heard of mobile money to one that habitually uses the service, there were 
practical barriers in this journey (see figure 41). 
 
Figure 41. MTN Uganda mobile money conversion map 
 
 
Note: adapted from “Marketing Mobile Money: Top 3 Challenges” - Yasmina McCarty, June 2012  
Source: GSMA Mobile Money program, MDI Analysis 
 
The gap was caused by customers receiving insufficient training to meet their needs in using 
the service (at the knowledge phase; see figure 42). Drilling further into this, it transpired that 
a key barrier was the vernacular: the term ‘send money’, in Uganda, translates to literally 
posting money, and made no sense in the context of mobile money to them. A better term 
turned out to be ‘put’. 
 
Figure 42. Non-users feedback regarding knowledge of MTN Uganda 
 
 
 
Source: GSMA Mobile Money programme; MDI Analysis 
 
 
 
 
 
 
UCD is a critical way to improve existing M4D services 
Willingness to re-design existing M4D products according to customer needs is an important 
way to increase their effectiveness. By continuously talking to customers and constantly 
monitoring their use of the service, service providers can identify gaps in the services they 
provide and think of ways to address those gaps. 
Spotlight  
  
Tigo’s first foray into the world of Mobile Money was in 2008 with the launch of its product 
Tigo Cash. Tigo Cash was an e-wallet which offered a range of products and services, but 
promoted merchant payments as the primary functionality. The market’s reaction to the 
product was disappointing with low customer registration and transactions.  
 
In July 2010, Tigo re-launched its service under the name Giros Tigo. Unlike Tigo Cash, 
Giros Tigo focused on one high potential customer segment with a Mobile Money product 
that was designed specifically to meet their needs (see figure 43). 
 
 
Figure 43. Tigo Paraguay mobile money service – before and after  
 
Tigo Cash Giros Tigo 
 
Tigo (2008) Tigo (2010) 
 
e-Wallet, merchant payments, e-Wallet, merchant payments,  
Services domestic remittances via P2P domestic remittances via  
transfer, top ups OTC withdrawal, top ups 
Marketing 
All services Domestic remittances 
focus 
Application and validation at 
Registration USSD (approximately 45 seconds) 
agent point 
 
Source: Tigo, GSMA Mobile Money program, MDI Analysis 
 
 
 
 
Realising that the initial Tigo Cash product needed redesigning, Tigo commissioned a  
national quantitative study of domestic remittances and payments. The study highlighted 
the general payment behaviour of users, and also mapped customer preferences among 
other money transfer options (see figure 44). One interesting finding was that users were 
sending and receiving money via bus drivers. Although these money transfers often took 
the better part of a day, users had grown accustomed to it and were not complaining 
about the speed. Thanks to this insight, Tigo realised that the attribute which mattered 
most to the target segment was not speed but rather price. “To drive customer usage, we 
learned that it was necessary to compete on price. We had to demonstrate that Giros Tigo 
was better value for money than alternative money transfer options.” 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 44. Pre vs. post segmentation comparison of Tigo mobile money 
products 
 
 
 
Source: MMU – A case study of Tigo Paraguay 
 
 
UCD and value creation incentives 
Interestingly, much of the above discussion is relevant to any type of m-service in developing 
markets. What is the relation to M4D? As earlier highlighted, M4D products have different 
underlying business models – with revenue generating and donor funded models at either 
pole. The difference between these two models stems from their value creation incentives. 
While every service is built on a value proposition, a purely donor funded model runs the risk 
of misaligning its value creation incentives toward donors, as opposed to end users in 
developing countries. In other words, two sets of requirements from donors and end users 
(even if theoretically similar) can skew the value proposition. This is less problematic in 
consumer driven models, where it is clearer that value propositions are aligned to end users. 
While we should remember that some services are not always best delivered by consumer 
driven business models (examples can be found in health, education and utilities), it is 
nevertheless fair to say that when third parties pay for services this is more likely to produce 
misaligned value propositions and produce wastage. In turn, this is an argument to move – 
where possible – toward models that have their value creation incentives aligned primarily 
around end users, with business planning and execution tailored to this. 
What are the attitudes of M4D organisations toward UCD? 
As part of this research we asked leading service providers about their attitudes to user-
centricity. Despite having very different areas of focus (from mobile money, agriculture to 
energy access) these mobile related services revealed common level themes. Firstly, all 
organisations clearly understood the value of designing services around end users, often 
citing this as critical to the organisation’s ethos and success. Many also discussed particular 
means (including user surveys, analysis of product data, and focus groups) of better 
understanding user habits, behaviour, and needs. A high number of organisations also 
stressed the importance of hiring local talent, and working on the ground with end users 
wherever possible. Finally, and perhaps most importantly, organisations said it was crucial to 
constantly test their products against newly collected user requirements.  
To provide greater detail, below are some of the individual responses from organisations to 
the question: how does the organisation build itself around the end user? 
 
 
 
 
Spotlight:  How does the organisation build itself around the 
end user? 
 
  
bKash has a core objective: to see low income users adopt electronic 
money as a genuine alternative of physical money. With this in mind, 
they understand that a key qualification needed to use bKash is 
confidence – “the confidence to believe that one can take control of her 
 financial decisions, save money, spend wisely and complete 
See full case study 
transactions in a manner that was never possible before”. Achieving 
these levels of user confidence depends upon understanding current 
user requirements and habits in detail. Old habits (like keeping the 
money under a mattress, insecure transfers, and paying high transfer 
fees) need to be replaced by new habits (keeping money in a safe 
digital system, secure transfers, paying low fees, recognizing the 
importance of being part of financial inclusivity). The organisational goal 
of shifting these old habits to new improved habits depends upon first 
understanding and building around the end user. 
 
The Syngenta Foundation takes a hands-on-approach to helping 
smallholder farmers becoming more productive, getting better access 
 to markets, and helping them manage risks. They do this through a 
 number of projects in Asia, Africa and Latin America. The approach to 
See full case study designing software is informed by the Foundation’s work in the field, 
and they generally only design products and applications in instances 
where they are involved on the ground. This ensures that the team 
understand the use case. In the case of Farmforce, this was developed 
through a number of pilot projects on the ground in which the Syngenta 
Foundation was involved. “The team understands that it’s extremely 
important that the user defines what is required.” In addition, the way 
the team is integrated, the way requirements are communicated, and 
the way user requests are dealt with is all oriented around the user. 
“This is paramount to the organisation as a whole.” 
  
FrontlineSMS is explicit about how the user features in its broader 
strategy: “user centricity isn’t just about design for us – it’s our whole 
business model. For example, we have a consultancy service where 
we do training, modification of the platform, hands on tech support, 
 systems design and evaluation. This is all because the users asked for 
 it, not because we thought it was simply a good idea.” Users ask the 
See full case study organisation about their knowledge of the platform, what other users 
 have done with it, as well as best practice SMS use. In the same way, 
 development of the cloud version of the software was in response user 
 requests. “I think user centricity has always been at the heart of our 
 organisation, and this has been one of our huge strengths.”  
  
 
 
 The basic need for electricity is clearly present within the rural 
communities. In the area in which OMC operates the average spend 
per household on kerosene is around 180 INR per month. With OMC’s 
basic lantern service, these customers spend about 100 INR per 
 
 month. “The value proposition to the household is clear – you reduce 
See full case study spend, reduce noxious fumes, and you get a much better service. One 
 of the most important things is also going out there, demoing the 
equipment, and earning trust by being an active community member.” 
OMC stress that, as an organisation, they are entirely designed and 
focused around their rural customers. “One of the big things that has 
really helped build the brand’s credibility is that we do home deliveries 
and pickups. This means that every day we have two connection points 
with our customers, and we’ve been extremely quick to respond to 
customer feedback coming in.” OMC appreciate the differences 
between communities in different localities, and therefore employ sales 
agents and delivery staff from the locality of each plant. They are also 
working with surveys to get more systematic feedback. Interestingly, 
when asked to indicate the customer needs identified, the company list 
the following in approximate order of priority: mobile phone charging, 
lighting, cooling, heating, cooking, entertainment, transportation, and 
irrigation. 
 
 
How can we incorporate this thinking into M4D service design, and 
how does this impact our approach to funding M4D projects? 
 
GSMA’s Service Development Cycle 
By considering how user-centric thinking impacts M4D services, a service development 
cycle emerges. Although developing different types of services clearly present unique 
challenges, meaning that the model we present here is limited in detail, we nevertheless find 
it helpful in illustrating a key point about M4D services at a high level: namely, that the ideal 
development is not necessarily matched with the way traditional funding models understand 
these services, particularly when funders’ interests are to drive scale.  
Figure 45. Service development cycle 
Concept 
development 
Concept 
realisation 
Execution & 
scaling 
 
Source: MDI Analysis 
 
 
To this end we first break M4D services into three key stages (see figure 45). The initial 
concept development phase involves requirements gathering, and a period of ideation to 
develop a concept. The second phase involves testing and realising concepts, where the 
business model, product, and content are repeatedly tested; evolving until a feasible service 
is established. The third phase, execution and scaling, arises only once a viable business 
model, product and service content have been established, and represents the stage at 
which significant investment is likely required. 
What might these phases look like in more detail though? The initial concept development 
phase (see figure 46) will typically involve market research, and arriving at the first business 
model. This model must be flexible, while covering a range of basic questions about the 
service. Consider, for example, a basic IVR service targeted at frontline health workers 
(FHW), designed to deliver key medical information. Here we must ask: what is the value 
proposition to the FHW? What key activities and resources are required to deliver this value 
proposition? How is this channelled to the FHWs? Are these FHWs segmented into different 
user groups? What are the revenue streams? And so on. These questions should be 
answered by the business model, though in such a way as to be testable and alterable. 
Crucially, this business model should give us grounds to build our first minimal viable 
product (MVP). The MVP allows services to achieve a big vision in small increments, and is 
designed to test customer behaviour as soon as possible at minimal cost.  
Figure 46. Concept development 
Market research 
Business model 
 
Source: MDI Analysis 
Flexilbilty of business model and MVP is critial at the concept realisation phase. This is 
because no amount of market research and ideation can substitute for actually testing 
whether the service works. In practice this plays out by iteratively testing the content, 
product, and business model against end user behavioural preferences – effectively a 
layered approach with multiple MVPs, each more refined than the last, which evolve and 
adapt by being tested against users. This is even more important for designers targeting end 
users in developing countries whose requirements are often harder to ‘second guess’. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Spotlight: Bihar BBC 
 
 
The Ananya programme is funded by the Bill and Melinda Gates Foundation along with 
the Government of Bihar to help meet the Millennium Development Goals around child 
mortality and maternal health. As part of this the BBC is working on communicating key 
practices and has developed a number of mobile services (in support of a wider 
communication and behavioural change plan). After extensive user research they opted 
to focus their development around voice based services such as IVR. 
 
One of these services is Mobile Academy, which is designed to support Frontline Health 
Workers (FLHWs) in the field by providing a standardised training course in key maternal 
and child health practices. This took the form of an IVR based training course which the 
FLHWs could work through at their own pace and receive recognition for completing the 
course by the local Government. 
  
The BBC took a lot of care during the research and development of the service to not 
only identify and profile the users but also in the testing with the FLHWs as the service 
was developed through a number of iterations. In part, this was to make sure the service 
functioned in a way which was compatible with end users abilities and comprehension 
(e.g. navigation of the service) but also to ensure the content was clear, interesting and 
of value to the FLHWs. 
 
The service allowed the user to navigate through 190 minutes of material at their own 
pace through the use of bookmarking. The service was also paid for by the FLHW, so cost 
was kept to a minimum through the design of the service and low cost tariffs negotiated 
with the local MNOs. The BBC developed the service through a number of iterations to 
establish ease of use and the comprehension of the content to the FLHW. 
During these development cycles the content was tested with FLHWs in the field to 
gauge their reaction (e.g. was the tone and gender of the voice used conducive to the 
FLHW learning the new practices, for example the use of rhymes and couplets to aid 
understanding). In doing this the BBC were able to make sure the service was not only 
highly usable but also provided the best chance of understanding and retaining the 
practices in line with their culture, nature and linguistic skills. 
 
 
The iterative service testing cycle, which drives M4D services to better meet user 
requirements and reduces wastage across the industry, has the end goal of establishing a 
business plan (see figure 47). This will include a set of key performance indicators (e.g. user 
base, activity levels, the potential for social impact metrics), details of concrete revenue 
streams, estimated overall return on investment, and so on. While the specific content of a 
business plan may change, it must at least provide a formal statement of a set 
of business goals, the reasons they are believed attainable, and the plan for reaching those 
goals. The reasons cited must also come from the testing conducted at the concept 
realisation phase. In this way, creating a business plan depends upon first forming and 
testing a business model. A business plan is critical for the execution and scaling phase 
where significant investment will depend upon clearly stated business goals. This does not 
mean, however, that the user isn’t considered at the execution and scaling stage. In fact, a 
business plan should include the goal of continually refining the product or service against 
end user requirements which are actively gathered and utilised. 
 
 
 
This is at the heart of the sustainable business model problem highlighted earlier (see 
section 3: platforms, multiplicity and the drive for scale). Models drawn up by entrepreneurs 
must be flexible based on designing and refining products that do what the customer wants, 
with traditional risk/return attitudes from investors (especially those based in mature markets 
like the US) having to show flexibility to accommodate this. What will remain fixed, however, 
is the key value proposition discovered at the business model generation stage – what you 
do, what problem or market failure that solves, and how you make money from it. 
 
Figure 47. Realisation, execution and scaling 
 
Source: MDI Analysis 
Two notions of success 
This basic distinction between a business plan and business model has important 
ramifications for the way M4D service funding is conceived. A business model sets out an 
initial hypothesis that should be tested and validated (or invalidated as the case may be). 
This process of validation will require funding, where it is understood that ‘success’ will entail 
the discovery of content, or a product that genuinely meets users’ needs, along with a 
feasible business model that allows the service to sustain itself. This is quite different from 
‘success’ at the execution and scale phase, in which achievement is measured in terms of 
the key performance indicators set out in the business plan.  
 
In order to achieve these key performance indicators significant funding is generally required 
(e.g. for marketing and training users or agents to use the service). These may also include 
the kind of social impact targets that donor funding generally aims at. The issue, however, is 
that mature services eligible for the sort of funding that drives specific impact at scale are 
dependent upon a healthy number of viable service models already being known. Clearly 
then, funders must think about two kinds of success here, one (more traditional) model in 
which funding enables some specific sustainable impact, and another (less traditional) model 
 
 
in which funding enables the discovery of services that achieve a less pre-determined kind of 
impact, and are also thoroughly designed around end users. Crucially, the latter ‘discovery’ 
kinds of successes feed the former ‘scaled’ kinds of successes. We believe there to be a 
general lack of funding and support currently provided for discovering user-centric viable 
services.  
 
Application of service development cycle to frameworks 
How might funders start to support the kind of ‘discovery activity’ described here? One 
suggestion relates to the notion of a framework already introduced. Frameworks target M4D 
service providers themselves as end users. By providing effective tools that enable a range 
of organisations across different sectors, an effective framework reduces the potential cost 
of MVPs, increases the speed of concept development iterations, and provides tools to test 
various implementations. This essentially reduces the barriers to discovery. Each use of a 
framework – e.g. Bihar BBC is one use of Motech’s framework – represents one iteration of 
that framework’s service development cycle. This means that every implementation of a 
framework naturally improves it, which, in turn will improve the quality of the services built 
using it. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
2G The second generation of digital mobile phone technologies including GSM, CDMA IS-
95 and D-AMPS IS-136 
3G The third generation of mobile phone technologies covered by the ITU IMT-2000 family 
Active Mobile Active unique SIM cards (or phone numbers, where SIM cards are not used), excluding 
Connections M2M, that have been used for voice, messaging or data activity on the mobile network 
over the operator’s activity period, which can range from one to 13 months. 
Advertising Revenue generated from advertising delivered through service itself 
API An application programming interface is a protocol intended to be used as 
an interface by software components to communicate with each other. 
Framework A set of re-usable software tools and interfaces for developing applications 
Apps A software application designed to run on mobile devices. (typically smartphones, and 
tablet computers) 
ARPU Average Revenue Per User 
Basic phone Offers basic voice services (telephony/voice mail), SMS and USSD based services. 
Business (B2B) Businesses targeted by service to generate revenue. Generally supports internal 
business processes (e.g.  Inventory management), or core business services (e.g., 
recruitment) 
Call Centre Simple voice call to a trained human content provider 
Consumer (MNO Rolled out as a value added service (VAS) by an MNO. While it may not earn revenue 
led) from customer directly, VAS designed to drive new customer uptake/ reduce customer 
churn. 
Consumer (non Revenue generated directly by end user. e.g. subscription, one off mobile money 
MNO led) payment 
Data collection Create customised surveys and send them to fieldworkers’ mobiles 
Donor Primary funding comes from donor organisations, usually in a lump sum grant 
Feature phone Basic phone features plus… Internet enabled, supports transmission of picture 
messages downloading music, built-in camera 
Foundation M4D Application that is designed to sit on top of a framework owned by another vendor 
application 
Government Primary funding comes from government 
GSM Global System for Mobile communications, the second generation digital technology 
originally developed for Europe but which now has in excess of 71 per cent of the world 
 
 
market. Initially developed for operation in the 900MHz band and subsequently 
modified for the 850, 1800 and 1900MHz bands. GSM originally stood for Groupe 
Speciale Mobile, the CEPT committee which began the GSM standardisation process 
HHI Herfindahl-Hirschman Index. A commonly accepted measure of market concentration. 
It is calculated by squaring the market share of each firm competing in a market, and 
then summing the resulting numbers 
Interactive content Content based services that users can access by querying a central database. May be 
delivered via IVR, SMS, USSD, app, WAP, etc. 
Internet A loose confederation of autonomous databases and networks. Originally developed 
for academic use the Internet is now a global structure of millions of sites accessible by 
anyone 
Inventory Supply chain management and stock ordering tools. Product security / validation tools 
management 
IP Internet Protocol 
IVR Interactive voice response, allows a computer to interact with humans through & voice 
recognition navigation and DTMF tones via keypad 
Java A programming language developed by Sun Microsystems Java is characterised by the 
fact that programs written in Java do not rely on an operating system 
M2M  Machine-to-machine is a broad label that can be used to describe any technology that 
enables automated wired or wireless communication between mechanical or electronic 
device 
MNO Mobile Network Operator 
Active mobile Unless otherwise specified, this is the total active subscribers in the market divided by 
subscriber the total population, expressed as a percentage. (It is not the more often cited 
penetration penetration of total mobile connections, which will always be higher) 
Bespoke M4D A “one off" application built from the “ground up 
application 
Open Source Service based around open source software/framework. Value derived from external 
parties adopting service 
Other A “catch all” for devices not included in the above. E.g., modems, Personal digital 
assistance (PDA), etc. 
OTT  Over the Top refers to video, television and other services provided over the internet 
rather than via a service provider’s own dedicated, managed IPTV network 
Payments Mobile wallets, payment gateways and a wide range of payment based services 
PC/laptop Personal desktop computer, or laptop. Typically running Windows, or maybe Linux OS. 
 
 
Peer to peer Social networks and posting systems, users create and access content. Wide range of 
content delivery mechanisms, even including voice 
Platform Generic in nature, could be used in a multitude of different services. An operating 
system, cloud, etc. 
Push content Content pushed out (one way) via voice message or SMS. May be “broadcast” or 
“narrowcast” (customised by location / user profile) 
SIM Subscriber Identity Module; A smart card containing the telephone number of the 
subscriber, encoded network identification details, the PIN and other user data such as 
the phone book. A user’s SIM card can be moved from phone to phone as it contains 
all the key information required to activate the phone 
Smart phone Feature phone features plus… graphical interfaces and touchscreen capability, built-in 
Wi-Fi, and GPS (global positioning system) 
SMS Short Messaging Service, allows exchange of short text messages between mobile 
phone devices 
STK SIM ToolKit: specified within the GSM standard, this allows operators to add additional 
functions to the phone menu in order to provide new services such as mobile banking 
or email 
Tablet Smart phone features plus… Larger screen, increased computing power, front and rear 
facing cameras, extra ports (e.g., USB) 
TCO  Total cost of ownership 
Text-to-Speech Computer or handset based service that generates speech using text input 
Total Mobile Total unique SIM cards (or phone numbers, where SIM cards are not used) that have 
Connections been registered on the mobile network at the end of the period. Connections differ from 
subscribers such that a unique subscriber can have multiple connections. 
USSD Unstructured Supplementary Service Data. A synchronous message service  creating a 
real-time M2P connection allowing a two-way exchange of data, mostly through menu 
structures 
VAS Value Added Services. Services beyond voice, SMS and mobile data access  
Voice Basic telephony services, with voice delivered over a mobile network 
WAP Wireless Application Protocol for accessing information over mobile network. WAP 
browsers typically found on older feature phones. 
WAP Wireless Application Protocol for accessing information over mobile network. WAP 
browsers typically found on older feature phones. 
Web A system of interlinked hypertext documents accessed via the Internet; also accessible 
via enabled mobile devices 
 
GSMA Intelligence • Scaling Mobile for Development
About the authors
Tim Hatt — Senior Analyst
Tim is the head of research at Mobile for Development Intelligence at 
the GSMA, having joined the group in October 2012. In this capacity, 
Tim has responsibility for the team producing research reports and 
presenting externally at conferences and public speaking engagements. 
Prior to joining the GSMA, Tim spent 6 years in London as an analyst 
covering telecoms and a variety of other sectors.
Corina Gardner — Senior Manager
Corina manages the Mobile for Development Intelligence programme. 
Building on ten years of international development experience across 
Africa and Central Asia, Corina brings a breadth of first-hand experience 
to the team. She joined GSMA in 2010 after completing an MBA from 
Cambridge University focused on Energy and Environment.
Adam Wills — Analyst
Adam joined GSMA in November 2012. His responsibilities on ‘Scaling 
Mobile’ included leading on multiple report sections, presenting 
work to external stakeholders in Africa, and conducting interviews 
to generate a range of supporting case studies. Prior to GSMA Adam 
conducted policy research in an MP’s parliamentary office, with a focus 
on environment and international development.
Martin Harris — Director of Technology, GSMA Mobile for Development
Martin has been involved with the GSMA over the last three years 
working on various implementations in mHealth, mAgri and related 
programs, alongside carrying out research for the sector into the use 
of mobile technologies in the M4D space. Martin is also involved with a 
number of external companies focused around technology incubators 
and start-ups.
 mobiledevelopmentintelligence.com • mdi@gsma.com • @GSMAm4d 
gsmaintelligence.com • info@gsmaintelligence.com • @GSMAi
Whilst every care is taken to ensure the accuracy of the information contained in this material, the facts, estimates and opinions stated are 
based on information and sources which, while we believe them to be reliable, are not guaranteed. In particular, it should not be relied upon 
as the sole source of reference in relation to the subject matter. No liability can be accepted by GSMA Intelligence, its directors or employees 
for any loss occasioned to any person or entity acting or failing to act as a result of anything contained in or omitted from the content of this 
material, or our conclusions as stated. The findings are GSMA Intelligence’s current opinions; they are subject to change without notice. The 
views expressed may not be the same as those of the GSM Association. GSMA Intelligence has no obligation to update or amend the research 
or to let anyone know if our opinions change materially.
© GSMA Intelligence 2013. Unauthorised reproduction prohibited.
Please contact us at info@gsmaintelligence.com or visit gsmaintelligence.com. GSMA Intelligence does not reflect the views of the GSM 
Association, its subsidiaries or its members. GSMA Intelligence does not endorse companies or their products.
GSMA Intelligence, 5 New Street Square, New Fetter Lane, London EC4A 3BF
