 
 
 
 
 
 
eHealth Network  
 
 
Guidelines on 
 
 
verifiable vaccination certificates - 
basic interoperability elements 
 
 
 
Release 2 
 
2021-03-12 
 
 
 
eHealth Network 
 
 
 
The eHealth Network is a voluntary network, set up under article 14 of Directive 2011/24/EU.  
It provides a platform of Member States' competent authorities dealing with eHealth.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
These guidelines aim at preparing for interoperability between proofs of vaccination (also 
known as vaccination certificates), whereby Member States or other parties can decide to 
implement or use them. They are meant to drive the design of interoperable solutions. The 
guidelines are mostly targeting the COVID-19 vaccination but might be used in the future as 
a basis for asserting other vaccinations or prophylaxis. 
The term ʻvaccination certificatesʼ is used intermittently in this document, referring to a 
reliable and verifiable proof of vaccination that can be presented by its holder upon request. 
These guidelines are the result of the discussions and reflections stemming from the eHealth 
Network and its subgroups on Semantics and Technical interoperability so far, as well as first 
consultations with Health Security Committee, EMA, ECDC and WHO. 
Although these guidelines have no binding character, Member States or other parties are 
nevertheless recommended to take them into account if and when deciding to set up their 
technical solutions for proof of vaccination. 
 
 
To be adopted by the eHealth Network, 12 March 2021  
  
2 
eHealth Network 
 
Table of Contents 
1 Introduction .............................................................................................................. 4 
2 Purposes of use ......................................................................................................... 4 
3 Basic interoperability elements .................................................................................. 5 
3.1 Minimum dataset .......................................................................................................... 6 
3.2 Unique Vaccination Certificate/assertion identifier ........................................................ 6 
3.3 Trust framework ............................................................................................................ 7 
4 Further steps towards vaccination certificate interoperability .................................... 8 
Annex 1 – Minimum dataset for proof of vaccination ........................................................ 8 
Annex 2 – Composition of the Unique Vaccination Certificate/assertion identifier ........... 11 
General requirements ......................................................................................................... 12 
Proposed options ............................................................................................................... 12 
 
  
3 
eHealth Network 
1 Introduction 
1
Following the conclusions of the European Council of 10-11 December 2020  and of 21 
January 20212 that called for “a coordinated approach to vaccination certificates”, these 
guidelines establish a minimum dataset, including a unique identifier for vaccination 
certificates. They also set out the basis for a trust framework. These guidelines are 
underpinned by the following principles: 
 Simplicity through a scheme that can accommodate both paper and digital means; 
 Flexibility and compatibility with existing national solutions; 
 Rigorous protection of personal data, for which necessary instruments need to be 
developed; 
 Step-wise approach, with agreement among Member States at each step of the way. 
These guidelines aim to support interoperability between vaccination certificates, if Member 
States or other parties decide to implement them. They are meant to drive the design of 
interoperable solutions. 
Although these guidelines have no binding character, Member States and other parties are 
nevertheless recommended to take them into account if and when deciding to set up their 
vaccination certificates, in order to support interoperability. 
The eHealth Network position is that digital and non-digital (Carte-Jaune or other paper) 
vaccination certificates can be used and co-exist. There shall be no unauthorised 
discriminatory side effects linked solely to the presentation of COVID-19 vaccination 
certificates. However, it is important to be prepared for different non-discriminating scenarios, 
with the reservation to the ongoing legal, ethical, scientific and societal discussions in 
Europe. 
 
2 Purposes of use 
The International Certificate of Vaccination or Prophylaxis (Carte-Jaune) has traditionally 
been a paper document, which was often simply presented in situ, occasionally along with 
the presentation of a passport. Usually, there was no further need for additional copies or 
proofs of veracity of the document. Even if (photo) copies were made, they would contain 
relatively little information, not be searchable and reveal less than the information copied 
from the passport. 
The situation is markedly different with a digital proof of vaccination; most scenarios call for 
automatic processing. It is conceivable that most implementations will use digital tools to 
                                               
1
 https://www.consilium.europa.eu/media/47296/1011-12-20-euco-conclusions-en.pdf  
2
 https://www.consilium.europa.eu/en/press/press-releases/2021/01/21/oral-conclusions-by-president-
charles-michel-following-the-video-conference-of-the-members-of-the-european-council-on-21-
january-2021/pdf  
4 
eHealth Network 
capture, store or process these digital vaccination certificates, whilst they should coexist with 
their paper equivalents.  
The purpose of use for vaccination proofs supported by these guidelines is in line with the 
conclusions of the European Council3 as well as to support the upcoming regulation on 
Digital Green Certificate. Vaccination certificates are to be used primarily as a standardised 
and interoperable form of proof of vaccination for medical purposes Other purposes for 
which proofs of vaccination (e.g. in particular the travel purposes) could be used, may be 
decided by Member States, with the reservation to ongoing scientific, ethical, legal, and 
societal discussions. Among the travel purposes one could consider situations where a 
person arrives to a country and a verifiying authority confirms whether the person has been 
vaccinated as regards of the SARS-CoV-2 virus. 
 
Among the medical purposes one could consider situations where a person can get two 
doses of vaccines in different countries and needs to show the information about the 
previous vaccine to the second healthcare provider, or situations where a patient develops 
side effects and the only information available to the healthcare providers is the certificate. 
In future evolutions of these guidelines, other purposes of use and further requirements 
concerning the described purpose can be addressed. Future versions should take into 
account people for whom vaccination is not possible, so that these groups would not be 
discriminated against in cases when vaccination certificates are requested from the public.  
The vaccination certificate will be issued as a confirmation to the fact that a person has been 
vaccinated; it can be issued at any time; and its validity can differ from the expected 
immunisation period; the certificate asserts one completed or partial vaccination course, 
which may cover one or multiple doses. 
3 Basic interoperability elements 
This document identifies and outlines basic interoperability elements for a COVID-19 
vaccination certificate, namely: 
1. Minimum dataset with the essential information included in a vaccination certificate; 
2. Unique Vaccination Certificate/assertion identifier, referring to a completed or 
partial vaccination course, that is globally unique and verifiable. 
3. A trust framework, including digital infrastructure, that is needed for establishing the 
authenticity and validity of certificates presented by certificate holders. 
The Unique Vaccination Certificate/assertion identifier and the Trust Framework are 
further specified in the eHealth Network document on”Interoperability of health certificates – 
Trust Framework”. 
The certificate shall be presented at least in English. In addition, the certificate may also be 
presented in other languages. 
                                               
3
 https://www.consilium.europa.eu/en/press/press-releases/2021/01/21/oral-conclusions-by-president-
charles-michel-following-the-video-conference-of-the-members-of-the-european-council-on-21-
january-2021/pdf  
5 
eHealth Network 
3.1 Minimum dataset 
A minimum dataset enables basic information to be captured and represented in a structured 
manner that facilitates sharing and interpretation. It is a foundation to enable possible future 
initiatives with a cross-border dimension on vaccination, such as the ongoing efforts by WHO 
to develop smart vaccination certificates. A minimum dataset is necessary to ensure 
interoperability and cross border cooperation on vaccine certificates.  
The minimum dataset for a vaccination certificate is organised in 3 sections: 
1. Person identification 
2. Vaccination information 
3. Certificate metadata 
The minimum dataset proposed for vaccination certificates is comprised of data elements 
and linked to the preferred EU code systems. Mappings to these code systems should be 
considered by the Member States when a Member State is not using any of the preferred 
code systems. The additional workload caused by the use of the preferred code systems 
should be kept reasonable. 
The dataset is defined as a minimum from the perspective of data registration relevant for the 
issuance of certificates. Certain fields may or may not be shown to the recipient of the 
certificate. Even if the defined purpose of use could be supported by the Patient Summary 
Guidelines, the vaccination certificate provides a complementary solution in which the 
certificate holder provides the data to the health professional directly. In the medium and 
longer term, all the vaccination information should be shared through MyHealth@EU, as part 
of the Patient Summary. However, vaccination certificates will remain useful outside the EU.  
Beyond providing input to the certificate minimum dataset, ECDC (European Centre for 
Disease Prevention and Control) and NITAG (National Immunization Technical Advisory 
Group) are willing to support the upcoming work related with the minimum dataset for 
Immunisation Information Systems (IIS) existing or to be developed at the Member State 
level. The work on IIS minimum dataset will build on top of the discussions and insights 
regarding the vaccination certificate minimum dataset. 
The vaccination certificate system should be designed in such a way that the data subject 
can control the use of the certificate data. This will be further clarified as part of the 
development of the trust framework. Information should be disclosed to the recipient of the 
certificate following the principle of data minimization of the GDPR.  
Details on the minimum dataset for vaccination certificates are available in Annex 1.  
3.2  Unique Vaccination Certificate/assertion identifier 
It is critical to ensure that each certificate about a partial or completed vaccination 
procedure/course that takes place in EU Member States is uniquely identified by a Unique 
Vaccination Certificate/Assertion Identifier (UVCI). This UVCI shall be included in any issued 
certificate of vaccination. 
The UVCI may be used, at later stages, to verify the certificate and also as a key linking to 
additional information about the vaccination, once the modalities and platforms have been 
developed and deployed. The UVCI is needed at the EU level to support the interoperability 
of the vaccination certificates, while it should be implemented under the responsibility of the 
Member States in a way that leaves them in full control of how they do so. 
6 
eHealth Network 
At the core of each purpose of use is the fact that at the moment of presentation of the UVCI 
a person is asserted to be partially or completely vaccinated. The UVCI is a means to verify 
the veracity of the certificate and, if required, to link to a registration system (for example, an 
IIS). These identifiers will also enable (paper and digital) assertions by the Member States 
that individuals have been vaccinated.  
The UVCI structure could evolve over time to accommodate additional requirements that 
may emerge. It should take into account the digital readiness of Member States and be 
flexible for Member States to accommodate the coexistence of paper and digital versions of 
certificates as they wish. 
Such an identifier would follow a common structure and format easing interpretability of 
information and could relate to elements such as country of vaccination, the vaccine itself 
and a Member State specific identifier. It should ensure flexibility to Member States to format 
it, in full respect of data protection legislation. 
It is therefore recommended that the UVCI contains no personal data – its primary purpose is 
to be a unique ‘primary key’ that allows Member States’ health authorities to verify an 
individual’s vaccination status.  
Details about the composition of the UVCI are available in Annex 2. 
3.3 Trust framework 
Vaccination certificates must be issued by trusted entities, and it must be possible to verify 
the authenticity and validity of a certificate and the trustworthiness of its issuing authority. 
Depending on the medium (i.e. paper, paper with digital elements such as QR-codes, or 
purely digital), verification scenarios and protocols will differ. Details of these protocols will 
need to be elaborated as part of ongoing technical design work, also in line with global 
initiatives.  In the design, security analysis and risk assessment should be used, in order to 
assure sufficient level of protection against forgery of certificates or reuse of valid certificates 
issued for other persons. 
Digital elements enable reliable verification and protection against forgery, at the same time 
increasing speed and improving usability of the verification process. For a coordinated 
approach at EU level, further work is needed in the realm of the eHealth Network in 
collaboration with other relevant groups and organisations in order to: 
 Provide mechanisms for establishing authorisation of certificate issuers; 
 Support the verification of vaccination certificates; 
 Provide support for additional features, such as the revocation of issued certificates; 
 Analyse legal implication for a trust framework; and 
 Design possible solution while complying with EU data protection legal framework 
and implementing its data protection principles. 
7 
eHealth Network 
4 Further steps towards vaccination certificate interoperability 
The guidelines on the basic interoperability elements of a COVID-19 vaccination certificate 
will be followed by additional work towards the implementation of the Digital Green Certificate 
regulation.  
In close cooperation with the WHO, a common specifications framework to guide the 
implementation of interoperable solutions could be developed by the eHealth Network, 
subject to the consultation of the Health Security Committee.  
The Commission is invited to support the development of a toolbox to provide means to 
issue, read and facilitate the verification of vaccination certificates.  
If a person cannot be vaccinated due to a medical reason, or cannot receive the next dose of 
the ongoing vaccination course, a separate certificate stating so should be implemented for 
such cases. Support for such certificates and other Covid-19 related proofs (tests etc.) will be 
explored later by the eHealth Network as part of the further work on vaccination certificates 
and the toolbox supporting them. 
In addition, the Member States are encouraged to develop immunisation information systems 
and, more broadly, take initiatives to further digitise the health sector, for instance through 
the Recovery and Resilience Fund (throughout 2021-2022). 
Annex 1 – Minimum dataset for proof of vaccination 
In the table below, the asterisk * means that a field or the whole section may be repeated. 
The minimum dataset is primarily designed for medical purposes. Should Member States 
decide to use proof of vaccination for other purposes, the contents could be less extensive4. 
Optionality is described in the data element section and (--) means not applicable.  
Section Data Description Preferred Purpose of use 
element  Code System 
Care Travel 
Person Person The legal name of the   X X 
identification  name vaccinated person 
(surname(s) and 
forename(s) in that order 
Person Vaccinated person’s date of Complete date, X X 
date of birth. without time, 
birth following the ISO 
8601. 
 
                                               
4
 Fields such as Sex, Batch/lot number, Administering centre, Health Professional identification, Next 
vaccination date may not be needed for purposes other than medical use. 
8 
eHealth Network 
Section Data Description Preferred Purpose of use 
element  Code System 
Care Travel 
 Person The type of identifier and  X X 
identifier identifier of the person, 
 
(optional) according to the policies 
applicable in each country. 
Examples: citizen ID and/or 
document number (ID-
card/passport) or identifier 
within the health system/IIS/e-
registry.  
Sex Administrative gender  X X 
(optional) 
     
*Vaccination Disease Disease or agent that the ICD-10 or X X 
/ or agent vaccination provides protection SNOMED CT 
prophylaxis targeted  against (GPS) 
information  In the future ICD-
11. 
* means that 
the whole 
Vaccine / Generic description of the SNOMED CT X X 
section may 
prophylaxi vaccine/prophylaxis or its  and ATC 
be repeated 
s component(s)  Classification 
(J07 therapeutic 
 
Example: subgroup);  
J07BX03 covid-19 vaccines  
(temporary code, to be In the future 
implemented in ATC 2022) substances from 
1119349007 | COVID-19 mRNA the ISO IDMP 
vaccine | Implementation-
1119305005 | COVID-19 antigen 
EU-SRS system  
vaccine | 
 Vaccine Medicinal product name  For the time being, X X 
this should be the 
medicinal 
Example:  name of the 
product  COMIRNATY concentrate for medicinal product 
dispersion for injection   as registered in the 
country. 
In the future the 
information on the 
medicinal product 
can incorporate the 
identifiers from the 
implementation of 
the ISO IDMP 
Standards and the 
medicinal 
package's unique 
identifier 
9 
eHealth Network 
Section Data Description Preferred Purpose of use 
element  Code System 
Care Travel 
 Vaccine Name of the market EMA's X X 
marketing authorization holder of the Organisations 
authorizati vaccination. If market System data 
on holder  authorization holder is not (SPOR), 
available, vaccine manufacturer 
or   
is REQUIRED. 
Vaccine WHO 
 
manufactu emergency use 
rer   listing  
Example:  
BioNTech Manufacturing GmbH 
 Number in Order in the vaccination course   X X 
a series of 
Example: 1 out of 2 doses, 2 
vaccinatio
out of 2 doses 
ns / doses  
1 out of 1 dose  
 
 Batch/lot A distinctive combination of   X -- 
number numbers and/or letters which 
(optional) specifically identifies a batch of 
vaccines 
 Date of  Complete date, X X 
vaccinatio without time, 
n  following ISO 
8601 
 Administeri Name/code of administering  X -- 
ng centre centre or a health authority 
responsible for the vaccination 
event 
 Health Name or health professional  X  -- 
Profession code responsible for 
al administering the vaccine or 
identificati prophylaxis 
on 
(optional) 
 Country of The country in which the ISO 3166 X X 
vaccinatio individual has been vaccinated  Country Codes  
n  
10 
eHealth Network 
Section Data Description Preferred Purpose of use 
element  Code System 
Care Travel 
Next Date on which the next Complete date, X  -- 
vaccinatio vaccination should be without time, 
n date administered following ISO 
8601 
(optional) 
Certificate Certificate Entity that has issued the   X X 
metadata issuer certificate (allowing to check the 
(minimum certificate) 
dataset) 
 Certificate Unique identifier of the   X X 
Identifier certificate (UVCI), to be printed 
into the certificate; the unique 
identifier can be included in the 
IIS 
 Certificate Certificate valid from (required if Complete date, X X 
valid from known) without time, 
following ISO 
(optional) 8601 
 Certificate Certificate valid until (validity Complete date, X X 
valid until can differ from the expected without time, 
immunisation period) following ISO 
(optional) 8601 
 Certificate Version of this minimum Semantic X -- 
schema dataset definition - currently set versioning (ISO, 
version at 1.0.0 https://semver.or
g/  version 2.0.0 
(optional) 
or newer). 
All fields that contain non-enumeration/numeric data should be encoded in UTF-8 must be fully canonicalised and 
normalised according to http://unicode.org/reports/tr15/ .  
 
Annex 2 – Composition of the Unique Vaccination 
Certificate/assertion identifier  
The Unique Vaccination Certificate/assertion identifier (UVCI) will follow a common structure 
that will enable human- or machine-interpretability in all Member States and is designed for 
the Internet. The order of the separate elements follows a defined hierarchy that can enable 
future modifications of the blocks while maintaining its structural integrity. 
11 
eHealth Network 
 
The possible solutions for the composition of the UVCI form a spectrum wherein the 
modularity and human-interpretability are the two main diversifying parameters and one 
fundamental characteristic: 
● Modularity: the degree to which the code is composed of distinct building blocks that 
contain semantically different information 
● Human-interpretability: the degree to which the code is meaningful or can be 
interpreted by the human reader 
● Globally unique; the Country or Authority identifier is well-managed; and each country 
(authority) is expected to manage its segment of the namespace well by never 
recycling or re-issuing identifiers. The combination of this ensures that each identifier 
is globally unique. 
General requirements 
The following overarching requirements should be satisfied: 
1. Charset: Only uppercase US-ASCII alpha numerical characters (‘A’ to ‘Z’, ‘0’ to ’9’) 
are allowed; with additional special characters for separation from RFC39865, namely 
{'/','#',':'}; 
2. Maximum length: designers should try to aim for a length of 27-30 characters;6  
3. Version prefix: This refers to the version of the UVCI schema. The version prefix is 
‘01’ for this version of the document; the version prefix is composed of two digits; 
4. Country prefix: The country code is specified by ISO 3166-1. Longer codes (e.g. 3 
characters and up (e.g ‘UNHCR’) are reserved for future use; 
5. Code suffix / Checksum: 
5.1 Member States should use a checksum when it is likely that transmission, 
(human) transcription or other corruptions may occur (i.e. when used in print).   
5.2 The checksum must not be relied upon for validating the certificate and is not 
technically part of the identifier but is used to verify the integrity of the code. 
This checksum should be the ISO-7812-1 (LUHN-10)7 summary of the entire 
UVCI in digital/wire transport format. The checksum is separated from the rest 
of the UVCI by a '#' character. 
Backwards-compatibility should be ensured: over time Member States that change the 
structure of their identifiers (within the main version, currently set at v1) must ensure that any 
                                               
5
 Ibid. 
6
 In the event of implementation with QR codes, Member States could consider an extra set of characters up to a 
total length of 72 characters (including the 27-30 of the identifier itself) may be used to convey other information. 
The specification of this information is up to the Member States to define. 
7
 The Luhn mod N algorithm is an extension to the Luhn algorithm (also known as mod 10 algorithm) which works 
for numeric codes and is used for example for calculating the checksum of credit cards. The extension allows the 
algorithm to work with sequences of values in any base (in our case alpha characters). 
12 
eHealth Network 
two identifiers that are identical represent the same vaccination certificate/assertion. Or in 
other words; Member States cannot recycle identifiers. 
Proposed options 
The different options presented below are available to Member States and other parties and 
can co-exist among different Member States. Member States can even deploy different 
option in different version of the UVCI schema. The UVCI should clearly allow distinguishing 
which option is applied in a given Member State. 
In both Options 1 and 3, vaccine manufacturers should preferably be internationally 
identifiable; this necessitates agreement on common terminology and identifiers to ensure 
that this is consistently applied. Although EMA has the Organisations Management Service 
(SPOR) database that includes identifiers for the Marketing Authorisation Holders, and which 
could serve as a candidate EU-wide solution, not all Member States may be ready to 
accommodate it. 
Option 1 - identifier with semantics 
 
This is the most modular approach and consists of three blocks. The issuing entity refers to 
the authority issuing the certificate while the vaccine block provides information about the 
vaccine shot used. Finally, the opaque unique string pertains to the vaccinated individual. 
Member States are free to determine how each block is coded. For example, the vaccine 
block could encode different data elements in different Member State implementations (i.e. 
vaccine product identifier, vaccine/lot identifier(s)), depending also on the data availability. 
Each block will be able to be understood by a human reader (assuming they can interpret the 
coding). This solution gives the greatest latitude to Member States to populate each block in 
the manner they see fit by exploiting existing event or evidence/status identifiers, for the 
registries of authorised vaccination providers.  
Each block should consist of alphanumeric characters (i.e. special characters are not allowed 
within a block). Alphanumeric blocks should be separated by the special character '/'. If two 
UVCIs are identical up until the first and/or second slash, this means that they are issued by 
the same issuing entity and/or that the same vaccine lot/batch has been used. Member 
States are responsible for defining the specifications of each block as they see fit. For 
instance, the Member States can determine the length of each block based on their actual 
needs, as long as the total cumulative length of all the blocks as well as the separators does 
not exceed the defined total length of the identifier (see requirement 2 of the General 
Requirements). 
This will result in greater heterogeneity but will also enhance the possibilities for offline and 
analogue verification. The option makes it easy to generate and write down the UVCI (e.g. by 
hand in paper-based documents). 
To avoid having the UVCI include personally identifiable information (PII), Member States are 
strongly urged to refrain from using, for example, a Social Security number or similar long-
term stable identifier. 
It is recommended therefore that countries use a non-guessable, random event identifier 
rather than an identifier that reveals something about the bearer. And use the country's IIS or 
other registration system to hold the provenance and identity of the bearer.  
13 
eHealth Network 
Option 2 - opaque identifier - no structure 
 
Apart from the country code and the code version in the beginning and the checksum of at 
the end, the code is not modular but it consists of a single field. This single field serves as 
the unique identifier of the vaccination in the national vaccination registry of the 
corresponding country. It is the Member states’ responsibility to come up with the mechanism 
for generating and indexing the aforementioned single unique vaccination identifiers. 
The opaque unique string should consist of alphanumeric characters exclusively; no other 
characters (e.g. “/”) are allowed. This option provides the maximum flexibility to the Member 
States in the management of their UVCIs. 
Option 3 - some semantics 
 
This option consists of two fields: the issuing entity and the opaque unique string. As 
opposed to Option 2, the opaque unique string does not need to contain information about 
the issuing entity. The use of an opaque unique string transfers the responsibility to the 
Member State for generating the opaque unique string while removing the human 
interpretability requirement. As in Option 2, Member States will be responsible for 
determining the mechanism for generating and indexing the opaque unique strings. 
The two blocks should consist of alphanumeric characters exclusively; no other characters 
(e.g., “/”) are allowed. The blocks are separated by the slash (“/”) character and if two UVCIs 
compare identical up until the slash, this means that they are issued by the same issuing 
entity. 
It is possible that the definitions of fields change in the future; and that fields need to be 
added. The use of RFC3986 allows for such; in a manner well understood in internet 
engineering and available libraries8. 
                                               
8
 https://tools.ietf.org/html/rfc3986 
14 
