 
 
 
EUROPEAN 
 COMMISSION  
Brussels, 18.10.2021  
COM(2021) 649 final 
 
REPORT FROM THE COMMISSION TO THE EUROPEAN PARLIAMENT AND 
THE COUNCIL 
pursuant to Article 16(1) of Regulation (EU) 2021/953 of the European Parliament and 
of the Council on a framework for the issuance, verification and acceptance of 
interoperable COVID-19 vaccination, test and recovery certificates (EU Digital COVID 
Certificate) to facilitate free movement during the COVID-19 pandemic 
 
EN   EN 
 
 
1. INTRODUCTION 
On 14 June 2021, the European Parliament and the Council adopted Regulation (EU) 
2021/953 establishing the EU Digital COVID Certificate (the “EU Digital COVID Certificate 
Regulation”)1. The Regulation sets out a common framework for the issuance, verification 
and acceptance of interoperable certificates for COVID-19 vaccination, test or recovery 
certificates to facilitate free movement of EU citizens and their family members during the 
COVID-19 pandemic. The Regulation is accompanied by Regulation (EU) 2021/9542, which 
extends the EU Digital COVID Certificate framework to third-country nationals who are 
legally staying or residing in a Member State’s territory and who are entitled to travel to other 
Member States in accordance with EU law. 
The EU Digital COVID Certificate is a simple and secure way to demonstrate a person’s 
COVID-19 status. It is free of charge and can be used both in a digital and paper-based 
format3. The EU Digital COVID Certificate has been a crucial element in Europe’s response 
to the COVID-19 pandemic. Its rapid adoption and rollout enabled European citizens to move 
freely and safely and the European travel sector to open in time for summer 2021. Today, 
more than 591 million EU Digital COVID Certificates have been issued. 
The EU Digital COVID Certificate is increasingly seen as an international benchmark and 
global standard, with many third countries developing solutions that are interoperable with 
the EU system. The system does not require the exchange of any personal data and there is no 
EU database storing the data contained in the certificates. There are currently 43 countries 
and territories connected. 
The EU Digital COVID Certificate Regulation requires the Commission to submit a report to 
the European Parliament and to the Council by 31 October 20214. This report provides an 
overview of the EU Digital COVID Certificate Regulation in practice since its adoption on 14 
June 2021. In the reporting period, the Commission gathered data on the technical 
implementation of the Regulation, including the connection of third countries to the system; 
developments in the issuance of certificates of recovery and vaccination; the use of 
certificates by the air transport sector; and the use of certificates by Member States for non-
travel related purposes.  
                                                          
1  Regulation (EU) 2021/953 of the European Parliament and of the Council of 14 June 2021 on a framework 
for the issuance, verification and acceptance of interoperable COVID-19 vaccination, test and recovery 
certificates (EU Digital COVID Certificate) to facilitate free movement during the COVID-19 pandemic 
(OJ L 211, 15.6.2021, p. 1). 
2  Regulation (EU) 2021/954 of the European Parliament and of the Council of 14 June 2021 on a framework 
for the issuance, verification and acceptance of interoperable COVID-19 vaccination, test and recovery 
certificates (EU Digital COVID Certificate) with regard to third-country nationals legally staying or 
residing in the territories of Member States during the COVID-19 pandemic (OJ L 211, 15.6.2021, p. 24). 
3  A template for the paper format is available at: 
https://ec.europa.eu/health/sites/default/files/ehealth/docs/covid-certificate_paper_guidelines_en.pdf  
4  Article 16(1) of the EU Digital COVID Certificate Regulation. 
1 
 
 
 
Apart from the topics required by the Regulation, this report also contains information on 
other developments regarding the EU Digital COVID Certificate. This includes the 
connection of third countries to the EU Digital COVID Certificate environment, guidance 
received on the validity period of certificates of recovery, developments regarding the 
issuance of vaccination certificates, and Member States’ use of the EU Digital COVID 
Certificate for domestic purposes. 
2. DEVELOPMENTS SINCE THE ADOPTION OF THE EU DIGITAL COVID 
CERTIFICATE 
2.1. Technical implementation 
2.1.1. Number of EU Digital COVID Certificates issued  
As of 13 October 2021, Member States have issued more than 591 million EU Digital 
COVID Certificates, made up of 437 million vaccination certificates5, 144 million test 
certificates, and 10 million certificates of recovery. A detailed breakdown per Member State 
is included in Annex I. 
2.1.2. EU Gateway and work at technical level 
The technical specifications, standards and guidelines for the common issuance, verification 
and acceptance of the EU Digital COVID Certificate were jointly developed by the 
Commission and the Member States within the framework of the eHealth Network6. All of 
the specifications developed by the eHealth Network are based on open standards and are 
published as open source on the eHealth Network website7. This has facilitated 
interoperability with systems developed by third countries (see Section 2.2 below).  
Overall, the system is versatile, robust and designed to accommodate the heterogeneity of 
Member States’ systems. The trust framework of the EU Digital COVID Certificate system is 
based on a public key infrastructure that ensures the authenticity and integrity of issued 
certificates by means of digitally signed Quick Response (QR) codes. Authorised certificate 
issuers (for example hospitals or laboratories) convert the data required by the EU Digital 
COVID Certificate Regulation into a QR code. The issuers then digitally sign the QR code 
using an asymmetric cryptographic algorithm and their own private key. Issuers’ 
corresponding public keys, used for verifying the authenticity, integrity and validity of the 
digitally signed QR codes, are exchanged via the EU Digital COVID Certificate Gateway 
                                                          
5  Where a Member State was only able to provide a total figure for all three types of certificates, these are 
included in the number of vaccination certificates issued given that these constitute the vast majority of 
certificates issued. 
6  The eHealth Network is a voluntary network connecting national authorities responsible for eHealth 
designated by the Member States set up on the basis of Article 14 of Directive 2011/24/EU. 
7  https://ec.europa.eu/health/ehealth/covid-19_en 
2 
 
 
 
(‘the EU Gateway’),8 operated and maintained by the Commission9. Public key information 
(which does not contain personal data) is then transferred between Member States’ national 
digital infrastructures (‘back-ends’) via the Gateway and distributed from the national back-
ends to the verification software in mobile devices.  
While Member States are responsible for developing their national back-ends and deploying 
their respective national solutions, the Commission has developed reference implementations 
for certificate issuance, verification and storage apps, which are publicly available as open 
source solutions10. As a result, for many Member States and EEA countries, the reference 
implementations formed the basis for the development of their national solutions. The 
reference implementations have also been useful for third countries developing national 
solutions, as well as for their connection to the EU Gateway. 
Work to further improve the EU Digital COVID Certificate system is ongoing in the eHealth 
Network. For example, it is now possible for Member States to exchange, via the EU 
Gateway, their national rules on the acceptance of certificates. This allows for the automatic 
checking of these rules via the verification applications, in addition to the verification of the 
authenticity of the certificates’ QR codes. Moreover, this allows for faster and more reliable 
checking of certificates against national rules, since a manual check for compliance with 
national rules is no longer necessary. To date, 13 countries connected to the Gateway have 
uploaded their rules and 20 countries have downloaded these rules to their national verifiers. 
The Commission invites all Member States to share their rules considering that this would 
improve travel experience and reduce uncertainty for passengers. 
In a similar vein, Member States and the Commission are also coordinating efforts on the 
revocation of certificates. According to the EU Digital COVID Certificate Regulation, for 
medical and public health reasons and in the event of fraudulently issued or obtained 
certificates, Member States should be able to establish and exchange with other Member 
States certificate revocation lists. This can be done in limited cases, in particular to revoke 
certificates that have been issued erroneously, as a result of fraud or following the suspension 
of a COVID-19 vaccine batch found to be defective11. The bilateral exchange of certificate 
revocation lists containing the unique certificate identifiers of revoked certificates may be 
supported by the EU Digital COVID Certificate trust framework12. Experts in the eHealth 
Network are exploring how this could be achieved technically while preserving the current 
nature of data processing by the EU Gateway. It is important that Member States support this 
work to develop a solution quickly. 
                                                          
8  For more information, see Annex IV of Commission Implementing Decision (EU) 2021/1073 of 28 June 
2021 laying down technical specifications and rules for the implementation of the trust framework for the 
EU Digital COVID Certificate established by Regulation (EU) 2021/953 of the European Parliament and of 
the Council (OJ L 230, 30.6.2021, p. 32). 
9  Recital 51 of the EU Digital COVID Certificate Regulation. 
10  https://github.com/eu-digital-green-certificates 
11  Recital 19 of the EU Digital COVID Certificate Regulation. 
12  Article 4(2) of the EU Digital COVID Certificate Regulation. 
3 
 
 
 
2.2. Equivalence decisions and international interoperability 
2.2.1. Framework for EU Digital COVID Certificate equivalence decisions 
Given its relevance to the Agreement on the European Economic Area, the EU Digital 
COVID Certificate Regulation has been incorporated in that agreement and as such it also 
applies to Iceland, Liechtenstein and Norway13. For other countries, where certain 
interoperability requirements are met, the EU Digital COVID Certificate Regulation 
stipulates that the Commission can issue a decision establishing that the certificates of a third 
country are to be considered as equivalent to EU Digital COVID Certificates (“equivalence 
decisions”). This results in the third country concerned being connected to the EU Gateway.  
A third country that is interested in joining the EU system is first asked to assess its 
compliance with the technical specifications of the EU Digital COVID Certificate system. If, 
after this self-assessment, the third country considers that it is technically ready, it can send 
an official request to the Commission. The Commission then assesses the application, in 
order to ensure that all technical requirements are met. During this process, all third countries 
undergo the same technical screening and testing procedures as were applied to Member 
States when they connected to the system. 
To support third countries interested in seeking an equivalence decision for their COVID-19 
certificate system, general and technical information about the EU Digital COVID Certificate 
system is shared via the European External Action Service and EU Delegations. In addition, 
all technical requirements are publicly available on the eHealth Network website. 
As the purpose of the EU Digital COVID Certificate Regulation is to facilitate free 
movement of EU citizens within the EU, the effect of equivalence decisions is to permit EU 
citizens and their family members, if they hold a certificate issued by a third country, to use it 
when exercising their right of free movement. For the same reason, the Regulation as such 
does not explicitly require that third countries seeking an equivalence decision reciprocally 
accept the EU Digital COVID Certificate for travelling to their respective countries. 
However, before adopting an equivalence decision, the Commission has asked all third 
countries concerned to accept the EU Digital COVID Certificate and, so far, all have 
confirmed that they do accept it.  
Although the EU Digital COVID Certificate is intended to facilitate free movement within 
the EU, the interest from third countries to be connected to the EU Digital COVID Certificate 
system also indirectly facilitates the entry of third-country nationals into the EU. Due to the 
COVID-19 pandemic, a restriction on non-essential travel into the EU has been in place since 
mid-March 2020, which has been coordinated through a Council Recommendation14. This 
                                                          
13  Decision of the EEA Joint Committee No 187/2021 of 30 June 2021 amending Annex V (Free movement 
of workers) and Annex VIII (Right of establishment) to the EEA Agreement (OJ L 124, 8.5.2008, p. 20). 
14  Council Recommendation (EU) 2020/912 of 30 June 2020 on the temporary restriction on non-essential 
travel into the EU and the possible lifting of such restriction (OJ L 208I, 1.7.2020, p. 1). 
4 
 
 
 
Recommendation was amended on 20 May 2021 to allow fully vaccinated third-country 
nationals’ entry into the EU15. While the Recommendation states that Member States could 
accept third-country vaccination certificates in accordance with national law, taking into 
account the need to be able to verify the authenticity, validity and integrity of the certificate, 
this process is facilitated once an equivalence decision for a third country has been adopted. 
By 13 October 2021, there had been preliminary contacts with 60 interested third countries or 
territories, 40 of which had formally submitted the results of the self-assessment of their 
readiness to join the EU system. With the EU Digital COVID Certificate, the EU has set a 
global a trend and exercised global technological leadership in the midst of the global 
pandemic while guaranteeing data protection and security, maintaining the core value of 
human-centricity during the digital transition, and remaining open to the world. 
The Regulation contains two separate legal bases for this purpose: Article 3(10) and Article 
8(2), depending on the EU’s relationship with the third country concerned in the field of free 
movement. 
2.2.2. Equivalence decision pursuant to Article 3(10) 
Article 3(10) of the Regulation empowers the Commission to adopt implementing acts 
establishing that COVID-19 certificates issued by a third country which has concluded a free 
movement agreement with the EU and the Member States that does not contain a mechanism 
of incorporation of EU legal acts are equivalent to EU Digital COVID Certificates. 
This provision currently only covers Switzerland, with which the Agreement between the 
European Union and its Member States and Switzerland on the free movement of persons is 
in force16. On 8 July 2021, the Commission adopted an Implementing Decision connecting 
Switzerland to the EU system17. As a result, COVID-19 certificates issued by Switzerland are 
accepted under the conditions referred to in Article 5(5), Article 6(5) and Article 7(8) of the 
EU Digital COVID Certificate Regulation. 
2.2.3. Equivalence decisions pursuant to Article 8(2) 
Based on Article 8(2) of the Regulation, the Commission may adopt implementing acts 
establishing that interoperable COVID-19 certificates issued by a third country are to be 
                                                          
15  Council Recommendation (EU) 2021/816 20 May 2021 amending Recommendation (EU) 2020/912 on the 
temporary restriction on non-essential travel into the EU and the possible lifting of such restriction (OJ L 
182, 21.5.2021, p. 1). 
16  Agreement between the European Community and its Member States, of the one part, and the Swiss 
Confederation, of the other, on the free movement of persons - Final Act - Joint Declarations - Information 
relating to the entry into force of the seven Agreements with the Swiss Confederation in the sectors free 
movement of persons, air and land transport, public procurement, scientific and technological cooperation, 
mutual recognition in relation to conformity assessment, and trade in agricultural products (OJ L 114, 
30.4.2002, p. 6). 
17  Commission Implementing Decision (EU) 2021/1126 establishing the equivalence of COVID-19 
certificates issued by Switzerland to the certificates issued in accordance with Regulation (EU) 2021/953 of 
the European Parliament and of the Council (OJ L 243, 9.7.2021, p. 49). 
5 
 
 
 
considered as equivalent to EU Digital COVID Certificates, for the purpose of facilitating the 
holders’ exercise of their right to free movement within the Union. By 13 October 2021, the 
Commission has adopted such equivalence decisions regarding COVID-19 certificates issued 
by Albania18, Andorra19, Faroe Islands20, Israel21, Monaco22, Morocco23, North Macedonia24, 
Panama25, San Marino26, Turkey27, Ukraine28 and Vatican City29. Additional equivalence 
decisions are in preparation. 
                                                          
18  Commission Implementing Decision (EU) 2021/1477 of 14 September 2021 establishing the equivalence, 
for the purpose of facilitating the right of free movement within the Union, of COVID-19 certificates issued 
by the Republic of Albania to the certificates issued in accordance with Regulation (EU) 2021/953 of the 
European Parliament and of the Council (OJ L 325, 15.9.2021, p. 36). 
19  Commission Implementing Decision (EU) 2021/1476 of 14 September 2021 establishing the equivalence, 
for the purpose of facilitating the right of free movement within the Union, of COVID-19 certificates issued 
by Andorra to the certificates issued in accordance with Regulation (EU) 2021/953 of the European 
Parliament and of the Council (OJ L 325, 15.9.2021, p. 33). 
20  Commission Implementing Decision (EU) 2021/1478 of 14 September 2021 establishing the equivalence, 
for the purpose of facilitating the right of free movement within the Union, of COVID-19 certificates issued 
by the Faroe Islands to the certificates issued in accordance with Regulation (EU) 2021/953 of the European 
Parliament and of the Council (OJ L 325, 15.9.2021, p. 39). 
21  Commission Implementing Decision (EU) 2021/1482 of 14 September 2021 establishing the equivalence, 
for the purpose of facilitating the right of free movement within the Union, of COVID-19 certificates issued 
by the State of Israel to the certificates issued in accordance with Regulation (EU) 2021/953 of the 
European Parliament and of the Council (OJ L 325, 15.9.2021, p. 51). 
22  Commission Implementing Decision (EU) 2021/1479 of 14 September 2021 establishing the equivalence, 
for the purpose of facilitating the right of free movement within the Union, of COVID-19 certificates issued 
by Monaco to the certificates issued in accordance with Regulation (EU) 2021/953 of the European 
Parliament and of the Council (OJ L 325, 15.9.2021, p. 42). 
23  Commission Implementing Decision (EU) 2021/1481 of 14 September 2021 establishing the equivalence, 
for the purpose of facilitating the right of free movement within the Union, of COVID-19 certificates issued 
by the Kingdom of Morocco to the certificates issued in accordance with Regulation (EU) 2021/953 of the 
European Parliament and of the Council (OJ L 325, 15.9.2021, p. 48). 
24  Commission Implementing Decision (EU) 2021/1381 of 19 August 2021 establishing the equivalence, for 
the purpose of facilitating the right of free movement within the Union, of COVID-19 certificates issued by 
the Republic of North Macedonia to the certificates issued in accordance with Regulation (EU) 2021/953 of 
the European Parliament and of the Council (OJ L 297, 20.8.2021, p. 38). 
25  Commission Implementing Decision (EU) 2021/1480 of 14 September 2021 establishing the equivalence, 
for the purpose of facilitating the right of free movement within the Union, of COVID-19 certificates issued 
by the Republic of Panama to the certificates issued in accordance with Regulation (EU) 2021/953 of the 
European Parliament and of the Council (OJ L 325, 15.9.2021, p. 45). 
26  Commission Implementing Decision (EU) 2021/1273 of 30 July 2021 establishing the equivalence, for the 
purpose of facilitating the right of free movement within the Union, of COVID-19 certificates issued by San 
Marino to the certificates issued in accordance with Regulation (EU) 2021/953 of the European Parliament 
and of the Council (OJ L 277, 2.8.2021, p. 151). 
27  Commission Implementing Decision (EU) 2021/1382 of 19 August 2021 establishing the equivalence, for 
the purpose of facilitating the right of free movement within the Union, of COVID-19 certificates issued by 
the Republic of Turkey to the certificates issued in accordance with Regulation (EU) 2021/953 of the 
European Parliament and of the Council (OJ L 297, 20.8.2021, p. 41). 
28  Commission Implementing Decision (EU) 2021/1380 of 19 August 2021 establishing the equivalence, for 
the purpose of facilitating the right of free movement within the Union, of COVID-19 certificates issued by 
Ukraine to the certificates issued in accordance with Regulation (EU) 2021/953 of the European Parliament 
and of the Council (OJ L 297, 20.8.2021, p. 35). 
29  Commission Implementing Decision (EU) 2021/1272 of 30 July 2021 establishing the equivalence, for the 
purpose of facilitating the right of free movement within the Union, of COVID-19 certificates issued by the 
Vatican City State to the certificates issued in accordance with Regulation (EU) 2021/953 of the European 
Parliament and of the Council (OJ L 277, 2.8.2021, p. 148). 
6 
 
 
 
2.2.4. Interoperability with systems developed at international level 
In accordance with Article 4(3) of the Regulation, the EU Digital COVID Certificate trust 
framework should ensure interoperability with technological systems established at 
international level.  
The International Civil Aviation Organization (ICAO) has recently developed the Visible 
Digital Seal for Non-Constrained Environments (VDS-NC)30 standard. The Commission is 
currently in discussions with the ICAO to identify ways to bridge the gap in specifications 
between its standard and the EU Digital COVID Certificate. There are a number of 
challenges in this regard, linked to differences between the two standards, such as in terms of 
the datasets, vaccine encoding, or the size of the ICAO VDS-NC QR code which could make 
verification difficult unless specific readers are used. At the same time, according to the 
information available to the Commission, no third country has yet implemented and deployed 
a COVID-19 certificate systems based on the ICAO VDS-NC standard31. While technical 
discussions will continue, workable solutions may require time and financial investment by 
Member States. In addition, based on the EU Digital COVID Certificate Regulation, the 
adoption of equivalence decisions is limited to COVID-19 certificate systems developed by 
third countries, posing difficulties in relation to international organisations. 
On 27 July 2021, the WHO published technical specifications and implementation guidance 
on digital documentation for COVID-19 certificates: vaccination status32 underlining that the 
EU Digital COVID Certificate complies with their guidance and is not a parallel or 
conflicting standard. On 26 August 2021, the International Air Transport Association (IATA) 
urged countries to adopt the EU Digital COVID Certificate as the global standard33. In the 
high-level principles for a safe and sustainable resumption of international travel adopted on 
30 September 2021, the members of the Group of Seven (G7) acknowledge the “positive 
development of the EU Digital COVID Certificate, which is operational internationally”34. 
                                                          
30  https://www.icao.int/Security/FAL/TRIP/PublishingImages/Pages/Publications/Guidelines%20-
%20VDS%20for%20Travel-Related%20Public%20Health%20Proofs.pdf  
31  On 1 October 2021, Australia announced that it would start issuing certificates meeting the ICAO VDS-NC 
standard by the end of October (https://www.pm.gov.au/media/national-cabinet-statement-56). 
32  WHO reference number: WHO/2019-nCoV/Digital_certificates/vaccination/2021.1. 
33  https://www.iata.org/en/pressroom/2021-releases/2021-08-26-01/  
34  https://www.gov.uk/government/publications/g7-high-level-principles-for-a-safe-and-sustainable-
resumption-of-international-travel/g7-high-level-principles-for-a-safe-and-sustainable-resumption-of-
international-travel 
7 
 
 
 
2.3. Developments regarding the issuance of certificates of recovery 
2.3.1. Possible issuance of certificates of recovery based on rapid antigen test results 
2.3.1.1. Guidance received from the European Centre for Disease Prevention and Control 
The issuance of a certificate of recovery based on a positive rapid antigen test35 is not 
covered by the EU Digital COVID Certificate even though it was in the original Commission 
proposal, since at the time of adoption, ECDC considered that the performance of rapid 
antigen tests was sufficient for the issuance of test certificates but not for the issuance of 
certificates of recovery. This is because rapid antigen tests were initially designed and 
approved for testing symptomatic people with an ongoing SARS-CoV-2 infection and high 
viral loads. A higher performance would be needed in order to limit the number of false 
positives resulting from rapid antigen test.  
Since then, the clinical performance of rapid antigen tests has improved. In May 2021, the 
Technical Working Group on COVID-19 diagnostic tests established by the Health Security 
Committee36, responsible for maintaining the EU common list of rapid antigen tests37, put in 
place a more structured, coherent and swift procedure for updating the list. Moreover, on 29 
June 2021, the experts of the Technical Working Group agreed on further definitions and 
criteria that should be considered for independent validation studies assessing the clinical 
performance of rapid antigen tests for COVID-19 diagnosis, in addition to those set out in the 
Council Recommendation of 21 January 202138. 
One of the criteria agreed was an increased specificity rate of 98%. Nowadays, the EU 
common list includes rapid antigen tests that have been assessed through independent 
evaluation studies, showing a sensitivity of ≥90% (some even of ≥95%) and a specificity of 
≥98%. As a consequence of these improved estimates of the test characteristics, the 
proportion likely to have a false positive test is now known to be lower. Furthermore, in July 
2021, the Technical Working Group agreed to exclude from the list rapid antigen tests based 
on saliva and other alternative sample types, as well as rapid antigen self-tests, further 
increasing the likely consistency of the performance of the tests included in the list. 
In view of these developments, ECDC now supports the issuance of certificates of recovery 
to persons who have received a positive result for SARS-CoV-2 infection following a rapid 
antigen test listed in the common and updated list of COVID-19 rapid antigen tests (for more 
information, see Annex II). 
                                                          
35  ‘Rapid antigen test’, that is, a test that relies on detection of viral proteins (antigens) using a lateral flow 
immunoassay that gives results in less than 30 minutes. 
36  https://ec.europa.eu/health/security/crisis-management/twg_covid-19_diagnostic_tests_en 
37  https://ec.europa.eu/health/sites/default/files/preparedness_response/docs/covid-19_rat_common-list_en.pdf  
38  Council Recommendation of 21 January 2021 on a common framework for the use and validation of rapid 
antigen tests and the mutual recognition of COVID-19 test results in the EU (OJ C 24, 22.1.2021, p. 1). 
8 
 
 
 
2.3.1.2. Assessment by the Commission 
Based on the guidance from the ECDC, the Commission consulted Member States’ experts in 
different fora, such as the Health Security Committee, the eHealth Network and the Technical 
Working Group on COVID-19 diagnostic tests, to obtain further scientific and technical input 
regarding the possible issuance of certificates of recovery based on positive rapid antigen test 
results.  
Following these consultations, the Commission concludes that for the time being there is 
insufficient support among Member States’ experts for the issuance of certificates of recovery 
based on the result of a rapid antigen test only, that is, without further confirmation by a 
reverse transcription polymerase chain reaction (RT-PCR) test. Several Member State experts 
consider that rapid antigen tests are still not sufficiently reliable in terms of their specificity 
levels, with several reports mentioning quality issues in particular, high level of false positive 
results. According to experts, current testing policies in a majority of Member States require a 
confirmatory RT-PCR test in case of a positive rapid antigen test result. Where positive, the 
result of the confirmatory RT-PCR test can then form the basis for the issuance of a 
certificate of recovery. 
In view of the above, for the time being the Commission will continue to monitor this issue 
and may consider the option of adopting a delegated act to amend the EU Digital COVID 
Certificate Regulation to allow for the issuance of certificates of recovery on the basis of 
rapid antigen test results at a later date39.  
2.3.2. Possible issuance of certificates of recovery based on antibody test results 
2.3.2.1. Guidance received from the European Centre for Disease Prevention and Control 
In May 2021, the ECDC and the Joint Research Centre published a technical report on the 
use of antibody tests for SARS-CoV-2 in the context of EU Digital COVID Certificates40, 
which lists the main points for consideration in their recommendation not to provide for the 
issuance of certificates of recovery based on antibody test results. These considerations 
included, among others: 
- A positive antibody test result cannot provide any indication of the time of infection, 
and cannot exclude a current ongoing infection.  
- Even if antibody tests provide some evidence of an immune response, it is not known 
if the antibody levels offer sufficient protection or how long such protection would 
last.  
- It is still unknown whether the antibodies detected by commercial tests currently in 
use would prevent infection with newly emerging SARS-CoV-2 variants.  
                                                          
39  Based on Article 7(4) of the EU Digital COVID Certificate Regulation. 
40  https://www.ecdc.europa.eu/sites/default/files/documents/Use-of-antibody-tests-for-SARS-COV-2-in-the-
context-of-Digital-Green-Certificates.pdf  
9 
 
 
 
- Due to the variety of antibody tests, a comparison of their results is extremely difficult 
due to the lack of standardisation.  
- Tests that target the spike protein will be unable to distinguish between people who 
have been previously infected and those who have received at least one dose of a 
vaccine. 
The ECDC has reviewed these conclusions (for more information, see Annex II) and 
considers that the abovementioned points remain valid and that there has not been any 
substantial change in the scientific evidence. As a result, the ECDC considers that currently 
available antibody tests are not suitable for the assessment of the time of infection and 
immunity status of an individual. Therefore, positive antibody test results are not considered 
sufficient for the issuance of certificates of recovery. 
2.3.2.2. Assessment by the Commission 
Based on the guidance from the ECDC, the Commission is currently not considering the 
adoption of a delegated act to amend the EU Digital COVID Certificate Regulation to allow 
for the issuance of certificates of recovery on the basis of antibody tests. The Commission 
may reconsider its position on the basis of new guidance from the ECDC. 
2.3.3. Validity period of certificates of recovery 
2.3.3.1. Guidance received from the European Centre for Disease Prevention and Control 
In accordance with Point 3(h) of the Annex of the EU Digital COVID Certificate Regulation, 
the validity of certificates of recovery is currently limited to 180 days after the date of first 
positive nucleic acid amplification test (NAAT)41 result. This is due to the currently limited 
knowledge regarding the duration of immunity of persons infected with SARS-CoV-2. To 
date, the correlation between measured immunity and clinical protection from SARS-CoV-2 
infection still needs to be established. 
The validity of certificates of recovery depends on the emerging scientific evidence on the 
duration of protective immunity after natural infection and effectiveness of the previous 
infection in the presence of current and potential future SARS-CoV-2 variants, which is a 
dynamic process changing on a regular basis.  
Having examined all the available information, the ECDC considers that there is currently 
insufficient evidence to support an increase of the validity period of certificates of recovery 
beyond 180 days (for more information, see Annex II). 
                                                          
41  Such as reverse transcription polymerase chain reaction (RT-PCR), loop-mediated isothermal amplification 
(LAMP) and transcription-mediated amplification (TMA) techniques, used to detect the presence of the 
SARS-CoV-2 ribonucleic acid (RNA). 
10 
 
 
 
2.3.3.2. Assessment by the Commission 
Based on the guidance from the ECDC, the Commission is currently not considering the 
adoption of a delegated act to amend the EU Digital COVID Certificate Regulation to extend 
the validity period of certificates of recovery beyond 180 days after the date of first positive 
NAAT result.  
2.4. Developments regarding the issuance of vaccination certificates 
2.4.1. Validity period of vaccination certificates 
2.4.1.1. Guidance received from the European Centre for Disease Prevention and Control 
According to the EU Digital COVID Certificate Regulation, it is up to Member States to 
decide how long to accept the validity of vaccination certificates and only the acceptance of 
EU-approved vaccines is obligatory. Acceptance of COVID-19 vaccines that have completed 
the WHO emergency use listing procedure42 is optional. The European Medicines Agency 
(EMA) has recently evaluated the use of a booster dose of the COVID-19 vaccine Comirnaty 
(by BioNTech/Pfizer) for people from 18 to 55 years old with normal immune systems43. On 
the basis of data showing a rise in antibody levels when a booster dose is given 
approximately six months after the second dose to these individuals, EMA concluded that 
booster doses may be considered at least six months after the second dose for people aged 18 
years and older. 
According to ECDC44, the currently available evidence regarding vaccine effectiveness and 
the duration of protection shows that all EU-authorised vaccines are currently highly 
protective against COVID-19-related hospitalisation, severe disease and death. While there 
could be a need to administer additional doses to medically vulnerable groups 
(immunosuppressed persons, elderly persons, etc.), and several EU Member States are 
currently already doing so, the ECDC concludes that there is no urgent need for the 
administration of booster doses of vaccines to fully vaccinated individuals in the general 
population.  
2.4.1.2. Assessment by the Commission 
Taking into account the absence of conclusive scientific evidence on waning immunity after a 
certain period of time, the Commission is not currently considering an amendment to the EU 
Digital COVID Certificate Regulation in order to specify the validity of vaccination 
certificates. The Commission will continue to monitor this issue very closely as the scientific 
evidence develops.  
                                                          
42  https://extranet.who.int/pqweb/key-resources/documents/status-covid-19-vaccines-within-who-eulpq-
evaluation-process  
43  https://www.ema.europa.eu/en/news/comirnaty-spikevax-ema-recommendations-extra-doses-boosters 
44  https://www.ecdc.europa.eu/en/publications-data/covid-19-public-health-considerations-additional-vaccine-
doses  
11 
 
 
 
It is also important to underline that, where booster doses are administered, this does not 
affect the validity of the certificates issued as part of the primary vaccination cycle. 
Following technical discussions in the eHealth Network, the Commission is currently 
preparing an implementing act amending the technical specifications of the EU Digital 
COVID Certificate 45 to ensure that there are uniform rules for the coding of additional 
COVID-19 vaccine doses in vaccination certificates issued afterwards.   
2.5. Information received from Member States  
2.5.1. Information received pursuant to Article 11 of the EU Digital COVID Certificate 
Regulation 
The Commission monitors Member States’ implementation of the EU Digital COVID 
Certificate Regulation. This is linked to the monitoring of Council Recommendation 
2020/147546, which established a coordinated approach to the restriction of free movement in 
response to the COVID-19 pandemic based on a traffic-light map published weekly by the 
ECDC47. To make best use of the EU Digital COVID Certificate system, the Council, 
following a proposal from the Commission, amended the Recommendation in June 202148. 
The Recommendation sets out, among other things, a coordinated understanding of ‘full 
vaccination’ and validity periods for tests in the context of travel.  Information from Member 
States on the EU Digital COVID Certificate is collected by means of overview tables 
submitted by the Member States to the Commission and the Council, and is also made 
available on the Re-open EU platform49. 
The EU Digital COVID Certificate Regulation provides that, without prejudice to Member 
States’ competence to impose restrictions on grounds of public health, where Member States 
accept vaccination certificates, test certificates indicating a negative result or certificates of 
recovery, they are to refrain from imposing additional restrictions to free movement, unless 
they are necessary and proportionate for the purpose of safeguarding public health in 
response to the COVID-19 pandemic50.  
Where a Member State requires holders of EU Digital COVID Certificates to undergo, after 
entry into its territory, quarantine or self-isolation or to be tested for SARS-CoV-2 infection, 
or if the Member State imposes other restrictions on the holders of such certificates, because 
                                                          
45  Commission Implementing Decision (EU) 2021/1073 of 28 June 2021 laying down technical specifications 
and rules for the implementation of the trust framework for the EU Digital COVID Certificate established 
by Regulation (EU) 2021/953 of the European Parliament and of the Council (OJ L 230, 30.6.2021, p. 32). 
46  Council Recommendation (EU) 2020/1475 of 13 October 2020 on a coordinated approach to the restriction 
of free movement in response to the COVID-19 pandemic (OJ L 337, 14.10.2020, p. 3). 
47  https://www.ecdc.europa.eu/en/covid-19/situation-updates/weekly-maps-coordinated-restriction-free-
movement  
48  Council Recommendation (EU) 2021/961 of 14 June 2021 amending Recommendation (EU) 2020/1475 on 
a coordinated approach to the restriction of free movement in response to the COVID-19 pandemic (OJ L 
213I, 16.6.2021, p. 1). 
49  https://reopen.europa.eu/en  
50  Article 11(1) of the EU Digital COVID Certificate Regulation. 
12 
 
 
 
the epidemiological situation in a Member State worsens quickly, for example as a result of a 
SARS-CoV-2 variant of concern or interest, the Member State should inform the 
Commission and the other Member States accordingly51. Member States provide such 
information in the form of formal notices to the Commission and the Council. By 13 October 
2021, Denmark, Ireland, Malta and Slovakia had submitted information pursuant to this 
provision. The additional requirements notified by these Member States amount to additional 
tests after arrival for holders of test certificates arriving from higher-risk areas, quarantine for 
holders of test certificates arriving from areas with variants of concern or interest, or 
quarantine requirements for unvaccinated travellers. The reasons invoked by these Member 
States were high case notification rates or the detection of variants of concern or interest, 
notably the so-called Delta variant (at a stage where that variant was not yet the dominant 
strain of SARS-CoV-2 across the EU)52. The duration of the measures varied, being in force 
until mid-July, the end of September 2021, October 2021, or for an indeterminate period. The 
Member States concerned indicated that the restrictions were being continually assessed. The 
Commission will continue to monitor compliance of Member States’ public health measures 
affecting citizens’ right to free movement with EU law, in particular the principles of non-
discrimination and proportionality.  
2.5.2. Other information on the implementation of the EU Digital COVID Certificate 
Regulation 
The EU Digital COVID Certificate Regulation provides that vaccination certificates are to 
be issued by the Member State where the vaccine has been administered. If citizens are 
vaccinated in two different Member States, the first Member State should issue an EU Digital 
COVID Certificate indicating the first dose and the second Member State should issue, upon 
presentation of proof that the first dose was administered in another Member State, an EU 
Digital COVID Certificate indicating the second dose (the certificate will indicate “2/2”). 
However, in certain cases citizens have reported difficulties receiving an EU Digital COVID 
Certificate correctly indicating the administration of a second dose, despite providing proof 
of the first dose. 
Some Member States have also not yet found a satisfying solution to issue EU Digital 
COVID Certificates for certain categories of people. This is mainly the case for 
vaccination certificates. Issues were most reported for persons not permanently residing in 
the Member State concerned, persons without health insurance in the Member State, or 
persons without a national register or social security number in the Member State53. Some 
Member States also encountered difficulties in setting up a system that would allow for the 
(timely) issuance of test certificates to travellers residing in other Member States. 
                                                          
51  Article 11(2) of the EU Digital COVID Certificate Regulation. 
52  See also: https://www.ecdc.europa.eu/en/covid-19/variants-concern  
53  While health insurance affiliation and national register numbers (where they exist) are not included in the 
EU Digital COVID Certificates themselves, these data items are sometimes processed in the process for 
(re)issuing certificates, in line with national rules. 
13 
 
 
 
When it comes to the format of EU Digital COVID Certificates, some difficulties were 
reported in relation to paper versions of test certificates, and the need to be able to receive a 
paper format of these certificates. Some Member States do not issue test certificates in a 
paper format, arguing that sending test certificates via post would result in them arriving past 
their validity period. It was also reported that the issuance of EU Digital COVID Certificates 
in paper format by healthcare providers was not always free of charge. 
The Commission maintains regular contacts with the Member States at technical level with 
regard to their implementation of the EU Digital COVID Certificate. Some of the issues 
outlined above have already been resolved. For example, Belgium has confirmed that no 
electronic ID is needed to receive a test certificate; Croatia confirmed that it issues 
vaccination certificates to mobile EU citizens; Germany confirmed that the results of rapid 
antigen tests are also issued in a paper format; Ireland confirmed that COVID-19 test 
providers are issuing test certificates in a format that complies with the Regulation; and Spain 
confirmed that non-resident EU citizens vaccinated or tested in Spain can receive an EU 
Digital COVID Certificate.  
Issues have also arisen in some Member States where citizens have reported disparities 
between the name mentioned in their travel documents and the name indicated in the EU 
Digital COVID Certificate. On 26 July 2021, a Corrigendum54 related to the French version 
of the EU Digital COVID Certificate Regulation was published to further clarify that 
certificates should include “nom(s) et prénom(s)” instead of “nom(s) de famille et 
prénom(s)”, which can be misunderstood as the person’s birth name. The Commission has 
clarified towards the Member States that the name included on the certificate should match 
the name stated on the holder’s travel documents. Where mistakes occur, citizens are 
encouraged to get in touch with the national authorities that have issued the certificate to have 
them corrected. 
As far as the implementation of Regulation (EU) 2021/954 is concerned, no specific issues 
were reported when it comes to the issuance of EU Digital COVID Certificates to third-
country nationals who are legally staying or residing in their territory and who are entitled to 
travel to other Member States in accordance with EU law. However, this is most likely due to 
the fact that Member States established one single system to issue EU Digital COVID 
Certificates to both EU citizens and legally residing third-country nationals. Furthermore, as 
far as short-term visitors are concerned, this can be explained by the absence of an obligation 
on Member States to issue persons who have proof of vaccination in a third country with an 
EU Digital COVID Certificate. Pursuant to Article 8(1) of the EU Digital COVID Certificate 
Regulation, such issuance is optional, although several Member States are offering this 
possibility. 
                                                          
54  Rectificatif au règlement (UE) 2021/953 du Parlement européen et du Conseil du 14 juin 2021 relatif à un 
cadre pour la délivrance, la vérification et l’acceptation de certificats COVID-19 interopérables de 
vaccination, de test et de rétablissement (certificat COVID numérique de l’UE) afin de faciliter la libre 
circulation pendant la pandémie de COVID-19 (OJ L 265, 26.7.2021, p. 49). 
14 
 
 
 
To provide citizens with additional information, the Commission has published frequently 
asked questions on the EU Digital COVID Certificate, vaccinations and travel restrictions55. 
2.5.3. Information received pursuant to Article 15 of the EU Digital COVID Certificate 
Regulation (phasing-in period) 
The EU Digital COVID Certificate Regulation applies since 1 July 2021. Where a Member 
State was not able to issue EU Digital COVID Certificates as of that date, it was to inform the 
Commission and the other Member States accordingly56. Where they contained the data set 
out in the Annex, the COVID-19 certificates issued by such a Member State in a format that 
did not comply with the Regulation had to be accepted by the other Member States until 12 
August 2021. The Commission received such information, which in some cases only 
concerned a delay of a couple of days, from eight Member States57.  
To ensure a smooth rollout of the system, the Commission encouraged Member States to start 
issuing EU Digital COVID Certificates already before its entry into application58. The 
Commission supported this process by launching the EU Gateway on 1 June 202159. Given 
that no personal data is exchanged via the EU Gateway, Member States were able to make 
use of its functionality already in advance of the entry into application of the Regulation. On 
the same day, the first Member States started to issue certificates60 and, 21 Member States in 
total anticipated the deadline of 1 July 202161. This was the result of a clear commitment by 
Member States to the EU Digital COVID Certificate and its aim to open up Europe for its 
citizens in time for the summer months.  
2.6. Air transport sector 
The air transport sector was one of the first sectors to make use of the EU Digital COVID 
Certificate, on a large scale and is a good test case to understand how the certificate works in 
practice. The European Union Aviation Safety Agency and ECDC updated their 
recommendations in the COVID-19 Aviation Health Safety Protocol to align it with the EU 
Digital COVID Certificate immediately after the adoption of the Regulation62.  
The EU Digital COVID Certificate Regulation leaves the decision on how to verify 
certificates to Member States. A Commission survey among Member States on the 
                                                          
55  Available at: https://ec.europa.eu/info/policies/justice-and-fundamental-rights/eu-citizenship/movement-
and-residence/eu-digital-covid-certificate-vaccinations-and-travel-restrictions_en  
56  Article 15(2) of the EU Digital COVID Certificate Regulation. 
57  Denmark, Finland, France, Ireland, Malta, Slovakia, Spain and Sweden. 
58  Recital 12 of the Proposal for a Council Recommendation amending Council Recommendation (EU) 
2020/1475 of 13 October 2020 on a coordinated approach to the restriction of free movement in response to 
the COVID-19 pandemic (COM(2021) 294 final). 
59  https://ec.europa.eu/commission/presscorner/detail/en/IP_21_2721  
60  Bulgaria, Czechia, Denmark, Germany, Greece, Croatia and Poland.  
61  https://ec.europa.eu/commission/presscorner/detail/en/ip_21_3343   
 
15 
 
 
 
verification of the EU Digital COVID Certificate for air travel showed at least 15 different 
ways of organising the verification process, bearing the risk of significant duplication, and 
resulting in a lack of clarity and delays for passengers.  
To address this issue, the Commission published a Communication with recommendations to 
Member States to streamline the verification63. To avoid unnecessary checks of the EU 
Digital COVID Certificate by more than one actor (airline operators, airport operators, public 
authorities, etc.), the Commission recommended a ‘one-stop’ verification process prior to 
departure. The verification should also be carried out as early as possible and preferably 
before the passenger arrives at the departure airport, and Member States are encouraged to 
ensure complete, comprehensible and timely provision of information to operators and 
travellers about the verification requirements and processes.  
While air passenger numbers continue to be significantly below pre-pandemic levels, the 
airport association Airports Council International (ACI) Europe reported that preliminary 
data for July 2021 revealed total passenger volumes more than doubling compared to July 
2020, with significant improvements compared to the second quarter of 2021. ACI Europe 
attributes this change to the rollout of the EU Digital COVID Certificate along with the 
easing of travel restrictions64.  
In this context, further functionalities of the EU Digital COVID Certificate system are 
currently being considered, including improved digital wallet features as well as a ticketing 
solution showcasing how airlines and other transport service operators could seamlessly 
integrate proofs of certificate verification into online check-in procedures without sharing 
personal data. 
2.7. Use of the EU Digital COVID Certificate for domestic purposes 
The EU Digital COVID Certificate Regulation covers the use of certificates for travel within 
the EU during the COVID-19 pandemic. It neither prescribes nor prohibits other uses for the 
certificate and the use of COVID-19 certificates for domestic purposes, such as for access to 
events or venues, goes beyond the scope of the Regulation.  
Where Member States decide to use the EU Digital COVID Certificate for other purposes, 
this must be provided for in national law, which must comply in particular with data 
protection requirements65. At the same time, where a Member State establishes a system of 
COVID-19 certificates for domestic purposes, it should ensure that the EU Digital COVID 
                                                          
63  Communication from the Commission, “Reaping the full benefits of EU Digital COVID Certificates: 
Supporting free movement of citizens and the recovery of the air transport sector through guidelines and 
recommendations for EU Member States”, C(2021) 5594 final, 22 July 2021. 
64  https://mcusercontent.com/66a62c6d1a4692e5a3b79a788/files/6ddf5241-a7e7-b614-e826-
04720e836172/21_09_17_Holiday_season_improvements_in_passenger_traffic_cannot_be_called_a_recov
ery_says_airport_body_as_gradual_gains_already_plateau_across_Europe.03.pdf  
65  Recital 48 of the EU Digital COVID Certificate Regulation. 
16 
 
 
 
Certificates can also be used and are fully accepted66. The objective is to make sure that 
travellers going to another Member State do not have to obtain an additional national 
certificate. In this way it is ensured that the interoperable system of the EU Digital COVID 
Certificate is used to its full potential. 
In a survey conducted in September 2021, twenty Member States67 indicated that they use the 
EU Digital COVID Certificate for such purposes. Five Member States68 noted that the 
domestic use of the certificates was being considered. Member States use the certificate for 
the access to large events (by far the most common use-case), restaurants, cinemas and 
museums, nightclubs, fitness centres and other sports facilities, close-contact occupations 
such as hairdressers, beauty and massage parlours, hotels, hospitals and care homes, or 
universities and schools. 
3. CONCLUSION AND NEXT STEPS 
When originally proposed by the Commission in March 202169, many voiced doubts 
regarding the Commission’s plans to have the system up and running in time for the summer. 
But the fact that it took the European Parliament and the Council only three months to find 
agreement – and Member States and the Commission only two more weeks to have the 
system up and running – demonstrates that when EU institutions and Member States act 
together, they are able to act fast. 
The EU Digital COVID Certificate has proven to be a major success in Europe’s efforts to 
address and mitigate the impact of the COVID-19 pandemic on societies and economies. The 
certificate facilitates travel and has been crucial to support Europe’s hard-hit tourism 
industry. The EU Digital COVID Certificate is also a success worldwide. Today it is the 
global standard and currently the only system in operation internationally. It is used by 
countries across four continents. It is also the first example of an interoperable electronic 
record deployed at scale across such a large number of countries in a very short period of 
time.  
This success is also appreciated by citizens. According to a Eurobarometer survey published 
in September 2021, about two thirds (65%) of respondents agreed that the EU Digital COVID 
Certificate is the safest means for free travel in Europe during the COVID-19 pandemic70. 
Although the Regulation has a time-limited application, the EU Digital COVID Certificate 
has demonstrated that it is possible to develop a safe and secure, privacy-preserving and data-
                                                          
66  Recital 49 of the EU Digital COVID Certificate Regulation. 
67  Belgium, Czechia, Denmark, Germany, Estonia, Ireland, Greece, France, Croatia, Italy, Cyprus, Latvia, 
Lithuania, Luxembourg, Hungary, Malta, Austria, Poland, Portugal and Slovenia. In view of the progress of 
its vaccination campaign, Denmark has lifted the requirement to present the certificate for domestic 
purposes in the meantime. 
68  Bulgaria, Spain, the Netherlands, Romania and Finland. 
69  COM(2021) 130 final. 
70  Available at: https://www.europarl.europa.eu/at-your-service/files/be-heard/eurobarometer/2021/soteu-
flash-survey/soteu-2021-report-en.pdf  
17 
 
 
 
protecting system in an accessible manner. The certificates are available free of charge, in a 
digital and paper-based format, and are both human and machine-readable. It is therefore an 
important test case for the development of an EU Digital Identity ‘toolbox’71. 
The EU Digital COVID Certificate Regulation currently applies until 30 June 202272. By 31 
March 2022, the Commission will submit another report to the European Parliament and to 
the Council on the application of the Regulation, which may be accompanied by a legislative 
proposal to extend the period of application of the Regulation, taking into account the 
evolution of the epidemiological situation with regard to the COVID-19 pandemic73.  
However, the Commission does not exclude that it will put forward such a proposal already at 
an earlier stage, in order to ensure that, for reasons of legal certainty, the necessary legislative 
procedure can be concluded sufficiently in time before June 2022. This extension may be 
necessary, for example, if it is likely that the pandemic has not yet abated in time for the 
summer of 2022 and not extending the EU Digital COVID Certificate would likely result in 
additional restrictions to free movement as EU citizens would be deprived of an effective, 
secure and privacy-preserving way of proving their COVID-19 status. Any proposal by the 
Commission to extend the Regulation would be time-limited as the Commission’s goal is to 
return to unrestricted free movement as soon as the epidemiological situation allows it.  
 
                                                          
71  Commission Recommendation (EU) 2021/946 of 3 June 2021 on a common Union Toolbox for a 
coordinated approach towards a European Digital Identity Framework: https://eur-lex.europa.eu/legal-
content/EN/TXT/?uri=CELEX%3A32021H0946&qid=1478030835186  
72  Article 17 of the EU Digital COVID Certificate Regulation.  
73  Article 16(2) of the EU Digital COVID Certificate Regulation. 
18 
 
