Third Country EU Digital COVID certificate 
Equivalence Decision procedure 
Version 1.0 
1 Onboarding procedure 
In case a third country wishes to link up to the EU’s Digital COVID Certificate, it should self-assess that 
its system complies with the EUs’ specifications described in this document. The checklist, which you 
find below, must be used for the self-assessment.  
If they wish to link up with the EU’s Digital Covid Certificate, third countries are encouraged to issue 
their COVID certificates according to the exact same technical specifications used by Member States 
in accordance with the EU DCC Regulation (EU DCC specifications). Third countries are encouraged to 
make use of available open source implementations. 
The EU DCC specifications covering data structure and encoding mechanisms, including the QR code, 
which will ensure that all certificates, whether digital or on paper, can be read and verified across the 
EU are available at https://ec.europa.eu/health/ehealth/covid-19_en and more specifically: 
• Detailed technical specifications:  
o Volume 1: formats and trust management 
o Volume 2: Digital Green Certificate Gateway 
o Volume 3: 2D Barcode Specifications 
o Volume 4: Digital Green Certificate Applications 
o Volume 5: Public Key Certificate Governance 
o EU DCC Validation Rules 
• Datasets and value sets:  
o Value sets 
o JSON Schema for Digital Green Certificates 
 
If a third country applies the EU DCC specifications in full, it follows that the conditions set in Article 8 
EU DCC Regulation1 are fulfilled. It will indeed be established that the third country certificates: i) are 
in accordance with standards and technological systems interoperable with the trust framework for 
the EU Digital COVID Certificate (EU DCC), ii) can be verified for their authenticity, validity and integrity 
iii) contain the data set out in the Annex of the EU DCC Regulation. 
If the result of this self-assessment is conclusive, a formal request should be addressed via an official 
letter to the Commission (official letter on behalf of the government addressed to the Secretary-
General of the European Commission, Ms Ilze Juhansone), to express the interest of the respective 
country in the adoption of a decision by the Commission establishing that certificates issued by the 
respective country should be considered as equivalent to EU Digital COVID Certificates. This letter 
                                                          
1 Regulation (EU) 2021/953 of the European Parliament and of the Council of 14 June 2021 on a framework for 
the issuance, verification and acceptance of interoperable COVID-19 vaccination, test and recovery certificates 
(EU Digital COVID Certificate) to facilitate free movement during the COVID-19 pandemic 
should include as annexes a description of the system developed and the completed checklist. Upon 
receipt, the Commission will launch the procedure to assess whether a third country applies the EU 
DCC specifications, and whether the process for the onboarding procedure workflow can be launched, 
which is the same that Member States have already used to bring their system online within the Union. 
If the result of this self-assessment is inconclusive, a fully-fledged equivalence decision cannot be 
granted to a third country. Entry to the EU for non-essential reasons would remain possible under the 
conditions set in Council Recommendation 2020/912. Technical level contact can be sought with the 
Commission if any clarification is required on these conditions. 
 
1. Initiation of the procedure –First contacts, pre-checks of readiness, technical clarification. 
 The third country completes the Evaluation Checklist (Annex I) through which the third 
country will self-assess its readiness to enter the technical part of the onboarding 
procedure.  
 If the assessment of the Evaluation Checklist concludes that the applicant country is 
technically fit to connect to EU Gateway (onboarding), go to step 2. 
 Otherwise, the Commission will, accordingly, inform the third country about this. 
To manage the flow of potential applications, priority will have to be established prior to moving 
to Step 2, also taking into account the Council Recommendation 2020/9122 and resource 
constraints. 
 
2. Country is deemed to be technically fit for onboarding procedure 
 The third country is invited to submit its application for an Equivalence Decision on the basis 
of the onboarding procedure via the following email address: EU-DIGITAL-COVID-
CERTIFICATE-COMMITTEE@ec.europa.eu 
 The Commission acknowledges the receipt of application and provides the applicant country 
the contact details of the team that will test the compatibility of the third country 
certificates with the EU-DCC specifications. 
 The procedure described in Annex II details the technical screening process.   
 If the applicant country falls under the scope of Article 3(5) of the EU DCC Regulation, in 
order to continue with the procedure the Commission will require from the third country 
formal assurances that the third country will accept Digital Covid Certificates issued by 
Member States.  
 The Commission will notify the third country of the result of the technical compliance tests 
 
 
 
                                                          
2 Council Recommendation (EU) 2020/912 on the temporary restriction on non-essential travel into the EU and 
the possible lifting of such restriction-Amendment of Annex I (Council Doc nr. 9878/21, 16 June 2021) 
3. Equivalence Decision  
 Upon a motivated positive opinion from the Commission technical team, the Commission 
will adopt the implementing act relative to the third country3 and inform the third country 
of a positive Equivalence Decision 
4. Go live  
 As soon as the Equivalence Decision has been adopted, the Commission will invite the third 
country to submit an application form (Annex III) including relevant information to connect 
the country to the production environment. 
 upon assessment of the application form, the Commission will invite the third country to 
register their production certificates and promote them to the production environment. 
 
 
                                                          
3 Subject to a positive opinion by the comitology committee 
