 
 
 
 
 
eHealth Network  
 
 
Guidelines on 
 
 
COVID-19 citizen recovery  
interoperable certificates - 
minimum dataset 
 
 
Release 1 
 
2021-03-15 
 
 
eHealth Network 
 
 
 
The eHealth Network is a voluntary network, set up under article 14 of Directive 2011/24/EU.  
It provides a platform of Member States' competent authorities dealing with eHealth.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Adopted by the eHealth Network, 15 March 2021 
The periods of infectiousness and protection mentioned in this guideline follow the ECDC 
Guidance and might undergo changes as new scientific evidence arises.  
2 
 
eHealth Network 
Table of Contents 
1 Introduction ............................................................................................................... 4 
2 Use case – COVID-19 citizen recovery ......................................................................... 4 
2.1 Scientific unknowns ....................................................................................................... 5 
3 Minimum dataset ...................................................................................................... 5 
4 Further steps towards cross-country interoperability ................................................. 6 
 
  
3 
 
eHealth Network 
1 Introduction 
To date, the results of COVID-19 testing have been the principal factor to decide on 
implementation of measures, e.g. isolation/quarantine, cross-border movement, etc. Despite 
efforts for a common approach on free movement across the EU/EEA, citizens are still facing 
problems when trying to present test certificates issued by one Member States in another 
(issues include language used or lack of trust in the authenticity of the document). To 
facilitate free movement within EU/EEA Member States, a common certificate for COVID-19 
testing is needed. With the rollout of the first COVID-19 vaccines on the EU market, there is 
also a desire from some Member States to introduce vaccination certificates for the purposes 
of free movement across borders. Under the proposal for a Digital Green Certificate, a 
framework for interoperable certificates on COVID-19 vaccination, testing and recovery 
should be established. 
The guideline follow epidemiological guidance1 and the specific values will be provided in 
due time by relevant institutions. 
2 Use case – COVID-19 citizen recovery 
According to the current evidence, individuals who recover from COVID-19 can continue to 
test positive for SARS-CoV-2 for some time after no longer being infectious. In those cases, 
the virus being shed is no longer viable and there is therefore limited risk of transmission to 
others. However, for the purposes of free movement, those individuals are unable to present 
a negative test result, and would thus be prevented from crossing borders. However, despite 
some uncertainties (described in the following chapter), on balance the evidence suggests 
that those who have recovered from COVID-19 have a reduced risk of infection.  
  
                                               
1
https://www.ecdc.europa.eu/en/publications-data/covid-19-guidance-discharge-and-ending-isolation  
4 
 
eHealth Network 
2.1 Scientific unknowns  
Some scientific unknowns remain regarding the infectiousness of a person infected with 
COVID-19. The following aspects are of particular relevance: 
- there is insufficient information on levels of immunity conferred by previous infection. 
It is widely accepted that previous infection provides in general some reduced risk of 
subsequent infection, but there is a lack of consensus on how much reduced risk of 
infection, the length of the protection and the extent of variation between individuals.  
- although relatively uncommon, reinfection in persons recently recovered from COVID-
19 has been documented. It has been reported that up to 9% of PCR positive cases 
do not mount an antibody response and may be susceptible for reinfection and further 
transmitting disease. More recently, possible reinfections with emerging variant 
strains such as B.1.351 and P.1 are of special concern.  
- the exact duration of the protection conferred by a previous infection, in particular in 
view of the increased transmission in EU/EA MSs of the new variants of concern, 
should be revised as new evidence is collected. 
Due to the current unknowns, the validity of certificates might undergo changes according to 
new scientific evidence. Considering the emergence of SARS-CoV-2 variants, this 
epidemiological evidence may change and ECDC, the Commission and Member States 
should take all the measures to update all the relevant guidance, legal acts and IT systems. 
 
3 Minimum dataset 
A minimum dataset, including a unique identifier, enables minimum information to be 
generated according to a common agreed structure, facilitating cross-border sharing and 
use.  
5 
 
eHealth Network 
 
Table 1 – COVID-19 citizen recovery minimum dataset 
Section Data element  Description Preferred Code System 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Person Person name The legal name of the person   
identification  recovered from the infection  
 surname(s) and 
forename(s) in that order 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Person date of birth  Recovered person’s date of Complete date, without 
birth.  time, following the ISO 
8601. 
6 
 
eHealth Network 
Person identifier The type of identifier and  
identifier of the person, 
(optional) 
according to the policies 
applicable in each country. 
Examples: citizen ID and/or 
document number (ID-
card/passport) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
Information Disease or agent  Disease or agent the citizen ICD-10, SNOMED CT GPS 
about past has recovered from 
infection 
Date of first positive Date when the sample for the Complete date, without 
 
test result test was collected that led to time, following the ISO 
positive test obtained through 8601. 
a procedure established by a 
public health authority in the 
MS [specific rules to be 
determined later] 
Country of test   Country in which the first ISO 3166 Country Codes 
positive test was performed 
Certificate Certificate issuer Entity that has issued the   
metadata  certificate (allowing to check 
the certificate) 
Certificate Identifier Unique identifier of the   
certificate to be printed into 
the certificate; the way of 
defining it should be similar 
2
to the vaccination guidelines  
Certificate valid from Certificate valid from [specific ISO 8601 or other 
rules to be determined later]  international stated format 
 
Subject to change as new 
evidence arises 
                                               
2
 https://ec.europa.eu/health/sites/health/files/ehealth/docs/vaccination-proof_interoperability-
guidelines_en.pdf  
7 
 
eHealth Network 
Certificate valid until Certificate valid until [specific ISO 8601 or other 
rules to be determined later] international stated format 
 
Subject to change as new 
evidence arises 
All fields that contain non-enumeration/numeric data should be encoded in UTF-8 must be fully canonicalised and 
normalised according to http://unicode.org/reports/tr15/  
 
4 Further steps towards cross-border interoperability 
The guidelines on COVID-19 Citizen Recovery interoperable certificates - minimum dataset 
will be followed by further steps towards cross-border interoperability of COVID-19 
certificates. 
In close cooperation with ECDC and WHO and supported by the European Commission, the 
eHealth Network and the Health Security Committee will continue working towards the 
design and implementation of interoperable solutions that work across borders and world 
regions. 
In addition, the European Commission is invited to support the development of toolboxes and 
trust frameworks to facilitate the deployment of interoperable solutions. 
 
8 
 
