The use of phone calls to 
defaulters is a cheaper  
and more convenient 
alternative to the home 
visit approach. Also, the 
use of phone contacts to 
track defaulters contributes 
to improved retention of 
immunization clients in 
intervention facilities. 
MATERNAL AND CHILD HEALTH  
INTEGRATED PROGRAM, KENYA
IMPLEMENTATION DATE:  May 2013 to March 2014 
Using cellular phones to increase return rates for immunization services in Kenya
Immunization is a proven strategy for the prevention of childhood disease and mortality, yet 
undervaccination remains a challenge in parts of sub-Saharan Africa.  In Kenya, failure to complete the 
immunization schedule is an obstacle to ensuring full childhood immunization. Traditional home visits to 
track defaulting children have not successfully reduced drop-out rates due primarily to their costliness 
and the time-consuming task of tracking defaulters.  The assumption is that caregivers do not remember 
the appointment date led to development and use of short message service (SMS) reminders. These 
reminders, however, do not clarify the reasons behind failure to honor appointments. Widespread 
mobile phone penetration (over 65 percent) in Kenya presents an opportunity to use phones to trace 
defaulters and minimize dropout, as well as understand the reasons contributing to dropout. The US 
Agency for International Development Global Health Bureau’s flagship program, Maternal and Child 
Health Integrated Program (MCHIP), determined to test the use of phone contacts as an alternative 
approach for tracking immunization defaulters in four districts in western Kenya. For nine months, 
children accessing immunization services (pentavalent 1) in 12 facilities were followed.
About MCHIP/Kenya Operations Research
The objective of this research was to test the feasibility of Twelve facilities with the highest drop-out rates, from four phone call reminders to track immunization defaulters. districts, were selected to participate in the study. Children 
Specific objectives included: 1) calculating defaulter rate;  who received the first dose of pentavalent (DTP-HepB-
2) determining the cost and time of phone calls; 3) elucidating Hib) vaccine were registered in an immunization diary and 
reasons for defaulting; and 4) determining mobile phone followed throughout the study. Caregivers provided a reliable 
ownership among caregivers. phone number. The child’s name was entered on the date of 
the next visit. Children were considered defaulters if they 
94  n  SERVICE DELIVERY 
Ronald Dangana, MCHIP
missed the appointment by at least 14 days, when the health Ownership of cell phones by immediate caregivers was above 
worker called the caregivers to remind them of the missed 65 percent with minimal rural/urban difference. Only nine 
appointment. The health worker recorded the number of percent of the caregivers did not provide any phone num-
times each caregiver was called and the estimated duration ber, and alternative efforts were made to link them to health 
of the call before the children were either brought back or workers for tracking.  
their immunization status was established. The duration and 
the cost of the calls were confirmed from the monthly phone Lessons Learned 
bills. During the call, reasons for missing appointments were 
sought from the caregivers.
n Calling the caregiver directly enables health workers to 
Dropout was defined as the difference between children establish personal relationships with them, to understand 
getting the first dose of pentavalent (penta1) and those  reasons for default, and to negotiate an appropriate time 
who received the third dose pentavalent (penta 3). The to vaccinate the child. Although perceived as expensive, 
dropout rate for the study period was compared to the this follow-up approach is cheaper than home visits.
dropout rate for the same period for two preceding years. 
n A major limitation of this study was its inability to pick 
The numbers of children successfully tracked using the health worker-related causes of dropouts, such as 
phone contacts and those tracked by health workers during long wait times and poor attitudes of the health workers, 
the study period were compared. which have been cited in other literature.
n Caregivers who provided phone contacts of their 
Evaluation and Results male spouses were more likely to respond to calls 
favorably and have their children vaccinated. Although 
The design of this study was longitudinal with both this finding needs further analysis, it is important to 
qualitative and quantitative arms. Sampling was purposive, note that none of the children were brought to the clinic 
based on reported high dropout rates and a rural-urban mix. by their fathers or females who were accompanied by 
A total of 5,908 children were enrolled during the nine- their spouses.
month duration of the study, 57 percent of them by three 
facilities. A total of 785 defaulters were tracked using the Conclusion 
phone compared to 141 tracked through home visits. 
Dropout rates varied between facilities. All facilities except Use of phone call reminders significantly reduced dropout 
one reported significant declines in dropout rates compared time at all facilities. Alternative approaches to reduce dropout 
to same period in the preceding two years. On average 1.5 have failed for three main reasons that this study attempted 
calls lasting two minutes were made before the child’s status to address: low motivation among health workers, competing 
was established. The average cost of the phone calls was priorities for public health technicians, and poor/no funding 
$0.14/child. for defaulter tracking. The use of phone calls to defaulters is 
Competing tasks, a sick child and vaccine-related effects were a cheaper and more convenient alternative to the home visit 
the most common reasons for missing appointments. Forget- approach. Also, the use of phone contacts to track defaulters 
ting the appointment date and traditional or religious beliefs contributes to improved retention of immunization clients 
were mentioned less frequently. in intervention facilities. Considering the high ownership 
rates of phones in Kenya and low costs of calling clients, the 
Figure 1. Reasons for defaulting use of phone contacts is a cost-effective alternative to other 
defaulter tracking mechanisms.  n 
3% No reason
21% 
Vaccinated
elsewhere
51% Geographic Coverage:  Western Kenya2% Cultural or 
religious beliefs Competing Implementation Partners: John Snow, Inc., Kisumu County 
17% tasks Health and Immunization Offices
Sick child,
side effects Donor: USAID
Contact Information: Lora Shimp, Senior Technical Officer, John 
Snow, Inc., lshimp@jsi.com 
6% Not knowing 
or forgetting date
mHEALTH COMPENDIUM  VOLUME 5  n  95
