 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
MOBILE MONEY FOR HEALTH  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
November 2013 
This publication was produced for review by the United States Agency for International Development.  
It was prepared by the Health Finance and Governance Project. 
 
 
The Health Finance and Governance Project  
USAID’s Health Finance and Governance (HFG) project will help to improve health in developing countries by 
expanding people’s access to health care. Led by Abt Associates, the project team will work with partner countries 
to increase their domestic resources for health, manage those precious resources more effectively, and make wise 
purchasing decisions. As a result, this five-year, $209 million global project will increase the use of both primary 
and priority health services, including HIV/AIDS, tuberculosis, malaria, and reproductive health services. Designed 
to fundamentally strengthen health systems, HFG will support countries as they navigate the economic transitions 
needed to achieve universal health care.  
November 2013 
Cooperative Agreement No:  AID-OAA-A-12-00080 
Submitted to:  Scott Stewart, AOR 
Office of Health Systems 
Bureau for Global Health 
United States Agency for International Development 
And 
Ishrat Z Husain 
Senior Health Adviser, Africa Bureau 
United States Agency for International Development 
 
 
 
 
 
Recommended Citation: Haas, Sherri, Marilyn Heymann, Pamela Riley, and Abeba Taddese. 2013. Mobile 
Money for Health. Bethesda, MD: Health Finance and Governance Project, Abt Associates Inc. 
 
Abt Associates Inc. | 4550 Montgomery Avenue, Suite 800 North | Bethesda, 
Maryland 20814 
T: 301.347.5000 | F: 301.652.3916 | www.abtassociates.com 
 
 
Broad Branch Associates | Development Alternatives Inc. (DAI) | Futures Institute  
| Johns Hopkins Bloomberg School of Public Health (JHSPH) | Results for Development Institute (R4D)  
| RTI International | Training Resources Group, Inc. (TRG)  
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
MOBILE MONEY FOR HEALTH 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
DISCLAIMER 
The author’s views expressed in this publication do not necessarily reflect the views of the United States Agency 
for International Development (USAID) or the United States government. 
 iii  
 
CONTENTS 
Contents .............................................................................................................. v 
Abbreviations and Acronyms .......................................................................... vi 
1. Executive Summary ................................................................................. 1 
2. Background ............................................................................................... 3 
3. Mobile Money in Context ........................................................................ 4 
3.1 Mobile Phone Prevalence .................................................................................................. 4 
3.2 Mobile Money Overview ................................................................................................... 4 
4. Mobile Money and Health: Potential Benefits and Challenges ........... 7 
4.1 Mobile Money at the Client Level ................................................................................... 8 
4.2 Mobile Money at the Provider Level .............................................................................. 9 
4.3 Mobile Money at the Program Level .............................................................................. 9 
4.4 Challenges in Mobile Money Use for Health ............................................................. 10 
5. Mobile Money Relevance to mHealth .................................................. 13 
5.1 Subsidizing Information Services with Financial Transaction Revenues.............. 13 
5.2 Attracting New Corporate Sector Partners .............................................................. 14 
5.3 Sharing Agent Networks ................................................................................................. 14 
6. Conclusions.............................................................................................. 16 
References ......................................................................................................... 17 
Appendix A. Case Studies ............................................................................... 19 
Case Study 1: MicroEnsure ............................................................................. 22 
Case Study 2: D-tree International ................................................................ 25 
Case Study 3: Marie Stopes International .................................................... 28 
Appendix B. Additional Resources ................................................................ 31 
 
List of Figures  
Figure 3.1 A Typical Cash-In and Cash-Out Agent Network .................................................... 5 
Figure 3.2 GSMA Map of Mobile Money Deployment in Africa ................................................ 6 
Figure 4.1 Financial Flows in a Health System ................................................................................ 8 
v 
 
ABBREVIATIONS AND ACRONYMS 
2G second generation 
ANC antenatal care 
CCT conditional cash transfers 
CGAP World Bank’s Consultative Group to Assist the Poor 
CHW community health workers 
GSMA Groupe Spéciale Mobile Association (mobile operators) 
HFG USAID Global Health Financing and Governance Project 
ILO International Labour Organization 
IT information technology 
mHealth mobile phone–based health interventions 
MSK Marie Stopes Kenya 
MSM Marie Stopes Madagascar 
MMU Mobile Money for the Unbanked 
NHIF National Hospital Insurance Fund 
NGO nongovernmental organization 
SIM subscriber identity module 
SMS short message service or text messages  
TB tuberculosis 
TBA traditional birth attendant 
USAID United States Agency for International Development 
USSD unstructured supplementary service data 
UTM Union Technique de la Mutualité Malienne 
ZISSP Zambia Integrated Systems Strengthening Program 
vi 
 
1. EXECUTIVE SUMMARY 
Mobile money enables funds to be deposited, transferred, and withdrawn electronically through mobile 
phone accounts.  
Fueled by the success of Kenya’s M-Pesa mobile payment platform, mobile money is a rapidly growing 
alternative to cash in developing countries. Whereas mobile money services have been launched in more 
than 70 countries with the majority of current deployments in sub-Saharan Africa, most have not yet 
reached significant scale. The United States Agency for International Development (USAID) is 
committed to accelerating adoption and uptake of mobile money based on its potential to increase 
financial inclusion, root out corruption, and provide economic benefits to communities. The USAID 
Global Health Finance and Governance (HFG) Project seeks to promote the use of mobile money 
specifically to strengthen health systems.  
Mobile money provides unique opportunities in the health sector. It can be integrated into existing 
activities—replacing cash flows—to improve efficiency, accountability, and transparency in financial 
transactions. It also opens up potential to improve scalability of subsidy and incentive schemes and to 
expand access to financial services such as credit and savings.  
This paper reviews current use cases and potential applications of mobile money in health, including (a) 
bulk payments for salaries and per diems, (b) conditional cash transfer and pay-for-performance 
schemes, (c) collection of health insurance premiums, and (d) management of voucher schemes, with the 
overall objective of bringing attention to the benefits and challenges of using mobile money in the health 
sector. The three detailed case studies included in appendix A represent some of the most documented 
examples of mobile money and health. Although the mobile money industry is continuing to grow 
rapidly, use cases in the health sector are limited. This small but promising collection of use cases is 
expected to expand as evidence that supports the potential benefits of mobile money in the health 
sector continues to grow.  
Health programs are exploring uses of mobile money at three levels. At the client level, mobile money 
platforms are used to save and pay for services and to receive remittances to cover high out-of-pocket 
health costs. In Kenya, mobile money is commonly referred to as “emergency money”—funds provided 
by family or friends to obtain immediate medical treatment. Changamka is a health-savings platform in 
Kenya that allows users to earmark funds for specific services such as maternity care, thus increasing 
payment options to encourage antenatal care (ANC) and institutional deliveries.  
At the provider level, electronic-payment platforms can save providers the time and expense needed 
to travel to cities to cash paychecks, and they can be used to facilitate timely payment of performance-
based incentives. D-tree International increased safe deliveries in Tanzania through a mobile phone–
based program that empowers traditional birth attendants (TBAs) to refer women with obstetric 
emergencies for delivery in health care facilities. Payments received through mobile money encourage 
future referrals and compensate the TBAs for lost income that they would have earned attending home 
births.  
At the program management level, mobile money can improve operations by reducing the risks and 
costs of distributing cash payments for per diems at trainings. To improve management of its voucher 
scheme, Marie Stopes Madagascar automated its claims settlement process using mobile money to 
reimburse providers. The change resulted in increasing provider willingness to participate in the voucher 
scheme because using mobile money reduced delays in reimbursement.  
 1  
Mobile money is increasingly being integrated into broader mobile phone–based health interventions 
(mHealth) that offer new opportunities for sustaining mHealth applications, which remain largely 
dependent on donor funding. Integrating mobile money and mHealth programs may be a way to 
generate new sources of revenue and to attract additional financing partners. In one innovative 
partnership, Tanzania mobile operator Tigo and microinsurance provider MicroEnsure teamed up to 
provide a mobile phone–based insurance product. Tigo provided free insurance premiums to its high-use 
network customers, thereby generating significant demand for the insurance products. Mobile financial 
products for health provide strong incentives for mobile network operators to use their vast marketing 
resources to promote service uptake because by doing so, they build customer loyalty and generate 
network use.  
Just as mobile money applications can provide benefits to the health sector, the health sector can serve 
as a catalyst for mobile money by generating the demand necessary to sustain and to develop mobile 
money platforms. For example, health programs can also serve as “anchor clients” that provide 
guaranteed users who allow the mobile operator to expand the reach of its platform and to increase 
agent locations. As mobile money ecosystems continue to develop, opportunities provided to the health 
sector can also be expected to grow, but more research on applications is needed to better understand 
the potential mobile money brings to the health sector. 
  
2 
 
2. BACKGROUND 
Mobile phones are one of the fastest-spreading technological innovations with an unprecedented rate of 
adoption. Between 2000 and 2010, mobile phone subscriptions in low- and middle-income countries 
increased by more than 1,500 percent, from 4 to 72 subscriptions per 100 inhabitants (World Bank 
2012). As access to mobile phones expands in developing markets, money transfer systems based on 
mobile phone technology (mobile money) are being leveraged to tackle development challenges across 
many different sectors, including agriculture, education, health, and finance. 
The USAID-funded Global Health Finance and Governance (HFG) Project is working with partner 
countries to increase domestic resources for health, to strengthen governance capacity, and to improve 
public health management. Designed to fundamentally strengthen health systems, the core objective of 
the HFG project is to improve health outcomes by expanding access to priority health services. Through 
HFG, USAID is supporting cross-cutting activities to strengthen health systems including promotion of 
mobile money to improve the efficiency, security, and transparency of financial transactions in the health 
sector. HFG’s mobile money team is facilitating sharing of knowledge, best practices, and lessons learned 
in implementing mobile money solutions. The team collaborates frequently with mobile money partners, 
including USAID’s Mobile Solutions team, and with implementing partners, including the Better than 
Cash Alliance, country-level implementers, and program managers.  
Commissioned by USAID’s Africa Bureau, the aim of this paper is to introduce mobile money’s potential 
in the health sector and to highlight innovations, trends, and opportunities for public health 
professionals, implementers, and partners. To gather information about promising applications, HFG 
conducted desk research and interviews with more than 30 stakeholders active in this area, including the 
World Bank Consultative Group to Assist the Poor (CGAP), International Labour Organization (ILO), 
Microinsurance Innovation Facility, the mHealth Alliance, NetHope, Groupe Spéciale Mobile Association 
(GSMA), the Bill and Melinda Gates Foundation, the Rockefeller Foundation, consultants, mobile 
operators, mobile money platform providers, and health programs using or contemplating using mobile 
money.  
A key learning from these interviews is that while there is tremendous momentum around mobile 
money, little focus has been given to date on the intersection of mobile money and health systems. 
Mobile money is gaining recognition as a potential vehicle for improving access to services, but it 
remains largely under-utilized in the health sector. Throughout the paper, reference is made to three of 
the most documented mobile money use cases in the health sector: Marie Stopes’s voucher 
management system, MicroEnsure’s mobile insurance products, and D-tree’s incentives for health 
workers. In addition to these case studies (see appendix A), a number of organizations are in the early 
phases of planning health-related mobile money applications. This paper highlights mobile money’s 
potential in the health sector, drawing on both actual use cases and likely applications based on 
observed uses in other sectors. This paper sets the stage to invite discussion about use of mobile money 
applications in the health sector as well as to invite contributions to the growing collection of case 
studies. More in-depth reports will follow over the life of the HFG project as new evidence of mobile 
money’s effect on health is generated.  
The paper is presented in five sections. Section 1 is an executive summary. Section 2, or background, 
summarizes the paper’s objectives. Section 3 defines mobile money and briefly provides background 
context for its use both broadly and in the health sector. Section 4 illustrates potential benefits and 
challenges of using mobile money in the health sector. Section 5 explores synergies between mHealth 
and mobile money. The final section draws early conclusions about the use of mobile money in health 
while pointing to the need for additional evidence to assess benefits to the health sector. 
3 
3. MOBILE MONEY IN CONTEXT 
3.1 Mobile Phone Prevalence 
In 2012, there were more than 3.2 billion mobile phone subscribers worldwide. There were over 6.7 
billion mobile connections, which includes the multiple devices or subscriber identity module (SIM) 
cards, owned by many (Kearney and GSMA 2013). Five billion of the connections are standard second-
generation (2G) technology, providing voice, messaging, and low-bandwidth data connections. In the 
Africa and Asia Pacific regions, mobile connections are predominately prepaid with 96 percent and 82 
percent, respectively, functioning on pay-as-you-go rather than on contract connections. Prepaid 
business models allow individuals who may not have bank accounts or other documentation necessary 
for entering a contract to nevertheless have access to mobile phones. 
Access to mobile phones has spread both economically, or down into the market—within the reach of 
many poor households—and geographically—available in rural areas where landlines and even electricity 
may not exist. This spread in access to mobile phones has unlocked opportunities to reach underserved 
populations by expanding access to services, including healthcare and financial services.  
3.2 Mobile Money Overview 
Mobile money systems vary across countries and 
between service providers (see box 3.1). The most Box 3.1 Mobile Money Defined  
common model establishes a network of agents—points “Mobile money” consists of financial 
at which users can convert between cash and e-money transactions that are conducted using a 
(see figure 3.1). Agents recruited as mobile money mobile phone, where value is stored 
vendors often have other roles in the community, such virtually (e-money) in an account associated 
as retail shop owners and airtime kiosk operators. E- with a SIM card. Individuals can deposit cash 
money stored on a customer’s mobile account can be onto a mobile account, make transactions 
transferred by text messages to other users who, in turn, between accounts, and withdraw funds as 
cash. Mobile money transactions are 
can store the funds in their accounts, transfer them, or 
compatible with basic phones and do not 
cash out at an agent. Although the amount of money require Internet access. 
allowed in an account varies across systems, mobile 
money systems tend to be designed for smaller and more 
frequent transactions.  
  
4 
 
Figure 3.1 A Typical Cash-In and Cash-Out Agent Network 
Source: Authors 
 
The most common types of mobile money transaction are person-to-person transactions. Kenya’s M-
Pesa mobile money platform achieved wide success with its “Send Money Home” marketing campaign, 
which was directed at income earners in urban areas with rural family members. As mobile money 
ecosystems grow, additional functions are often added. Other transaction types include consumer-to-
business (e.g., paying a utility bill), business-to-business (e.g., settling supply costs), and government-to-
consumer (e.g., social welfare payments). Health sector applications can be found in each of these 
categories. 
As mobile phone–based financial systems develop, some grow from simple individual transactions to 
include more sophisticated finance and banking components. Mobile network operators have driven the 
growth of mobile money, including the first money transfer system—the widely popular M-Pesa 
program—which registered two-thirds of Kenya’s adult population within five years of its 2007 launch 
(Buku and Meredith 2013). Mobile payment systems may also be led by banks or operated by third 
parties, with regulatory bodies in some countries requiring bank involvement to varying degrees. Bank-
led or bank-partnered mobile money systems may allow for connection to an individual’s bank account, 
adding function to both the bank and e-money accounts. Third-party platforms, such as bKash in 
Bangladesh, offer payment services on all mobile networks, helping widespread adoption of mobile 
money and lowering barriers to its use.  
Safaricom’s enormous success with M-Pesa in Kenya led the way for the launch of mobile money 
systems in numerous countries around the world. By October 2013, the GSMA Mobile Money for the 
Unbanked Deployment Tracker reported more than 200 live mobile money services and more than 100 
planned deployments in developing countries around the world. Sub-Saharan Africa alone accounts for 
53 percent of all live mobile money services, which are available in 36 of the 47 countries in the region 
(GSMA 2013). (See figure 3.2) 
  
5 
Figure 3.2 GSMA Map of Mobile Money Deployment in Africa 
 
Source: GSMA: Mobile for Development Intelligence. 
 
Mobile money services have been launched in more than 70 countries, with the majority of the current 
deployments in sub-Saharan Africa. In 2012, mobile money outlets outnumbered bank branches in at 
least 28 countries and in 40 countries that had at least two mobile money services. Although a 
substantial number of mobile money systems are in operation, the majority of the systems have not yet 
scaled to a level of Kenya’s M-Pesa payment systems. In Kenya, a supportive regulatory environment, 
dominant mobile network operator, targeted marketing campaigns, extensive agent network, high levels 
of financial literacy, and a high demand for domestic transfer services are among the factors that have 
contributed to the rapid expansion of M-Pesa. Countries that have tried to emulate Kenya’s payment 
system, but with less successful results, are now developing strategies to address country-specific 
factors. As the number, location, and size of mobile money systems continue to grow, so too will the 
opportunities for utilizing this new approach in the health sector.  
6 
 
4. MOBILE MONEY AND HEALTH: 
POTENTIAL BENEFITS AND CHALLENGES  
Mobile money provides unique opportunities in the health sector. It can be used to replace cash flows, 
thus bringing efficiency to health programs by enhancing data, operations, and program management. 
Successful use of mobile money can increase opportunities 
for financial support, can scale up programs, and can pave 
Box 4.1 Illustrative Uses of  
the way for developing more complex programs that 
otherwise would not have been feasible. Box 4.1 lists a few Mobile Money for Health 
examples of how mobile money is used in the health sector. 
 Facilitates person-to-person transfers at 
Those examples are not necessarily specific to the health scale, such as conditional cash transfer 
sector, but point more broadly to the efficiency, security, programs for dispersed populations to 
and transparency that mobile payment solutions can bring. increase use of service 
Health systems in developing countries rely on large  Enables collection of funds from hard-
volumes of cash transactions. This reliance on cash for to-reach locations, such as routine 
financial transactions contributes to inefficiencies, enables small payments for health insurance 
leakage, and carries security risks. On the patient side, premiums 
cash is often the means of payment for services at health  Increases safety of health workforce by 
facilities, for drugs at pharmacies, for health service reducing need for cash transactions at 
vouchers and insurance premiums where available, and for clinics 
the transport to treatment. On the provider side, cash is  Allows for targeted and timely 
prevalent in transactions ranging from stock purchase, to assistance in emergencies, such as taxi 
allowances, and to voucher reimbursement. At the payments in the event of obstructed 
program and country levels, cash may be used for births  
training per diems, among other applications. Thus, there 
 Protects against catastrophic financial 
are numerous points within the health sector at which setbacks by offering enabling earmarked 
mobile money can replace cash and enhance accountability, savings for health emergencies  
improve operational efficiency, and lower transaction costs, 
 Provides permanent real-time records 
as demonstrated in Box 4.1.  
for bulk payments such as per diems or 
Mobile money use in the health sector is still an emerging salaries 
practice. Although increasing, the number of applications 
and pilot programs is still limited in size and scope. This 
paper highlights mobile money’s potential in the health sector, drawing both on actual use cases and on 
likely applications that are based on observed uses in other sectors. The three detailed case studies 
presented in appendix A showcase the first wave of mobile money and health innovators, thereby 
highlighting challenges and successes and drawing lessons for others who are exploring mobile money in 
health to consider.  
  
7 
Figure 4.1 Financial Flows in a Health System 
 
Source: authors 
 
4.1 Mobile Money at the Client Level 
Mobile money may increase access to health care in two ways. First, it can lower financial barriers by 
increasing access to funds at crucial times. High out-of-pocket health costs are a significant barrier to 
accessing health services in many countries. Safe and reliable financial services can play an important role 
in improving access to savings and credit and facilitating the transfer of remittances and emergency 
funds. In this way, the use of mobile money can lead to better financial management and, potentially, 
improved access to care. For example, when funds are needed for urgent care, individuals with access to 
mobile money can quickly receive transfers from remote friends and family. In Kenya, it is common to 
hear of mobile money referred to as “emergency money”—funds provided by family or friends to obtain 
immediate medical treatment (Haas and Nagarajan 2011). Providing conditional or direct aid through 
mobile money enables more accountable and secure transactions without the security risks of cash.  
Second, mobile money can expand access to financial services such as insurance by facilitating premium 
collection and claims payments through mobile account–based enrollment in the insurance scheme. 
Mobile money payment platforms reduce transaction costs when compared to the prohibitive expense 
of face-to-face cash payments for routine premium collection. Mobile-enabled insurance services 
facilitate outreach and education, automate transactions processing, and expand access to insurance 
products for hard-to-reach populations. 
New partnership models such as the one between mobile network provider Tigo and MicroEnsure, a 
non-governmental organization (NGO) that provides mass-market insurance products, have opened the 
way for design of an innovative microinsurance product that is being delivered on a large scale to Tigo 
clients in Tanzania and Ghana (Case Study 1 in appendix A). Claims are paid via a mobile money service, 
and the insurance premiums are deducted from the customer’s airtime balance.  In effect, the airtime 
balance acts as an account that can be transformed back into funds to pay the premium.  This method 
has enabled the service providers to secure premium payments even when users may not have sufficient 
funds in their accounts, thereby expanding the reach of insurance by leveraging consumer investments in 
airtime.  
8 
 
4.2 Mobile Money at the Provider Level 
Inefficient mechanisms for disbursing salary payments, training fees, and financial incentives are 
particularly problematic for health workers in remote and hard-to-reach areas, and affect the motivation 
and performance of the workforce. Payments through mobile phones can save health workers the time 
and expense of traveling to nearby cities to find bank branches or payment centers to access their funds. 
Mobile money can be used to automatically pay salaries as well as to pay for additional incentives (rent, 
utilities, transportation) for rural health workers. This method of payment can decrease the 
administrative burden of cash payment as well as travel and security costs. It can also provide increased 
benefits for health workers as mobile payments may allow faster and more frequent distribution of 
funds.  
Pay-for-performance schemes and financial incentives to improve health worker motivation, 
performance, and retention are widely used in health programs, but often face operational challenges. 
Mobile money services offer employers the ability to make payments to health workers that are timely 
and that can be audited. 
D-tree International, a U.S.-based NGO, develops clinical decision-support tools on mobile devices to 
improve the quality of health care (Case Study 2 in appendix A). D-tree has integrated mobile money 
into its program to improve maternal and child health by increasing safe deliveries in Tanzania. In 
Zanzibar, women often deliver at home with the assistance of a traditional birth assistant (TBA). D-tree 
is training TBAs to screen women for high-risk conditions and obstetric emergencies using a mobile-
enabled guide. TBAs refer and accompany mothers with high-risk complications to health facilities for 
delivery, and they provide at-home post-partum care. The attendant receives payment from D-tree via 
mobile money to encourage future referrals and as compensation for lost income that would have been 
earned attending home births. The mobile money channel is also used to fund emergency transport for 
the women to health facilities. D-tree has seen health facility deliveries increase from 30 to 70 percent 
among program beneficiaries.  
4.3 Mobile Money at the Program Level 
Mobile money improves transparency in cash systems and 
Box 4.2 Tools to Assess Cost 
can reduce both actual as well as the appearance of financial 
Savings in Mobile Money 
impropriety. It also enables financial transactions to be 
Applications 
independently verified and tracked and often lowers 
administrative burdens. Replacing cash transactions with NetHope, under a USAID cooperative 
electronic payments reduces the likelihood of leakage by agreement, has developed several tools 
to assess costs of mobile money 
decreasing the number of hands through which money 
applications at 
passes. Use of mobile money for payment of workshop per 
http://solutionscenter.nethope.org/progra
diems and incidental expenses removes the financial logistics ms/payment-innovation. The tools include 
burden and any security risks that large volumes of cash may a survey tool for organizations to map 
bring to the trainers. It also minimizes the number of hands current use of cash and electronic 
through which cash is passed. In Tanzania, the NGO titled payment methods in their program 
Pathfinder International transitioned from using cash operations. A costing tool provides a 
payments in its programs to using mobile money at a national reference guide for comparing costs 
level after a successful pilot program. Pathfinder Tanzania has (financial and nonfinancial) of using cash 
since brought mobile payments to program scale, and more and electronic payments.   
than 20,000 transactions have been sent to program  
recipients, including community health workers, supervisors, 
9 
and even local government counterparts. USAID is supporting the development of tools for program 
managers to evaluate the financial and nonfinancial costs of using both cash and mobile payments in their 
programs (see box 4.2).  
Electronic payment systems can also enable scalable innovations that would not otherwise be possible. 
Marie Stopes Madagascar (MSM, Case Study 3 in appendix A) integrated mobile money into its claims 
management system when it launched a new reproductive health voucher program in 2010. Service 
providers use text messaging to submit a unique voucher code with their claim, and receive payment 
from MSM via the clinic’s choice of mobile money service providers (one of three major systems 
operating in the country). Using mobile phones to collect details of voucher redemption and to provide 
reimbursement to clinics has increased program efficiency. Service providers are reimbursed within a 
few days, rather than weeks or months. Overall, program management has been improved by data that 
are available immediately through the system. MSM anticipates a more general transition from paper-
based systems to an electronic system for client receipt of voucher, client redemption, and provider 
reimbursement. 
Mobile money may also provide program efficiencies and scalability in conditional cash transfer (CCT) 
programs. CCTs can be an effective means of increasing the use of health services and improving health 
outcomes (Cueto 2009).  Pathfinder and government partners in Nigeria are exploring the use of mobile 
money as a channel to distribute CCTs to pregnant women to encourage antenatal care (ANC) and 
institutional delivery (Marion McNabb interview Sept. 2013).  
4.4 Challenges in Mobile Money Use for Health  
Mobile money services face a number of barriers to growth in many countries.  The ability of health 
programs to use mobile money successfully will depend on how widespread mobile money is in a 
particular setting. Health applications in and of themselves will not ensure rapid penetration of the 
market, but health programs may play a role in addressing those challenges. Most important, health 
institutions using mobile money can serve as an anchor client with a trusted role in society that can 
vouch for the benefits of a new financial medium. A few of these challenges and the role that the health 
sector can play in addressing them are highlighted here. In addition, key lessons are shown in box 4.3.  
 Users may not understand how to use mobile money or its potential benefits. Health 
programs can work with the mobile operators to encourage mutually beneficial client education. 
Program staff members may resist the transition to using unfamiliar services to access their hard-
earned money. Trust and operational knowledge are needed, as well as support to handle questions 
and issues as they arise.  
 Network of mobile money agents—the cash-in and cash-out points—may not be 
extensive enough or available in the areas in which a program would like to work. 
Additionally, available agent locations may not all belong to the same mobile money platform. 
Programs should stay open to working with more than one operator. Mobile operators are looking 
for growth in their systems, and, to the extent that the health sector can provide a reliable client in 
an area, additional agent locations may be put in place. Frontline health workers may also play a role 
in cross-training as mobile money agents, potentially providing an incentive for them to work in 
remote areas.  
 Fragmented mobile money systems may make it difficult to transfer money from one 
payment platform to another. Lack of interoperability between platforms can limit value of the 
service and increase transaction fees. For example, having parallel agent networks can duplicate 
operating costs. Such issues must be addressed at the policy level, along with other mobile money 
regulations that balance the need for consumer protection with services that are easy to use. Health 
10 
 
sector institutions and donors can advocate for policies to promote economic transactions, 
especially in rural areas without access to banking resources.  
 Transaction fees charged by mobile network operators can serve as a barrier to mobile 
money use. Fees charged for mobile money transactions vary by operator and often by the size of 
the transactions. Moreover, systems that do work together may charge higher transaction fees for 
transfers made to other mobile money platforms. Health programs may choose to cover the costs 
of transaction fees for recipients and to help educate clients about fees that may be charged. 
Box 4.3 Key Lessons Learned in Implementing Mobile Money for Health 
Strong Partnerships—D-tree’s experience in Tanzania (see Case Study 2 in appendix A) reinforces the 
importance of strong partnerships between program stakeholders. In collaboration with Zantel—the mobile 
money partner—D-tree delivered training on mobile money to traditional birth attendants. The organizations 
collaborated with the health facilities and communities to encourage local ownership and buy-in to the 
program. D-tree chose its mobile partners by their availability and location of agents to serve as cash-out 
points, by their negotiation of transaction fees, and by their comprehensiveness and how easy it was to use 
their back-end systems to support program needs.  
Plan for Adjustments during Rollout—Originally, Marie Stopes Madagascar (MSM) intended to work with 
only one mobile operating partner to implement its reproductive health voucher program (see Case Study 3 in 
appendix A). However, because of the location of mobile money agents and their service providers, MSM 
found it necessary to work with all mobile network operators in Madagascar to ensure that accessible cash-out 
options were in place for their health service providers. Whereas getting the system up and running smoothly 
was a challenge at the onset, Marie Stopes International is now actively looking to build on the success of the 
voucher program and exploring the possibility of using mobile money to replace cash flows in its other 
programs. 
 
 
 
 
11 
 
5. MOBILE MONEY RELEVANCE TO MHEALTH 
The use of mobile money in health programs is emerging as a subset of the broader category of mobile 
phone–based health interventions (mHealth) applications. Integration of mobile payment platforms can 
provide new revenue opportunities and potential partnerships to sustain mHealth interventions. 
mHealth covers a broad range of applications using mobile technologies to improve health outcomes 
(Labrique et al. 2013). Categories of mHealth include the following: 
 Direct consumer services to improve access to health care, such as appointment reminders, 
awareness messages, personalized health information, behavior change communications, help lines, 
medication alerts, and resource databases  
 Healthcare provider tools to improve quality of care, such as point-of-care decision support, remote 
consultation and supervision, peer support groups, case management software, job aids, and other 
training resources 
 Program management applications, including registries and vital events tracking, electronic medical 
records, disease surveillance, data collection and analysis, and supply tracking systems to improve 
decision-making  
Sustaining and scaling those applications has been a challenge, and most interventions remain dependent 
on donor funding (mHealth Alliance, 2013). The integration of mobile payments into other mobile 
financial services provides the potential to address the barriers to sustainable business models. Mobile 
money may help sustain mHealth interventions through a number of pathways including bundling 
services, engaging new partners, and sharing registration costs. 
5.1 Subsidizing Information Services with Financial Transaction 
Revenues  
One barrier to mHealth sustainability is the challenge of monetizing digital information, even in 
developed countries. In a recent study of more than a dozen commercial enterprises in Africa using 
mobile technology to serve the poor, only Kenya’s M-Pesa mobile money service was found to be 
profitable (Cooper 2013). The authors note that it is rarely possible to recoup the full cost of selling 
information and that business models are needed to combine intangible services such as health advice 
(which is difficult to sell) with more concrete and immediate inputs (that people are willing to pay for). 
By packaging health information services with mobile financial services such as credit or insurance, the 
financial transactions for which consumers may be willing to pay can help to subsidize service provided 
through mHealth applications.  
Kenya’s Changamka (www.Changamka.co.ke) service offers various mobile savings accounts earmarked 
for outpatient and maternity care including health facility–based delivery. Subscribers use the accounts 
to plan, save, and pay for health care through private earmarked mobile accounts with secure ability to 
track deposits and payouts. Subscriber benefits include discounted prices and predictable service fees at 
participating providers, and providers benefit from more reliable settlement of accounts. Those and 
similar mobile savings accounts provide an opportunity to leverage communications channels that 
confirm transactions and health account balances to send health content as well.  Service providers such 
as Changamka would financially benefit from subsidizing health advisory content to the degree that such 
services increase the motivation of subscribers to save through the mobile financial platform. Bundling 
13 
financial and information services would provide substantial economies of scale in formative research, 
marketing, registration, and billing.  
In addition, acceptability of modest user fees for health information may be greater if combined with 
mobile savings accounts. Consumers who regularly store, transmit, and withdraw funds on their phones 
may be more likely to use their accounts for telemedicine services, mobile health games, or other 
premium mHealth applications. Mobile financial services may also facilitate the collection of mobile 
numbers from beneficiaries to target for health information services.  
5.2 Attracting New Corporate Sector Partners  
Because mobile money has the potential to accelerate commercial activity generally, it is more likely to 
attract private sector investment. This is demonstrated by the rapid growth in mobile money services 
throughout sub-Saharan Africa. Mobile operators charge small transaction fees for transmitting and 
withdrawing funds from mobile money accounts. Because mobile money services provide higher 
likelihood of profitability than health information services, mobile operators are more likely to subsidize 
health information services that increase the use of mobile money. Using the mobile savings account as 
an example, a mobile money provider would have the incentive to bundle appointment reminders or 
medication adherence messages to stimulate regular savings and use of the mobile money account. This 
motivation is different from mobile operator discounts for mHealth airtime under corporate social 
responsibility programs because mobile money use affects their bottom line.  
The MicroEnsure–Tigo partnership (see appendix A) illustrates this dynamic. As discussed earlier, 
MicroEnsure introduced a mobile-based health insurance product through which subscribers registered 
on their phones. They paid their premiums and received their claims through mobile money accounts. 
Tigo provided free insurance premiums to its high-use network customers, thus generating significant 
demand for the insurance products. Those rewards provided mutual benefits to the operator: the 
rewards built customer loyalty among the most valued customers and generated additional network use 
by adding the mobile insurance transactions, thus covering the costs of the free subsidies. Similar 
motivations do not exist for mHealth information services, which may be offered free to users and 
subsidized by donors, government, or corporate philanthropy. Mobile financial products for health 
provide strong incentives for operators to use their vast marketing resources to promote service 
uptake.  
5.3 Sharing Agent Networks  
Community health workers (CHW) play a critical role in the delivery of health services. They are 
trusted members of the community, often serving as the first point of contact within the health care 
system. Whereas CHW functions are diverse and depend on country settings, typical duties often 
include (a) education and awareness building; (b) detection and referral of complicated health cases; and 
(c) data collection for client registration, case management, and disease surveillance.  
Similarly, mobile money agents are also a type of frontline worker—the face of mobile network 
operators—serving as the first point of contact for financial transactions among the poor and unbanked 
populations. In the agents’ roles as primary cash-in and cash-out points, they develop a clear 
understanding of customer preferences, are called upon for financial advice, and must become trusted 
members of the community. A major barrier to mobile money uptake is the lack of a well-trained agent 
network to serve and address the financial needs of the community, with the greatest effects felt in 
remote areas. One way to address this challenge is to explore synergies between CHWs and mobile 
money agents, thereby leveraging the trust they have built in communities as frontline workers. Training 
14 
 
CHWs to serve as “last mile” mobile money agents in hard-to-reach areas could extend the reach of 
both health services and mobile money. 
In addition to a shortage of mobile money agents, rural areas also face critical shortages of health 
workers. Burdened with high case loads and inadequate training, CHWs may resist mobile data 
collection tools because the tools are perceived as increasing their workload for minimum reward. By 
expanding their role to include mobile money transactions, CHWs gain potential to earn revenue as a 
mobile money agent and can receive immediate financial incentives for surveillance and data collection 
responsibilities. Use cases have not surfaced yet, but several health programs are considering pilots. The 
additional revenue potential could be used to incentivize health workers to take up posts in remote 
areas. CHWs who are trained as mobile money agents would be well positioned to educate clients 
about the benefits of expanded access to financial services, including paying for emergency 
transportation to health services or enrolling in insurance. Some health programs are beginning to 
explore the challenges and benefits of this approach, which has potential to improve financial and health 
access among the hard-to-reach populations.  
  
15 
 
6. CONCLUSIONS 
Mobile money is a rapidly growing alternative to cash transactions in developing countries. Health 
systems and mobile money are well positioned for mutual benefit. 
Moreover, mobile money in health is a growing subset of mHealth applications. It provides new 
opportunities for revenue and potential partners to sustain and expand mHealth interventions. The 
health sector can serve as a catalyst for mobile money, thus generating demand necessary to sustain and 
to develop mobile money platforms. Health programs can also serve as anchor clients—guaranteed 
users that allow the mobile operator to expand the reach of its platform and increase agent locations. 
The three detailed case studies included in this paper illustrate just a few of the current health-sector 
uses of mobile money. As mobile money ecosystems continue to develop, opportunities provided to the 
health sector can also be expected to grow, but more research is needed to better understand the 
potential that mobile money brings to the health sector. 
Research conducted to date on the use of mobile money has focused primarily on how it is used by the 
poor and on the potential economic development and financial inclusion benefits. As mobile money 
becomes more widely adopted in the health sector, research is needed to evaluate mobile money 
benefits for health. Strong evidence and in-depth documentation of experiences will increase awareness 
of the value of mobile payment systems to the health sector, will reduce start-up hurdles, and will open 
the door for more partnerships and greater innovation.  
Specifically, additional evidence is needed to assess the following: 
 The extent to which mobile money use increases uptake of health services, expands access to 
services for the poor, increases provider productivity, and improves health program financial 
management 
 Cost savings, operational efficiencies, or reduced leakage that are realized through adoption of 
mobile money in health programs (see box 4.2) for a description of a few tools that have been 
developed to address questions around cost savings) 
Finally, although mobile money use in the health sector is still an emerging practice and evidence 
demonstrating benefits to the health sector is limited, innovative applications, including the ones 
reviewed in this paper, are helping to showcase mobile money’s potential as a vehicle for improving 
access, quality, and affordability of health services for the poor. 
16 
 
REFERENCES 
Buku, Mercy, and Michael W. Meredith. 2013. “Safaricom and M-PESA in Kenya: Financial Inclusion and 
Financial Integrity,” Washington Journal of Law, Technology and Arts 8 (3): 375–401. 
Cooper, Ansulie, and Michael Kubzansky. 2013. m-Enabled Inclusive Business Models: Applications for 
Health. Bethesda, MD: SHOPS Project, Abt Associates. 
Cueto, Santiago. 2009. “Conditional Cash-Transfer Programmes in Developing Countries,” The Lancet 
374 (9706): 1952–953. doi:10.1016/S0140-6736(09)61640-8.  
GSMA (Groupe Spéciale Mobile Association). 2013. “Initial Findings of 2013 Mobile Money Adoption 
Survey.” http://www.gsma.com/newsroom/gsma-releases-initial. 
Haas, Sherri, and Geetha Nagarajan. 2011. “M-PESA and Access to Health in Kenya.” Report, Financial 
Services Assessment, Iris Center, University of Maryland, College Park. 
http://www.fsassessment.umd.edu/publications/mpesa-health-kenya.html. 
Kearney, A.T., and GSMA (Groupe Spéciale Mobile Association). 2013. The Mobile Economy 2013. 
London: A. T. Kearney and GSMA. http://www.gsma.com/mobileeconomy/. 
Labrique, Alain, Lavanya Vasudevan, Erica Kochi, Robert Fabricant, and Garrett Mehl. 2013. “mHealth 
Innovations as Health System Strengthening Tools: 12 Common Applications and a Visual 
Framework,” Global Health: Science and Practice. doi: 10.9745/GHSP-D-13-00031.  
mHealth Alliance. 2013. Sustainable Financing for Mobile Health (mHealth): Options and opportunities 
for mHealth financial models in low and middle-income countries  
NetHope Payment Innovations Tools. Retrieved October 2013, from 
utm_source=HFG+Mobile+Money&utm_campaign=40612ff310-
MM4H_Newsletter9_26_2013&utm_medium=email&utm_term=0_3c2e0c237a-40612ff310-
82703209.  
Pénicaud, Claire. 2013. State of the Industry—Results from the 2012 Global Money Adoption Survey. 
London: GSMA. http://www.gsma.com/mobilefordevelopment/state-of-the-industry-2012.  
World Bank. 2012. Information and Communications for Development 2012: Maximizing Mobile. 
Washington, DC: World Bank. doi: 10.1596/978-0-8213-8991-1. 
  
17 
 
APPENDIX A. CASE STUDIES 
Through a desk review and over 30 interviews with key experts and stakeholders implementing mobile money 
solutions in health programs, the Health Finance and Governance (HFG) Mobile Money activity has identified 13 
active mobile money applications in the health sector, described in the table below. The HFG Mobile 
Money Activity is documenting best practices and innovations to build the evidence base on this topic. The three 
case studies included in this Annex are pioneers in mobile money and health and represent some of the most 
documented interventions that have rapidly achieved scale.   The HFG Mobile Money Activity will continue to build 
on this collection of case studies as more is learned about other health programs that are using mobile money 
The HFG mobile money team has identified 10 additional programs that are currently in the conceptual or pilot 
phase of developing mobile money payment applications in the health sector. This demonstrates that mobile 
money use in the health sector is new and emerging, and it is gaining recognition as a potential vehicle for 
improving access to services.  
Table A.1: Identified Use Cases of Mobile Money in Health 
BayadLoad (Philippines) 
In July 2013, the Philippines launched a Government to Person (G2P) e-payment program, BayadLoad, that 
allows users to pay for government social benefits, including the national social security system and the national 
health insurance scheme, PhilHealth. BayadLoad facilitates subscriptions and contribution collection for more 
than 10 million people in the informal sector and who are likely to be unbanked. BayadLoad partners with three 
telecom companies – Smart, Talk-‘N Text, and SunCellular – and allows users to send payments free of charge. 
BayadLoad has been launched within two government agencies (housing and health) and is in its early stages of 
implementation.  
 http://www.cgap.org/blog/innovation-person-government-payments-philippines 
CCBRT Fistula program/Freedom from fistula (Tanzania and Kenya) 
Freedom from fistula (FFF) works with several of Kenya’s largest tertiary hospitals to delivery free fistula 
treatment. Through its work, FFF identified that transport costs present a financial access barrier that often 
delays or prevents women from seeking care, thereby placing women at risk and complicating fistula care. In 
order to improve timely access to care, FFF partnered with M-Pesa to send patients money for emergency 
transport. From July 2009 – November 2010, FFF sent more than $2,300 via mobile payments for transport 
costs for the 230 women for whom they paid for fistula care.  
http://www.fistulacare.org/pages/pdf/technical-briefs/mobile_phone_brief_updated4.5.2011.pdf 
Changamka (Kenya) 
A lack of a safe, cost-effective way of saving money over times makes it difficult for the poor to accumulate 
funds for health expenses, even for expected medical costs such as maternity and delivery care. Changamka 
Microhealth Limited in Kenya offers clients who may not have access to traditional banking platforms, a 
convenient mobile phone-based savings account to save money for outpatient or maternal health services. 
Payments for health services are made electronically using pre-determined price-contracted packages. 
Customers can add cash value to their savings accounts in small amounts over time and can transfer funds by 
phone to family and friends, thereby allowing customers to set aside funds incrementally for sickness or 
maternity care.  
http://changamka.co.ke/ 
19 
 
D-tree International (Tanzania)  
D-tree International is a non-profit organization committed to improving the quality of healthcare with the use 
of innovative technology. D-tree established a program in Zanzibar, Tanzania to help frontline community health 
workers provide high quality maternal health care and adequately refer women with high-risk conditions and 
obstetric emergencies to health facilities. D-tree uses mobile money to pay traditional birth attendants (TBAs) 
payments to incentivize timely and appropriate referrals. D-tree also uses mobile money payments to send 
payments to TBAs to cover costs for emergency transport.   
http://www.d-tree.org/ 
Linda Jamii (Kenya) 
In 2013, Linda Jamii was launched in Kenya to provide an affordable health insurance option. It provides 
comprehensive coverage for inpatient and outpatient services, as well as some dental and optical services. 
Benefits coverage includes a hospitalization income replacement benefit as well as funeral costs, should a 
beneficiary pass away. Linda Jamii was developed as a partnership between Britam, Safaricom, and Population 
Services International. Those organizations partnered with Changamka and M-Pesa to create a mobile-based 
platform for clients to register and make incremental payments toward the annual premium (K Sh12, 000 per 
family).  
http://www.lindajamii.co.ke/ 
Marie Stopes Madagascar (Madagascar) 
In 2010, Marie Stopes Madagascar (MSM) launched a voucher program with support from USAID to subsidize 
care for family planning services, with a particular focus on reaching poor women in areas in remote and hard-
to-reach areas. The program aims to help Madagascar reach its national target to increase access to 
reproductive health services and the use of contraceptives among women – particularly among the poor – by 
reducing financial access barrier to care. MSM partners with the three largest mobile phone operators in 
Madagascar - Telma, Orange, and Airtel- to offer mobile payment solutions for voucher claims reimbursements, 
which enables sending timely payments to health providers in hard-to-reach rural and urban areas of 
Madagascar.  
http://www.mariestopes.mg/ 
MicroEnsure (Tanzania) 
MicroEnsure is a social business that designs and delivers high-impact insurance products to provide financial 
risk-protection for poor and underserved populations.  In October 2012, MicroEnsure and its partners, Tigo, 
Bima and Golden Crescent, piloted a health insurance product, “Pona na Tigo Bima” (Get Well with Tigo 
Insurance), which offers life insurance and cash for inpatient hospital care at a defined network of private and 
public hospitals. The product offers six tiers of life and hospitalization coverage based on the premium level 
(between $0.45-$6.00), which are paid via three monthly installments, deducted from the customer’s airtime 
balance. Clients receive hospital cash via Tigo’s mobile money service, “Tigo Cash.” Initially launched in Dar es 
Salaam, within the first year, tens of thousands of memberships were sold and the company expanded to other 
regions in Tanzania, making it the fastest-growing health insurance product in East Africa over the past year.  
http://www.microensure.com/ 
  
20 
 
Mutuelles (Mali)  
In 2011, the Union Technique de la Mutualité Malienne (UTM) approached Orange, a leading telecom provider 
in Mali, to develop a mobile money solution for Mutuelle members to submit premium contributions via mobile 
phone. Over the course of one year, they UTM and Orange established a partnership and designed a pilot for 
Mutuelle members to pay incremental premium contributions. A key feature of this partnership is that Orange 
trained UTM staff to serve as agents to enroll their beneficiaries into Orange’s mobile money program and 
established a server where UTM staff can directly register their members for their mobile money transfer 
system and to facilitate data transfer between programs. This program is in early phases of implementation.  
 
For more information, please contact Cheickna Toure (cheickna.toure@yahoo.fr ) 
National Health Insurance Fund (Kenya) 
The National Hospital Insurance Fund (NHIF) is the primary provider of health insurance in Kenya with a 
mandate to enable all Kenyans to access quality and affordable health services. With the aim of increasing 
coverage to informal populations, the NHIF forged a partnership with Safaricom and uses the M-Pesa program 
to collect premium collections via mobile phones.  
http://www.nhif.or.ke/healthinsurance/ 
Pathfinder International (Tanzania) 
Pathfinder International is a global NGO that delivers reproductive, maternal and child health care services in 
more than 100 countries. Pathfinder currently uses the M-Pesa platform to pay community health workers using 
mobile money in eight regions of Tanzania. Within 18 months of the launch of mobile money, Pathfinder had 
phased out all cash payments to its community health workers and had made more than 1.8 million mobile 
payment transactions.  
http://www.pathfinder.org/our-work/where-we-work/tanzania/ 
Sheikhpura’s District Health Society (India)  
The National Rural Health Mission of India pays performance based incentives to India’s community health 
workers in rural communities via mobile money. The program was piloted in January 2011 in the Shiekpura 
district of Bihar State, India, led by the Norway India Partnership Initiative (NIPI), in partnership with the 
Sheikpura District Health Society, the State Bank of India based in Patna, and Eko Financial Services–a 
branchless-banking social enterprise in India.   
http://microsave.net/sites/default/files/Eko_Asha_Review.pdf 
Stop TB partnership (Pakistan) 
In partnership with the Stop TB Partnership and Interactive Research and Development, the Indus hospital in 
India developed a mobile-money incentive scheme for data on directly-observed treatment for tuberculosis 
(TB). The program provides cash incentives to community members, patients, and doctors for referring 
suspected cases of TB for testing and for supporting patient adherence to treatment.  
http://whqlibdoc.who.int/publications/2012/9789241564465_eng.pdf  
Zambia Integrated Systems Strengthening Program (Zambia) 
The USAID-funded Zambia Integrated Systems Strengthening Program (ZISSP) works with Zambia’s National 
Malaria Control Center and hires hundreds of spray operators to treat homes in rural and poor urban areas. To 
improve operations and reduce the risk of large cash transactions, in 2012 ZISSP piloted mobile money 
payments to cover salaries, allowances, per diem payments, and other expenses for spray operators and project 
staff. ZISSP pays spray operators their salary and per diems on a weekly basis through Mobile Payment Solution 
Ltd., a Zambian company specializing in financial transactions, in partnership with Airtel, a mobile phone 
operator. The MPS system allows for SMS based mobile payments to be sent to recipient mobile phones.   
http://www.akrosresearch.com/AboutUs/Projects/ZISSP.html 
21 
 
CASE STUDY 1: MICROENSURE 
Background 
MicroEnsure is a social business that designs and delivers 
high-impact insurance products to provide financial risk- Type of program:  mobile phone-based 
protection for poor and underserved populations.  As of claims payments    
June 2013, the company covered more than 4.5 million Date launched: 2001 
clients across 13 countries in Africa and Asia, oftentimes 
Stage: scale up 
partnering with private and not-for-profit sectors to 
deliver insurance products to mass-market consumers.  Size: N/A 
In May 2010, MicroEnsure partnered with Tigo, a mobile Countries: Kenya, Tanzania, Ghana 
network provider, to develop a life insurance product Key partners (in Tanzania):  Tigo, Bima, 
(that MicroEnsure named, “Family Care”) for the Golden Crescent 
network’s subscribers in Ghana (see box A.1.1). The 
partnership quickly expanded to Tanzania and Senegal, 
reaching one million lives insured within 14 months of the formal launch in January 2011. MicroEnsure’s 
efforts to build awareness about the value of insurance among its rapidly expanding client network 
helped to create ambassadors life insurance, thereby setting the stage for health insurance. Following the 
rapid success of the Family Care Insurance Plan, Tigo Tanzania asked MicroEnsure to design a micro-
insurance health product for its subscribers. In October 2012, MicroEnsure and its partners, Tigo, Bima 
and Golden Crescent, piloted a health insurance product, “Pona na Tigo Bima” (Get Well with Tigo 
Insurance), which offers life insurance and cash for inpatient hospital care at a defined network of private 
and public hospitals.  
The product offers six tiers of life and hospitalization 
coverage based on the premium level (between Box A.1.1 MicroEnsure–Tigo Partnership 
US$0.45 and US$6.00), which are paid via three MicroEnsure designed the insurance product and 
monthly installments that are deducted from the the processes to manage and deliver it to 
customer’s airtime balance. Clients receive hospital consumers. On a day-to-day basis, they perform 
cash via Tigo’s mobile money service, “Tigo Cash.” overall administration and oversight for the 
Initially launched in Dar es Salaam, within the first year, insurance product, including claims processing and 
tens of thousands of memberships were sold and the customer service.  
product was expanded to other regions in Tanzania, Tigo distributes the product and manages the 
making it the fastest-growing health insurance product technology side of delivering the insurance product 
in East Africa over the past year.  to clients. Tigo works with Bima, a Swedish 
company that provides the technical platform for 
Mobile Money 
enrollment and that trains and manages the network 
MicroEnsure uses mobile money transfers for claims of sales agents. Tigo also partners with Golden 
payments. With Tigo Cash, they can pay claims to Crescent, a local licensed insurer that underwrites 
subscribers within minutes of claims submission and the product.  
anywhere in Tanzania. By switching from paper to 
mobile claims payments, MicroEnsure reduced claims processing time from 11.0 to 3.2 days (a number 
that is expected to be further reduced over time). Claimants were surprisingly willing to register for 
mobile money payments and expressed interest in learning about the details of the payment process, 
and the timely and reliable nature of the payment has built client trust in both mobile payments and 
MicroEnsure’s health product.  
22 
 
Lessons Learned 
 Establish strategic partnerships. An essential part of establishing a successful partnership 
between MicroEnsure and Tigo was to clearly define the role and responsibilities of each partner. 
This clarity ensured that all parties agreed from the outset and benefited from the partnership 
arrangement. 
 Training sales agents about health product and mobile money. MicroEnsure and its 
partners use a network of sales agents to educate consumers about the “Pona na Tigo Bima” 
program. MicroEnsure provides one-day training to all sales agents that covers both the insurance 
and mobile payment components of the program. MicroEnsure conducted agent trainings for the 
first two years of the program; today, Bima trains and manages the agent network using a variety of 
approaches to deploy agents, including placing agents in Tigo shops and working with call centers.  
 Design payment mechanisms for users. Although MicroEnsure explored the possibility of using 
mobile phone payments for premium payments, mobile money utilization in Tanzania is still too 
infrequent to secure regular premiums. The company opted to use automated premium deductions 
(via airtime) to make premium contributions as convenient as possible for clients. Tigo clients are 
willing to pay for health insurance, but they face difficulties in paying standalone payments on a 
monthly basis – just as other mass-market consumers do. By bundling health insurance in a package 
of Tigo services and automatically deducting premiums, MicroEnsure established a convenient 
payment mechanism for its clients that ensure regular and timely contributions for premiums.   
Challenges 
 Low utilization rates for mobile money.  Whereas MicroEnsure is interested in expanding its 
use of mobile money to other areas (e.g. premium payments), low utilization rates for mobile money 
in Tanzania limit opportunities for mobile payments. Mobile money potential continues to increase 
as familiarity grows across Tanzania, and more widely across the continent.  
 Education of clients about health insurance. MicroEnsure and its partners intended to launch a 
product that was easy to understand and operate, such as its life insurance products; however, 
health insurance has proven to be more challenging product for clients to understand than life 
insurance products. The company is continuing to address this challenge in its product development, 
messaging and underwriting work. 
Looking Forward 
MicroEnsure has established itself as a clear leader in the rapidly-growing field of mobile insurance, 
including health. Over the next few months, MicroEnsure plans to launch new products to extend 
financial protection and deliver high-quality insurance coverage using mobile money payments to new 
markets. MicroEnsure aims to continue to build consumer trust both in insurance and in the use of 
mobile money as it extends the reach of its products to new populations.  
Sources 
 Interview with Peter Gross - Regional Director, Africa, MicroEnsure UK Ltd 
(peter.gross@microensure.com ; +254 786 499 100 )  
 http://www.microensure.com/ 
 http://www.tigo.com.gh/tigo-cash/tigo-cash-3-easy-steps 
H Mobile Money Activity, please write to Marty Makinen:  
 
 
23 
 
For information about MicroEnsure: 
Web: www.microensure.com 
Email: info@microensure.com 
Twitter: @microensure 
Facebook: www.facebook.com/microensure 
24 
 
CASE STUDY 2: D-TREE INTERNATIONAL 
Background 
D-tree International is a non-profit organization 
committed to improving the quality of Use of mobile money: payment of incentives to TBAS 
healthcare with the use of innovative and emergency transport costs for pregnant and post- 
technology. D-tree established a program in partum women 
Zanzibar, Tanzania to help frontline community Date launched: November 2011  
health workers provide high quality maternal 
Scale: scale-up 
health care and adequately refer women with 
high-risk conditions and obstetric emergencies Size: 208 TBAs, expected 350-400 by end of 2014 
to health facilities. The program currently has Country:  Tanzania 
208 trained traditional birth attendants (TBAs) 
Area of the country: Zanzibar 
and community health workers (CHWs) who 
serve a network of 4,500 women who have Funding: The Bill and Melinda Gates Foundation Grand 
enrolled in the program.   Challenges Round 1 and Round 2 
TBAs in Zanzibar are typically paid to assist Key partners:  The Bill and Melinda Gates Foundation, 
deliveries. It is therefore a financial disincentive Zantel, Etisalat  
for TBAs to refer their patients to health 
facilities, since this represents a loss of income.  
Mobile Money 
In November 2011, D-tree was awarded a grant through Grand Challenges Round 1 and launched a 
program in Zanzibar that offers mobile-enabled clinical guides to TBAs to help them treat women and 
identify women who should be referred to health facilities. D-tree also forged a partnership with Zantel, 
the largest mobile phone operator in Zanzibar, and Etisalat to incorporate an SMS-mobile money 
payment system into the program. Phase II started with a Round II grant in late 2012.  
The mobile money payment system used by D-tree incentivizes timely and appropriate referrals. TBAs 
conduct home visits, screen each pregnant woman for risk factors and danger signs, identify need for 
referrals and accompany the woman to the health facility, and provide follow-up care for both mother 
and baby after delivery. D-tree uses mobile money so the TBAs are able to make prompt payment for 
transport for the woman to deliver in a health facility or in case of any complications for both mother 
and baby that require medical attention. Transfers are made from the TBAs’ mobile money accounts to 
the drivers’ accounts at pre-negotiated rates to the appropriate facility, costing and average of 
US$30USD per referral. After the TBA’s last follow-up visit to the family, D-tree pays each TBA US$6 
per facility delivery through mobile money as well.   
As of October 2013, more than 1,720 financial transactions had been sent to TBAs to pay incentives. 
For emergency transport, the program performed 781 transfers from D-tree to TBAs for transport, 
while TBAs made more than 3,000 payments to drivers for transport to health facilities. The use of 
mobile money in the D-tree enables rapid referrals and contributes to increased rates of institutional 
deliveries among program beneficiaries, and reduced administrative costs and improved accountability 
and oversight for program administration.    
 
25 
 
 
Lessons Learned 
 Establish strong partnerships with local actors. D-tree invested in building relationships with 
the Ministry of Health, district health officials, and local health institutions to ensure buy-in and local 
ownership of the program. D-tree worked with local health facilities and district staff to identify and 
establish a network of car owners to provide emergency transport services for the program at fair 
rates. D-tree also met with village leaders to sensitize them about the project and the importance of 
facility delivery for the women in their community. 
 Provide adequate training and follow up for mobile money. D-tree provides a 
comprehensive training not only on the decision support application, but on the use of mobile 
money. The initial training covers basic functions of mobile money (e.g. typing letters into phones, 
remembering passwords, conducting transactions, and checking balances). In the subsequent 
months, D-tree follows up with newly trained TBAs and monitors their use of mobile payments to 
ensure that they have a strong understanding of the mobile payment system. This training and 
oversight process is essential to ensure that the TBAs have a strong enough understanding of how 
to transfer mobile money transfer so they can complete mobile-based payment while managing 
complicated emergencies.  
 Offer a cash payment option for community health workers. There is a strong “cash 
culture” in Tanzania, and some TBAs initially took time to become accustomed to using mobile 
money instead of cash. However, in the 2 years since the initial project launched, D-tree has seen 
this issue disappear and the drivers and TBAs have been very comfortable using mobile money.   
 Building an agent network. D-tree uses Zantel’s agent network, which is spread across the 
country, to allow drivers to cash their money out. When working with an agent network, it is 
important for the program to verify that all the listed agent locations are fully operational to ensure 
that the coverage of the agent network meets the programs’ needs. This is particularly important in 
rural areas, where there tend to be fewer agents, and so it is important to work with the mobile 
provider to ensure they can bring pay points where you need them. 
Challenges 
 Integrating mobile payments with existing information technology (IT) systems. D-tree 
initially had to manually reconcile its payments to TBAs using combined information from the 
network provider on D-tree’s corporate mobile money account and the referral forms from the 
phone application that showed what the TBAs should spend on each referral. This was a challenging 
and tedious administrative task because D-tree could only see payments sent to TBAs–not from 
TBAs to drivers. In 2013, D-tree established a web-based platform that synthesizes payment 
information in one place, thus providing a running balance for each TBA through an automated 
system, but with the added ability to manually edit payments if needed. It also flags duplicates, 
incorrect payments, and low balances so that D-tree can better control the flow of money and track 
the referral activity for each TBA.  
 Measuring impact specifically of mobile money. The benefits and impacts of mobile money 
are difficult to quantify and to isolate from other program effects. In the case of D-tree, this difficulty 
is partly because mobile money consists of a bundled package of services.   The costs of not using 
mobile money, however, would be very significant and would include costs for staff time, vehicle 
rental, and fuel to arrange visits to complete payment in-person for 1,000 transactions a month (at 
current scale) or 1,800 transactions a month (at the full expected scale). There is also a security risk 
associated with cash-payments that is eliminated with the use of mobile money. 
 
26 
 
 
Looking Forward 
D-tree is successfully scaling up the use of mobile money as it expands its program. Currently, 208 TBAs 
are enrolled in the program, as well as 32 Community Health Workers using the same application, and 
this project will scale up to 350-400 users by the end of 2014. Because of the success of using mobile 
money in Tanzania, D-tree is seeking other opportunities to phase out cash in its programs and 
eliminate financial barriers to healthcare.   
Sources 
  http://www.globalgiving.org/projects/safedelivery/  
 Interview with Steve Ollis, Chief Operating Officer, D-tree International. October 2013. 
(+1.410.443.3916, sollis@d-tree.org ) 
 
For information about D-tree International:  
Web: http://www.D-tree.org/ 
Email: info@D-tree.org 
Telephone: +1 617 432 6322 
 
 
 
27 
 
CASE STUDY 3: MARIE STOPES INTERNATIONAL 
Program Overview  
Marie Stopes International (MSI) is a non-profit organization 
that is one of the leading providers of reproductive health Use of mobile money: voucher claims 
services in the world. In 2010, Marie Stopes Madagascar management 
(MSM) launched a voucher program to subsidize care for Date launched: 2010 
family planning services, with a particular focus on reaching 
Scale: Fully operational 
poor women in remote and hard-to-reach areas. The 
program aims to help Madagascar reach its national target to Size: provider network of 150 facilities 
increase access to reproductive health services and use of of which 118 are accredited to voucher 
contraceptives among women –particularly among the poor – program 
by reducing financial access barriers to care. MSM offers Areas of the country: 12 regions of 
reproductive health vouchers to prospective clients through Madagascar 
community-based delivery channels for about $US.10USD. 
Key partners:  Mobile operators 
Each voucher has a unique code and can be redeemed at one 
(Telma, Orange, and Airtel)  
of 118 different health facilities in 12 regions of Madagascar, in 
exchange for reproductive and contraceptive health care 
services.  
The number of vouchers sold in the MSM program has increased at an impressive rate; more than 
37,000 vouchers have been sold since the start of the program, and this number continues to grow. The 
high number of vouchers sold represents increased access to family planning services for poor women in 
Madagascar, which is the main objective of the MSM voucher program.  
Mobile Money 
MSM integrated a mobile money system in an effort to improve the efficiency of voucher management to 
reduce barriers to accessing family planning (FP) and further increase availability of voluntary FP across 
Madagascar, as well as reducing inefficiencies and risks associated with reimbursing providers with cash 
payments in both urban and hard-to-reach rural areas of Madagascar. Support for developing a mobile 
money platform for MSM’s voucher reimbursement scheme initially came from USAID as part of the 
Strengthening Health Outcomes through the Private Sector project, followed by funding from 
Strengthening International Family Planning Organizations. 
MSM partners with the three largest mobile phone operators in Madagascar —Telma, Orange, and 
Airtel—all of which have SMS-based money transfer systems and a network of mobile money agents in 
kiosks across the country.  Health facilities register to receive and send payments with the mobile phone 
operator of their choice. They can then receive cash payments through their phones, and “cash out” at 
local kiosks the mobile network provider’s agent network.  When a client comes to the social franchise 
with a voucher, the provider counsels the client on a range of voluntary FP methods. If the client 
chooses to take up a method, they are provided with the method of their choice free of charge and the 
provider then sends in the voucher code to MSI where MSI validates it and sends a reimbursement back 
to the provider via SMS. To submit claims, the providers send a unique voucher code with each claim by 
text message and receive the reimbursement by mobile phone payment.  
From a programmatic perspective, MSM has experienced improved financial and administrative efficiency 
due to the availability of real-time data on service provision and redemption through the mobile money 
28 
 
program, ultimately making more resources available for other activities. The use of mobile money in 
this program also provides access to current data on service provision (number and type of service), 
which has been very helpful for overall program management.  Mobile money has also contributed to 
improved service delivery among providers. Service providers are reimbursed within a few days, instead 
of weeks or months, and their satisfaction with rapid and direct claims reimbursements has increased 
their motivation to comply with quality checklists around counseling and service provision in order to 
increase their client base.  
Lessons Learned 
 Invest in program start-up. Some key challenges faced by MSM with its use of mobile money 
came when setting up the payment system, fixing “bugs,” and ensuring that the SMS-based payment 
system was fully functioning. MSM invested time in the initial startup phase of the project and scaled 
up the use of mobile money slowly and systematically in order to address operational and technical 
issues as they arose.  
 Working with donors:  There was strong donor support for the mobile money component, to 
improve the operations of the MSM program which ensured voluntary and informed choice for a 
broad range of FP methods and appropriate care to meet reproductive health needs.  
 Ensuring timely payments to obtain buy-in from users: The MSM accredited social franchise 
network providers were already familiar with FP voucher reimbursements, so the integration of 
mobile money only changed the payment system for the program. Providers were familiar with 
mobile money transactions and were very eager to work with MSM to develop a mobile money 
payment system for voucher reimbursements. Once developed and tested, the mobile money 
system was fairly easy to explain to providers, there was enthusiasm around the efficiency and quick 
turnaround of reimbursements for services provided. The mobile money system was accepted and 
advocated for wider use very quickly.  While the providers initially took a bit of time to send the 
voucher codes for reimbursement via SMS, MSI Madagascar consistently reimbursed the provider 
within 7 days and once accepted, transaction efficiency improved. MSI Madagascar receives claims 
for reimbursement via their centralized server and a voucher manager cross checks the claims 
before issuing an electronic reimbursement.  
 Ensuring convenience for users. MSM had initially planned to work with the biggest supplier of 
mobile money in Madagascar, Telma, but quickly realized that they needed to work with all three 
mobile network operators to ensure that health service providers could rapidly access their 
payments at locations nearer to them. MSM engaged local network providers at the inception of the 
program to understand their needs and develop an SMS reimbursement system that would be useful 
for providers. A challenge around working with multiple network providers was the variation in the 
rate of SMS transfers and varying network coverage across the 12 regions MSI works in. In an effort 
to reduce financial barriers and expand access to FP regardless of network provider or financial 
ability, MSI deliberately chose to collaborate with multiple providers to increase access to FP across 
network. 
Challenges 
 Streamlining provider payments: MSM reimburses every provider for each voucher claimed, 
which leads to a high volume of transactions. MSM is working with mobile operators to identify 
solutions for reducing the overall number of transactions to providers while still reimbursing 
voucher claims in a timely manner. This is particularly challenging given that there are currently 118 
providers across the country that have different network coverage. 
 
 
29 
 
Looking Forward 
MSI is currently exploring opportunities to expand the use of mobile money payments in its programs in 
other countries to replace cash flows. In some places, uptake of mobile money payment systems is 
happening organically; program staff at Marie Stopes Kenya (MSK) began using mobile money transfers 
to rapidly transfer money using M-Pesa to send cash advances to cover medical costs and payments for 
last minute travel costs. MSK is now integrating a mobile payment system to pay community health 
workers and youth peer educators monthly stipends and to cover costs for trainings and other 
activities.  
Sources:  
 Interview in July 2013 with Judy Gold, formerly Marie Stopes International.  
 Interview in July and October 2013 with Lalaina Razafinirinasoa, Projects, Evidence and Innovations 
Director, Marie Stopes Madagascar (+261 (0) 20 22 403 04; lalaina.razafinirinasoa@mariestopes.mg)  
For information about Marie Stopes International 
Web: http://www.mariestopes.org 
 
30 
 
APPENDIX B. ADDITIONAL RESOURCES 
Readers can find additional information on mobile money and financial inclusion for the poor at the 
following:  
 USAID Mobile Solutions: http://www.usaid.gov/mobile-solutions 
 Better than Cash Alliance: http://betterthancash.org/  
 The Bill & Melinda Gates Foundation Financial Services for the Poor: 
http://www.gatesfoundation.org/What-We-Do/Global-Development/Financial-Services-for-the-Poor 
 Consultative Group to Assist the Poor (CGAP): http://www.cgap.org/  
 Bankable Frontier Associates (BFA): http://bankablefrontier.com/ 
 GSMA Mobile Money for the Unbanked: 
http://www.gsma.com/mobilefordevelopment/programmes/mobile-money-for-the-unbanked/  
 Alliance for Financial Inclusion: http://www.afi-global.org/  
 NetHope Payment Innovations: http://solutionscenter.nethope.org/programs/payment-innovation  
 
 
31 
 
 
 
 
 
 
32 
 
