THE MOBILE HEALTH RESEARCH LAB: 
MOBILE WALLET 
Investigating how mobile money can be used to pre-pay for healthcare in Kenya  
FINANCE 
Implementation date: June 2010 to June 2015  
The healthcare system in Kenya is stuck in a vicious cycle of low demand and poor supply. On the demand side, only seven 
percent of women and 11 percent of men have health insurance (Kenya DHS, 2010), with 35.9 percent of total health 
expenditure paid for out-of-pocket, in cash (Chuma and Okungu, 2014). On the supply side, private healthcare providers have 
difficulty attracting capital to invest in more services and better quality. Despite the promise of free, publicly provided healthcare, 
most consumers prefer the service and customer-oriented attitude offered by the private sector. This is evidenced by the fact that 
more than 50 percent of all healthcare is provided by the private sector. It is forecast that by 2025, the private sector will 
account for as much as 75 percent of health expenditures, amounting to $1.8-3.1 billion (Open Capital Advisors, October 2012). 
In its Mobile Health Research Lab in Nairobi, PharmAccess investigates how mobile technology can be leveraged to turn the 
vicious cycle of low demand and poor supply into a virtuous one. One of the concepts tested was that of a mobile health wallet 
(i.e. ring-fenced mobile money that can only be used to pay for healthcare at selected, quality-controlled healthcare facilities). 
About Mobile Wallet 
The Mobile Health Research Lab in Nairobi was established increase health spending and decrease cash out-of-pocket 
i n 2013 to investigate how mobile money can be leveraged costs, for example through risk pooling and digitizing 
to pre-pay for health-care. The Lab tested various payment healthcare payments. The mobile health wallet facilitates 
m echanisms, including Safaricom’s M-PESA—the mobile same-day payments and lowering of transaction (overhead) 
payment system that converts cash into electronic value (and costs for healthcare providers, the creation of a trusted 
vice versa) and is used by 80 percent  of Kenya’s adult brand for the mobile network operator,  increased access to 
 
population—to enable users to pay and save funds for services for the user, and proper accountability of the usage 
healthcare with a mobile wallet. The application aims to of funds for payers (including reporting). 
 
 
 
 
46  |  mHealth Compendium Volume 4 
E valuation and Results 
The Mobile Health Research Lab uses aspects 
borrowed from Behavioral Economics to observe 
what people really spend money on, rather than 
only asking for opinions via self-reported surveys. 
Apart from performing technical usability tests on 
the different designs, the Lab collected data on the 
willingness of healthcare providers to accept 
mobile payments; service utilization (diagnosis, 
drugs, and lab tests); user experience with the 
technology; and customer satisfaction with the 
service received. In addition to online / real-time 
transaction and utilization data, the Lab also 
collected information via (bi-weekly) telephone 
interviews and focus group discussions. Results 
and outcomes from mobile health wallet 
implementation included: 
Mobile payments help cut-down on “leakage” at 
providers (i.e. money disappearing)—estimated at 
20-25 percent in the private sector 
Visibility of cash flows opens up possibilities for granting loans and advances to further strengthen the financial position of 
health facilities, allowing them to invest more in better care 
Mobile wallet has positive effects on the ability to save and pay for healthcare—women, for example, can no longer be 
robbed of their cash when walking to a maternity clinic after dark. As a result, more women now come to the clinic for safe 
delivery, which has a positive effect on maternal and child health 
Group savings (“chamas”) as well as dedicated health remittances can be stimulated as well 
The results and outcomes were obtained by directly gauging the response in test markets. Commercial viability is the best 
proof-of-concept. 
Lessons Learned 
 People at the bottom of the pyramid have no difficulty using mobile products/services 
 Mobile health wallet allows direct targeting/subsidizing of selected 
groups (e.g. women with children) 
 (Near) real-time data on payments & utilization can be turned 
Geographic Coverage: Nairobi, Kenya  
into targeted health services 
 Mobile (i.e. digital) payments increase the security/safety of Implementation Partners: Safaricom (Telecom 
patients, and the financial position of clinics (through less leakage) & Mobile Money expertise), AAR (Healthcare & 
 Trust is important; The Chama (savings group) members did want Health Insurance expertise), Dodore Kenya 
to meet, in person, the party who would be holding money on (Enrollment of patients & facilities), PharmAccess 
their behalf, and who would be providing the top-up (Implementation Lead, Project Design & Donor 
 Change management is required, and takes time coordination)  
Funder: Amsterdam Diner Foundation, (Dutch) 
Conclusion Health Insurance Fund  
The mobile health wallet was designed and tested successfully. By 
Contact Information: 
channeling funds directly to the patients, they are empowered to vote 
with their feet, demanding better care at lower prices (strategic PharmAccess | Cees Hesp, Director Joint Learning, 
purchasing). Providers are encouraged and incentivized to deliver (+31654203527, c.hesp@pharmaccess.org) 
quality services, given access to quality improvement programs, 
See References on page 89. 
business training and affordable loans. A consortium is now being 
formed to take the mobile health wallet to national scale.  
 
mHealth Compendium Volume 4  |  47 
