 
PONA NA TIGO BIMA 
Health microinsurance utilizing mobile phone-based claim payments  
World Bank studies have found that poor health and process, the vast majority of claimants can submit claims 
the inability to access health care are key factors and receive money without travelling to an insurance 
leading to, and resulting from, poverty. Health office.  
microinsurance can offer financial protection to the 
poor as well as increase access to medically needed 
healthcare services.  Evaluation and Results 
By switching from paper to mobile claims payments, 
In October 2012, the social business MicroEnsure, in 
MicroEnsure reduced claims processing time from 11 to 
partnership with mobile network provider Tigo, sales 
3.2 days. Claimants were willing to register for mobile 
and technology facilitator Bima and insurer Golden 
money payments and expressed interest in learning 
Crescent, piloted the Pona na Tigo Bima (“Get Well with 
about the details of the payment process. The timely 
Tigo Insurance”) health insurance product in Dar es 
and reliable nature of the payment has built client trust 
Salaam, Tanzania, offering life insurance and hospital cash 
in both mobile payments and MicroEnsure’s health 
for hospital care at a defined network of hospitals.  
product. Based on its experience, MicroEnsure is 
Implementation date: October 2012 implementing new mobile health insurance products for 
launch in 2014 in six new markets across sub-Saharan 
Africa and Asia.  
About Pona Na Tigo Bima 
MicroEnsure designed the insurance product and 
processes to manage and deliver it to consumers. They Lessons Learned 
perform daily overall administration and oversight,  MicroEnsure and Tigo built a successful partnership 
including claims processing and customer service. Bima by clearly defining their roles and responsibilities 
developed the technical platform for enrollment and and ensuring that all parties were in agreement from 
manages the agent network, and Tigo distributes the the outset and benefitted from the arrangement. 
product under its local brand. 
 A network of sales agents was essential in educating 
The health insurance product offers six tiers of life and consumers about the Pona na Tigo Bima program. 
hospitalization coverage paid via three monthly 
 By bundling health insurance in a package of Tigo 
installments that are deducted from the customer’s 
services and automatically deducting premiums via 
airtime balance.  From a technical perspective, Pona na 
airtime, MicroEnsure established a convenient 
Tigo Bima utilizes a USSD application for product 
payment mechanism for its clients that ensures 
enrollment, which provides an efficient service as well as 
regular and timely contributions for premiums. 
high-quality product information at low cost to the 
entire Tigo Tanzania subscriber base.  The claims  Mobile money’s potential continues to increase; 
process is handled via a call center and most documents however, current low utilization rates in Tanzania 
are submitted digitally in Tigo shops.  MicroEnsure limit opportunities for expansion into other areas. 
assists claimants throughout the claims process, helping such as premium payments. 
them to find and submit the documents required to 
receive their claim payments.  Once the claim is  Client understanding of MicroEnsure’s health 
approved by MicroEnsure and Golden Crescent products is lower than for its life products. The 
Assurance, the claim is paid immediately via mobile company is continuing to address this challenge 
money transfer using the Tigo Cash service. Tigo Cash through its product development, messaging and 
offers a safe, transparent and reliable means for underwriting work.  
MicroEnsure and its partners to pay claims wherever 
there is a Tigo network signal.  As a result of this 
38 mHEALTH COMPENDIUM   |   VOLUME 3 
 
PONA NA TIGO BIMA 
Health microinsurance utilizing mobile phone-based claim payments   FINANCE 
Conclusion Contact Information:  
While challenging, health microinsurance has the MicroEnsure UK Ltd: Richard Leftley, CEO MicroEnsure 
potential to increase access to needed healthcare & MicroEnsure Asia (+44 (0)1242 526836, 
services, mitigate the risks of disease and ill health, and richard.leftley@microensure.com),  Peter Gross, Regional 
address the need for new methods of health financing. Director - Africa (+254-786-499-100, 
Insurance practitioners, researchers, policy makers and peter.gross@microensure.com) 
the global health community should continue to seek  
evidence towards the benefits, as well as shortcomings, References: 
of mobile health microinsurance for the poor.  1. MicroEnsure Case Study. USAID, Health Finance & Governance. 
No Date. 
-------------------------------------------------------- 2. Micro Insurance Matters. Issue No. 10. MicroEnsure. No Date.  
Geographic Coverage: Tanzania 
Implementation Partners: MicroEnsure, Tigo, Bima, 
Golden Crescent Assurance 
Funders: MicroEnsure, Tigo, Bima, Golden Crescent 
Assurance 
  mHEALTH COMPENDIUM   |   VOLUME 3 39 
