 
PROJECT OPTIMIZE: ALBANIA  
Remote temperature monitoring for vaccine quality 
Proper monitoring of temperatures is crucial to supervisors in charge of the storage location. Once the 
ensuring the quality of vaccines. As vaccine efficacy problem is addressed, its status is reset on the central 
can be affected by exposure to excessive heat and server. 
cold, it is important that vaccines are correctly 
transported and stored from the point of To analyze temperature curves for the working status of 
manufacture to the point of use. Temperature refrigeration equipment, mobile phones were also used 
monitoring, usually conducted by health workers, to transmit frequent temperature measurements. The 
helps ensure the quality with which vaccines are FoneAstra system was used for this process and 
handled, detects malfunctioning equipment and installed at six sites. Temperature probes were placed 
prevents temperature fluctuations that can negatively inside equipment and the mobile phone and accessory 
impact vaccine potency and safety. In Albania, 30-day mounted externally, which sampled and aggregated data 
temperature recording devices, such as Berlinger’s from the temperature sensors every few minutes. 
Fridge-tag®, are used in most health centers where Detailed temperature logs are periodically sent to the 
vaccines are stored. However, health workers cannot central server via SMS, which also stores alarm 
respond to an alarm during nonworking hours, and notification data. All data can be easily viewed using a 
without supervisors’ assistance, they cannot always standard web browser.  
take the appropriate remedial actions.  
Project Optimize designed and implemented a study in Evaluation and Results 
Albania to evaluate the potential benefits of remotely Over a 10-month period, 136 alarm incidents were 
connected monitoring devices. Optimize was a five-year detected, including 22 low- and 114 high-temperature 
partnership between WHO and PATH to identify ways alarms. The system also demonstrated certain 
in which supply chains can be optimized to meet the managerial benefits. For example, supervisors phoned 
demands of an increasingly large and costly portfolio of health workers or storekeepers in 41% of incidents to 
vaccines. The project tested an SMS-based system to confirm detection of the problem and assisted in taking 
monitor and log temperature conditions in peripheral appropriate follow-up measures in 15% of these. 
cold chain equipment. The aim was to assess whether 
these remote alarm systems facilitate better vaccine and In focus group discussions, nurses and supervisors 
cold chain management than non-connected reported that the technology was beneficial for their 
temperature loggers.  work. However, while the study highlighted some 
qualitative benefits of the technology, it did not find any 
Implementation date: March 2010 situation in which remote monitoring saved a vaccine 
from freezing or excessive temperature exposure. 
Therefore, a case for positive cost-benefits could not be 
About Project Optimize: Albania made.  
In collaboration with the National Immunization 
Program (NIP) and Berlinger, Optimize installed an SMS-
based system that monitors and logs temperature Lessons Learned 
conditions in peripheral cold chain equipment. In  The study increased awareness of the importance of 
Albania’s Shkoder District, 24 health centers storing temperature monitoring, improved collaboration 
vaccines were equipped with remote temperature between vaccinators and supervisors to resolve 
monitoring devices that included sensors, monitors and alarm events and cold chain problems, and served to 
SMS gateways. When an alarm is activated due to improve the entire cold chain system in Shkoder 
exceeded temperature limits, an SMS text message is district 
immediately sent to a central server that logs the issue 
 There was a sense that this technology provided a 
and sends a notification to health workers and 
“best-in-class” level of quality control. 
44 mHEALTH COMPENDIUM   |   VOLUME 3 
 
PROJECT OPTIMIZE: ALBANIA  
Remote temperature monitoring for vaccine quality  LOGISTICS 
 Since the study was designed to establish the -------------------------------------------------------- 
potential benefits of the concept, there was no Geographic Coverage: Albania 
attempt to produce the devices at low cost, thereby 
making scalability and sustainability unknown. At Implementation Partners: Ministry of Health, Albania | 
USD$1,000 per monitoring device, the Fridge-tag®– Institute of Public Health, Albania | Health Insurance 
based system is unaffordable for limited-resource  Institute, Albania | PATH | Shkoder Directorate of Public 
locations. However, a prior FoneAstra project Health, Shkoder, Albania | Albania Country Office, World 
suggests costs may drop to about $100 per device. Health Organization  
 Ongoing communication costs of almost $1,500 Funder: The Bill & Melinda Gates Foundation 
each year may also present a barrier to project 
adoption. Contact Information:  
World Health Organization: Jan Grevendonk, 
Technical Officer (grevendonkj@who.int) 
Conclusion  
References: 
The adoption of non-connected recording devices has 
1. World Health Organization, PATH. Optimize: Albania Report. 
demonstrated willingness to invest in temperature 
Seattle: PATH; 2013.  
monitoring equipment to safeguard expensive vaccines. 
2. Temperature monitoring for vaccine quality. Optimize Fact 
The prospects for adoption of remote monitoring 
Sheet. World Health Organization, PATH. July 2012.  
systems will likely be driven by their costs. The 
experience in Albania suggests it may become a niche 
product, mostly suitable for places where high vaccine 
stock values are at stake or for remote storage points 
with unreliable storage conditions.  
The demonstration was a partial success. Further 
research is needed to quantify potential benefits, such as 
the number of vaccines saved, and to produce lower-
cost devices.  
  mHEALTH COMPENDIUM   |   VOLUME 3 45 
