BETTER HEALTH FOR AFGHAN 
MOTHERS AND CHILDREN 
Using mobile phones to improve maternal, newborn and child health in 
Afghanistan 
SERVICE DELIVERY 
Implementation date: 2010 to 2012 
World Vision and its partners designed a mobile health innovation and implemented a research study in Herat Province, 
Afghanistan, nested within the broader Better Health for Afghan Mothers and Children (BHAMC) project, which aimed to 
improve maternal, neonatal, and child survival. BHAMC reached 36,200 children under five years old and 45,250 women of 
reproductive age in 74 villages across four districts of Herat Province. An important component of the strategy was utilizing 
community health workers (CHWs) and community leaders to strengthen linkages of households and communities to health 
facilities and skilled providers; to improve health behavior; and to provide basic lifesaving care within the home and community 
using Home Based Life Saving Skills (HBLSS). 
The pilot study focused on CHWs using the HBLSS modules on a mobile phone instead of standard paper materials to facilitate 
counseling and referrals as part of the comprehensive maternal and newborn care approach. The intervention was introduced 
into ten remote villages (five intervention villages and five comparison villages), in Karukh District. A total of 10 CHWs working in 
male-female teams to make home visits culturally acceptable (one pair per intervention village) received phones loaded with 
airtime and an application to facilitate counselling and referrals.  
About Better Health for Afghan Mothers and Children 
World Vision worked with the software consultancy firm During home visits, CHWs used the application to facilitate 
D imagi to adapt its software application CommCare™ and discussions about maternal and newborn health issues. After 
develop two counseling modules for CHWs based on consultations with the women, CHWs uploaded information 
HBLSS—one for antenatal care and one for postnatal care. about the pregnancy to the phones for recordkeeping, 
T he modules were created in Dari, the local language, in reporting and follow up. When a woman went into labor, 
visual and audio formats. The project also set up a database the CHWs made a referral call to link the woman’s family 
at the BHAMC office and at World Vision headquarters to with a skilled provider in the nearest facility.  
 
access the data in real time. 
  
54  |  mHealth Compendium Volume 4 
 
Evaluation and Results 
The study, cleared by Institutional Review Board, used a pretest/posttest 
design with baseline (2010) and endline (2012) household surveys, in the 
ten designated sites. All intervention and comparison areas were part of 
the comprehensive maternal and newborn care approach. Both surveys 
had a total sample size of 206 mothers of children aged 0 to 23 months 
(103 each from intervention and comparison sites). In addition, focus 
group discussions were conducted in February 2013 with seven CHWs 
and eight Shura (village health committee) members from the 
intervention area. Data were analyzed to observe changes that could be 
associated with using CommCare™ with HBLSS. Heightened security 
challenges resulted in study limitations including implementation delays, 
small sample sizes, and a limited follow-up period.  
Key findings included the following: 
 Using mobile phones with the HBLSS application by CHWs, 
improved women’s health knowledge and use of health services. 
 As a job aid, mobile technology spurred interest among women to 
learn from CHWs, facilitated counseling, and enhanced CHWs’ 
credibility among clients 
 As a communication tool, use of mobile phones helped coordinate 
referrals to health facilities and delivery of medical supplies. 
After 20 months of implementation, more mothers in the intervention group developed a birth plan than mothers in the 
comparison group (76 percent vs. 63 percent); to have had at least one antenatal care (ANC) visit (73 percent vs. 53 
percent); and to know at least two danger signs during pregnancy (71percent vs. 58 percent) (see table). In addition, more 
mothers in the intervention group had a CHW coordinate referral to a facility than mothers in the comparison group (17 
percent vs. 5 percent). A larger proportion of mothers in the intervention group delivered in a facility than mothers in the 
comparison group (58 percent vs. 47 percent), but the sample size was too small to detect statistical significance. 
Lessons Learned 
 Expanding the project to a larger number of CHWs will require careful documentation of the design and process of 
training and supervision of CHWs, including costs 
 Harmonizing CommCare™ data with the district-level health information system is another consideration for further 
expansion of the model 
 Similar studies with larger sample sizes and that include cost analysis should be conducted to build more evidence on the 
value of using mobile technology in community health promotion strategies, especially in post-conflict settings 
 CHWs in Afghanistan operate primarily in closely-knit pairs of 
one male and one female (typically a husband and wife pair, but 
also as a brother and sister, or man and aunt pair); men tend to Geographic Coverage: Herat Province, 
be more literate and more experienced with cell phones, while Afghanistan  
women, typically not formally employed, have more time to 
devote to CHW tasks and provide the majority of pregnancy and Implementation Partners: World Vision, Inc.; 
newborn-related care Bhakthar Development Network; Afghanistan 
Ministry of Public Health  
Conclusion Funder: USAID 
Using mobile health technology to enhance communication within a Contact Information: 
family-focused, maternal and newborn health care approach is a 
promising strategy for addressing geographical and cultural barriers World Vision | Dennis Cherian, Senior Director of 
that impede access to basic health care services in post-conflict Health (202.572.6380, dcherian@worldvision.org) 
settings. Findings from this pilot study demonstrate that equipping USAID | Meredith Crews, MPH, Child Survival and 
CHWs with a low-cost (two USD per month), locally customized Health Grants Program (mcrews@usaid.gov) 
mobile application for counseling and referrals is feasible, affordable 
and highly acceptable among rural Afghan women and that it See References on page 89. 
improves their health knowledge and behavior.  
 
mHealth Compendium Volume 4  |  55 
