The combination of 
decision support, SMS 
reminders and linking 
of  health records has 
the potential to improve 
continuum of care for 
mothers and babies 
and improve quality of 
service delivery.
MOBYAPP 
IMPLEMENTATION DATE:  July 2013 to December 2016
Strengthening maternal and newborn health in Tanzania
Access to and uptake of comprehensive, quality maternal, newborn, and child health (MNCH) services 
are a prerequisite to reaching Millennium Development Goals 4 and 5. Unfortunately health indicators 
in Tanzania show that MNCH service utilization remains low. While 96 percent of pregnant women 
attend at least one antenatal care (ANC) visit and immunization coverage among children is high, there 
is a lack of continuity with the uptake of institutional deliveries at 50 percent and postnatal care (PNC) 
services within two days after birth as low as 31 percent.1, 2 Because these services are not provided 
with a continuum of care approach, there are missed opportunities to provide essential MNCH 
interventions to mothers and their infants. 
One gap in current service provision at reproductive and child health (RCH) clinics is the lack of patient 
records, which would allow health workers to monitor and follow up mothers and their infants along a 
continuum, beginning with the initial ANC visit. The Elizabeth Glaser Pediatric AIDS Foundation (EGPAF) 
and its partner, D-tree International, have developed a decision-support application and electronic 
patient record system, which can track uptake of MNCH services along the continuum of care. This 
application is being implemented in 25 health facilities in six districts of the Tabora region.
About MobyApp
EGPAF supports the Ministry of Health and Social Welfare mother and baby records, and tracks mother-baby pairs across (MOHSW) with integrated RCH and prevention of MNCH/HIV services.  
mother-to-child transmission of HIV (PMTCT) services The application supports health workers to provide MNCH 
in over 1,400 health facilities. EGPAF and D-tree’s Moby services in line with national guidelines. Each pregnant 
App, designed on an Android platform for use with smart woman starting ANC, regardless of HIV status, is registered 
phones, provides decision-support for health workers, links to into a phone-based electronic record. This phone-based app is 
100  n  SERVICE DELIVERY 
Gabriel Anthony
then used to prompt the nurse to provide (and record) a step- Lessons Learned 
by-step assessment of the mother and record all findings in the 
mother’s health record. Similarly, the tool provides support 
n Using mobile technology provides useful support to 
to the nursing staff for postpartum visits for the mother and health workers to standardize services provision.
newborn. The system also registers, tracks, and provides 
decision support for PMTCT prophylaxis for the newborn n Health care workers appreciate the support the 
and HIV testing after six weeks to determine infant HIV phone-based tool provides, which has increased their 
status. The Moby App sends automated short message service knowledge and capacity to provide quality services to 
(SMS) reminders to clients, reminding them of upcoming pregnant and lactating women.
appointments, missed appointments, and approaching delivery n Shortage of reagents and equipment failure affects 
dates so women can prepare to deliver in a health facility. The health worker ability to provide services according to the 
next stage of development will involve experimenting with the national guidelines, thus it was necessary to update the 
use of unique IDs to allow tracking of clients across facilities. Moby App to allow providers to record the reasons for 
To date, staff from 25 health facilities across six districts in clients not receiving tests.
the Tabora region have been trained in the use of the Moby n Stable and secure mobile services coverage affects 
App; eight facilities have started implementation, while the success of this application, thus rollout is limited to areas 
remaining sites are still practicing its use for future rollout. with network coverage. Innovative technologies to expand 
mobile services to the most remote areas are needed.
Evaluation and Results 
Conclusion 
In the first full quarter of Moby App implementation, 
91 percent of pregnant women registering for ANC were Although the project is still in its infancy, using mobile 
entered into the Moby App (n=1606). This performance technology in service delivery has been well perceived. The 
decreased substantially to only 34 percent in the second combination of decision support, SMS reminders, and linking 
quarter due to technological, logistical, and motivation the health records of mothers and infants has the potential to 
challenges. Key inputs required to address this drop in improve the adherence to provide a continuum of care and 
coverage were: (1) re-installing or updating the application improve quality of service delivery. 
at sites where it seemed corrupted; (2) managing airtime 
through bundles to enable continuous connectivity; and (3) In 2015-16, the Moby App will be expanded to an 
personal feedback and support to motivate health workers to additional 17 sites in Tabora as part of an operations 
use the application.  research study to evaluate the effectiveness of the SMS 
As of March 2015, a total of 3,790 were registered, of which reminders on adherence to ANC and PNC visit schedules. 
83 percent were ANC clients, 6 percent postnatal care This feature will also allow community health workers to 
mothers, and 11 percent neonatal clients.  automatically receive contact details of patients who have missed their appointments for follow-up.
Providers have given both positive and negative feedback on 
the application. Most find the tool useful to ensure that the Ulitmately, the project aims to create an electronic patient-
full standard of care is provided, and many have reported level database feature. This new feature will generate the 
that they feel proud to have been reminded and supported in current data collected by the Moby App into a customized, 
providing the “care they were trained to provide.” However, user-friendly reporting system to provide health workers with 
as the tool is not yet fully implemented and not all clients data for individualized provision of care and monitoring of 
are registered in it, providers still also maintain usual the uptake of services across the continuum of care for each 
paper-based tools and thus some perceive the new tools as mother and infant. The system will also offer districts easy 
additional workload. access to real time data reports for program monitoring and 
While still early, initial data in some sites are promising; in decision-making.  n   
the original eight pilot sites a combination of interventions 
to improve continuum of care, including the implementation Geographic Coverage:  Tabora, Tanzania 
of the tool, the percentage of mother/baby pairs attending Implementation Partners: Elizabeth Glaser Pediatric AIDS 
HIV services each month increased from 68 percent in Foundation, D-Tree International  
January 2014 to 96 percent by December 2014. Donors: USAID, HealthEnabled
Contact Information: Roland van de Ven, Technical Director  
Elizabeth Glaser Pediatric AIDS Foundation, Tanzania  
roland@pedaids.org  
mHEALTH COMPENDIUM  VOLUME 5  n  101
