 
 I nternational Q
 uality Short Message Services 
(IQSMS) 
 
Brief Overview 
The LEAD project, led by CRS, provides high-quality care and 
antiretroviral therapy to people living with HIV in four 
regions of Tanzania. One of the primary objectives is to 
strengthen the capacity of local partners to provide quality 
services. In collaboration with 126 government and faith-
based Care and Treatment HIV facilities and 787 PMTCT 
sites, LEAD supports antiretroviral therapy, prevention of 
mother-to-child transmission and tuberculosis services. 
 
The project aims to increase access to the full continuum of 
care for PLHIV and their families and envisions a Government 
of Tanzania healthcare system linking care across community 
services, healthcare workers, local facilities, and government.  
 
In 2010, AIDSRelief (the predecessor to the LEAD project) 
introduced International Quality Short Message (IQSMS) to 
100 facilities. IQSMS tracks routine aggregate PMTCT indicators using basic SMS mobile phone technology to 
meet donor and Tanzania Ministry of Health reporting requirements. Reports are submitted monthly to the 
district and regional levels for program monitoring and decision making. 
 
  
 Geographic Coverage: 
Afghanistan, Angola, Bangladesh, Benin, Brazil, Burundi, China, Dominican Republic, DR 
Congo, Ethiopia, Guatemala, India, Indonesia, Jordan, Kenya, Lesotho, Liberia, Mali, 
Namibia, Philippines, Rwanda, Senegal, South Africa, South Sudan,  Swaziland, 
Tanzania, Ukraine, Vietnam  
 
 Implementation Partners: 
Catholic Relief Services (CRS) leads a team of partners which includes:  
Futures Group International (Futures) | Interchurch Medical Assistance World Health 
(IMA) | University of Maryland School Of Medicine – Institute of Human Virology 
 
 Funder: 
CDC 
 
 For More Information Contact: 
CDC 
 Brandy Airall, Project Officer; 
Centers for Disease Control and Prevention 
2448 Luthuli Road; PO Box 9124, Dar es Salaam,Tanzania; 
Email:bairall@cdc.gov 
Futures Group 
 Bobby Jefferson  
Senior Health Informatics Advisor, Futures Group 
Principal Investigator CDC HMIS Grant Kenya 
 Senior HMIS Advisor, Center for Health Solutions – Futures; 45 
Email: bjefferson@futuresgroup.com 
 
 
Logistics 
 
International Quality Short Message Services (IQSMS) 
About IQSMS errors. Wait time on feedback of the quality of reports 
IQSMS was developed by Futures Group as freely is significantly reduced. IQSMS has also helped the 
available, open source software, under the creative district and regional offices to be able to compare their 
commons license. This allows IQSMS software to be reports with other regions for improvement. 
used by local implementing partners, NGOs and local  
ICT groups in Tanzania. By taking an open approach to By October 2012, 558 sites were sending their reports 
designing ICT solutions, it enables the Ministry of Health to a centralized project server in Dar es Salaam. The 
and the Government of Tanzania to have country reports include: PMTCT Antenatal Clinic (ANC) 
ownership and ensure sustainability of this innovative monthly summary form; PMTCT care monthly summary 
ICT mhealth solution. IQSMS is an application that uses form; PMTCT mother-child follow-up monthly summary 
mobile phone sms to report data in a predetermined form; and labor and delivery monthly summary form. 
format to a centralized server. The SMS is transformed Complaints about the accuracy of the transcription of 
into an integrated database.  paper-based reports have been reduced. There is also 
 reduced time in error checking as the system checks 
The software uses SMS data in a predetermined format, automatically and final results are posted within 20-30 
sent to a dedicated central server (can be a basic seconds. 
desktop) connected to a modem or 3G connection.  
IQSMS records incoming SMS and reports into a SQL Lessons Learned 
database. Automated data quality checks, business rules • 558 PMTCT facilities have been reached.  
and immediate notifications are sent to users • No paper based reports leading to minimal 
ensuring that only validated data is added to database.  storage and office space need.  
IQSMS was implemented at rural and hard-to-reach • Reduced travel costs and increased productivity 
sites in areas with network coverage. Messages were at the facility since monthly travel to deliver 
received by a modem connected to a server which reports is no longer required.  
performed data quality checks and responded to sender.  
After data verification, the data was automatically IQSMS supports the government to ensure continuity of 
integrated into the database. The user was notified reports between partners and the Tanzanian Ministry of 
about any inaccurate reports rejected by server. Health and Social welfare. IQSMS is implemented 
PMTCT staff participated in a four-hour training session without any significant investments in data collection 
on using IQSMS. The application is very flexible and labor, transportation and storage costs. 
reports, data validation and business rules can be  
updated by an administrator without the need to engage Conclusion 
a software developer. The tool can be used for IQSMS is an easy to use and effective tool for aggregate 
reporting other program areas with no further reporting of health and development information. 
development.  IQSMS reduces the time required to provide feedback 
 to the reporting facilities and can lead to improved 
Results efficiencies by reducing travel time to submit reports. 
IQSMS has made reports available on time at the The software does not require Smartphones or a 
district, regional and national level from facilities. It has specific operating system; a simple feature phone with 
reduced the travel frequency of facility staff and field SMS enabled is the only mobile phone requirement. The 
officers since data is sent electronically rather than system improves data quality and requires to facilities to 
submitting hard copies. Staff at the district, regional and submit validated reports.  
national level no longer need to aggregate data manually  
from the facility level and time in error checking has  
been reduced as the system checks automatically for 
Information was excerpted from:  
AIDSRelief Marks Lifesaving Milestones - http://crs.org/united-states/aidsrelief-landmark-event/; 
http://www.stockholmchallenge.org/project/2010/international-quality-short-message-services; Futures Health Informatics Presentation Bobby 
Jefferson, Senior Health Informatics Advisor; http://www.iqstrategy.net/frmiqsms.shtml; 
46  http://www.stockholmchallenge.org/project/2010/international-quality-short-message-services; Using mobile technology to improve prevention of mother-to-child transmission reporting in Tanzania: T.S. Tulli, J. Ndega, I. Darlene, B. Jefferson, B. Chikira, M. Upendo, E. Robinson, M. Deas, M. 
Clement, A. Essau, L. Burrows, N. Mwemezi, M. Aidi; 6th IAS Conference on HIV Pathogenesis and Treatment 
Abstract no. TUPE459; http://www.iasociety.org/Abstracts/A200743546.aspx 
