 
MOBIUS ULTRASOUND IMAGING SYSTEMS  
Point of care ultrasound diagnostic imaging on a smartphone or tablet  
Mobile ultrasound imaging is a non-invasive diagnostic calls, however, the patient exam can be emailed for 
tool that has the potential to greatly improve access archive or second opinion. The system’s versatile 
to quality health care in more remote areas. In performance for diagnosis include routine screenings, 
Zambia, ultrasound findings from a focused maternal abdominal and pelvic examinations to determine cause 
ultrasound-training program for midwives had a of pain, monitoring women throughout their pregnancy, 
positive effect on clinical decision-making. determining extent of trauma, and various ultrasound-
Additionally, findings from a study in Senegal point guided procedures. Multiple probe types are available 
towards the utility of a mobile ultrasonography for different clinical applications, and customers have 
service in managing health problems for both rural access to training videos and manuals. 
communities and healthcare structures.  
There is a five-step process to scanning with the 
MobiSante, a company based in Washington State, has MobiUS: select exam type, optimize image (optional), 
developed a mobile diagnostic system that allows health add annotations (optional), save image or video, and 
professionals to conduct ultrasound assessment at the review the images and send directly from the system. 
point of care. After receiving FDA clearance in 2011, Images are readily stored and quickly shared via cellular 
MobiSante launched the MobiUS SP1 smartphone or Wi-Fi networks. In areas without network 
system, followed by a tablet version entitled the MobiUS connectivity, patient data can be stored on the device 
TC2 system.  and transmitted at a later point. All data transfer is 
encrypted when the device is password protected. 
Implementation date: 2011 Users have the option of sending emails securely or 
stripping data out of non-encrypted emails, as well as 
transmitting data to a cloud server for archive and off-
site analysis by trained health professionals.  
About  MobiUS 
The complete ultrasound imaging system includes a 
smartphone (SP1 System) or tablet (TC2 System), 
transducer probe and pre-installed software. Devices 
are both battery powered and rechargeable and the 
entire system can either be purchased or leased. 
Currently, SP1 capabilities are limited to ultrasound 
imaging and cannot be used for text messaging or phone 
58 mHEALTH COMPENDIUM   |   VOLUME 3 
c. Lydia Zibin 
c. Lydia Zibin 
 
MOBIUS ULTRASOUND IMAGING SYSTEMS  
Point of care ultrasound diagnostic imaging on a smartphone or tablet   SERVICE DELIVERY 
Evaluation and Results  Ultrasound education is a critical component in 
Several studies have been done or are in process with planning a successful implementation. Several 
the MobiUS systems. Studies have been done in resources and partners are available to users for 
Rochester, NY where the systems were successfully becoming competent in acquiring and interpreting 
used for thoracic ultrasound to help identify images.  
pneumothorax and congestive heart failure. In another 
study, users compared field trauma evaluations using the 
MobiUS SP1 system and a Sonosite device.  Equal Conclusion 
success rates were obtained by identifying intra- Data captured from the MobiUS system provides point-
abdominal fluid in the pre-hospital environment.  of-care diagnostic capabilities in a wide range of settings, 
Additionally, this study demonstrated that images could including more remote locations. These data can be 
be created, then pushed to a remote location to be read combined with electronic medical records thereby 
by the ultrasound fellowship director with similar improving clinical decision-making capabilities. Future 
success rates.  A wilderness medicine study was also iterations should involve lower cost models and 
conducted on Denali.  Pulmonary edema and IVC expanded platform compatibility to aid in expanded 
volumes were observed in climbers using the MobiUS market usage. Lastly, additional research will needed  to 
SP1 system. Finally, broad screening of 100+ patients in determine whether ultrasound ultimately improves 
Sierra Leone were conducted with over-read services health outcomes in rural areas and if the benefits 
provided by a radiologist in Seattle. Short studies were outweigh the costs of such devices.  
also conducted with the MobiUS SP1 system in Nepal, 
-------------------------------------------------------- 
Philippines and India. 
Geographic Coverage: United States of America 
A study in progress is looking at post-operative wounds 
to identify small amounts of fluid accumulation, which Implementation Partners: MobiSante 
can indicate early stages of infection. Ongoing studies 
include a residency program conducting a central venous Funder: WRF Capital, W Fund, Alliance of Angels 
access project with the MobiUS SP1system.  
Contact Information:   
MobiSante: Sailesh Chutani, CEO/Co-Founder (+1-425-
605-0600, sailesh.chutani@MobiSante.com) 
Lessons Learned 
 
 While MobiUS systems cost only a fraction of 
References: 
conventional ultrasound machines, the current price 
1. Brian Dolan. Smartphone ultrasound device launches 
may still keep this product out of reach for 
commercially. MobiHealthNews. Oct 10, 2011. Web. 
financially constrained health facilities and low-
2. The Economist. The dream of the medical tricorder. Technology 
resource settings. However, MobiSante is offering 
Quarterly: Q4 2012. Dec 1, 2012. 
special discounts for NGOs and not-for-profit 
3. Gianni Truzzi and Hayley Young. 2013 Leaders in Health Care, 
organizations. 
Innovation in Medical Devices: MobiSante Inc. brings remote 
 The current system only works with a MobiSante control to health care. Seattle Business. March 2013. Web. 
provided smartphone or tablet which all feature 4. MobiSante. Products: Product Brochure. Web. 
USB 2.0 host support to connect the ultrasound 5. Ndiaye P, et al. Annual assessment of a mobile ultrasonography 
probes. However, future applications are expected service in the region of Ziguinchor, Senegal. Medecine tropicale : 
to be compatible with other platforms, including revue du Corps de sante colonial. February 2007. 67(1):38-42. 
Android, Apple iPhones and iPads, thus expanding 6. World Federation for Ultrasound in Medicine & Biology. 
its reach. Focused maternal ultrasound by midwives in rural Zambia. 
August 2010. (8):1267-72.  
  mHEALTH COMPENDIUM   |   VOLUME 3 59 
