Categories	Menu
Home Perspective	Pieces
Operational	challenges	in	the	Cambodian
mHealth	revolution
Operational
challenges	in	the
Cambodian
mHealth
revolution
1
Piroska	A.	Bisits	Bullen
1
Technical	Management	Advisor,	Cambodian
Health	Education	Media	Service	(CHEMS)
#104,	St	472,	Toul	Tom	Pong,	Phnom	Penh,
Cambodia
Corresponding	Author:
piroska.bisitsbullen@gmail.com
Journal	MTM	2:2:20–23,	2013
http://dx.doi.org/10.7309/jmtm.2.2.5
The	 use	 of	 mobile	 phones	 to	 deliver	 health
programs	 (mHealth)	 has	 great	 potential	 in
developing	 countries,	 and	mHealth	 initiatives
1
such	 as	 the	 NightWatch 	 malaria	 prevention
program	 are	 becoming	 increasingly	 popular.
However,	even	when	an	mHealth	intervention
is	known	 to	be	e ective,	 the	structure	of	 the
telecommunications	 industry,	 combined	with
user	 behaviours,	 can	 make	 it	 extremely
difficult	to	implement	in	some	countries.
This	article	describes	the	case	of	Cambodia,
where	more	than	90%	of	the	population	have
2
access	to	a	mobile	phone 	due	to	limited
accessibility	of	landlines,	but	operational
challenges	plague	even	the	simplest	mobile
interventions.	The	impact	of	this	is	already
apparent	with	commercial	mobile	banking
services.	In	Kenya	the	M-Pesa	mobile	banking
system	grew	to	around	nine	million	users
(21%	of	the	population)	within	three	years	of
3
launch. 	Despite	Cambodians	having	a	similar
need	for	financial	services,	an	equivalent
mobile	banking	product	(Wing)	has	only
reached	around	250,000	Cambodian	users
4
(2%	of	the	population)	in	its	first	three	years.
Four	significant	operational	challenges	facing
mHealth	programs	in	Cambodia	have	been
identified	through	the	author’s	own
experiences	implementing	mHealth	initiatives
with	the	Cambodian	Health	Education	Media
Service	(CHEMS).	These	challenges	are
potentially	relevant	to	other	countries	with
similar	telecommunication	markets.
Switching	Subscriber
Identification	Module
(SIM)	cards
Perhaps	the	greatest	challenge	facing
mHealth	interventions	in	Cambodia	is	that
most	Cambodians	have	multiple	Subscriber
Identity	Module	(SIM)	cards	–	and	thus
multiple	phone	numbers	–	which	they	change
regularly.	This	practice	is	not	limited	to	low-
income	groups.	It	is	also	common	among
wealthier	Nongovernmental	Organisation
(NGO)	workers	and	government	staff.
There	are	several	factors	that	promote	this
practice	among	users.	The	first	is	that,	as	of
2011,	the	Ministry	of	Posts	and
Telecommunications	recognised	eight
different	mobile	networks	within	the	country
5
(some	have	since	merged). 	It	can	be
significantly	cheaper	to	call	within	a	network
than	between	networks,	so	people	keep
different	SIM	cards	for	each	network	in	order
to	save	call	costs.	The	introduction	of	phones
6
such	as	the	Nokia	Dual	SIM 	which	are
capable	of	taking	two	SIM	cards	at	once	may
help	with	this,	although	many	Cambodians
have	three	or	more	SIM	cards.
Fierce	competition	between	the	Cambodian
mobile	networks	also	promotes	SIM	card
switching.	Some	companies	offer	free	air	time
with	their	new	SIM	cards	in	an	effort	to	get
people	to	switch.	This	can	make	it	cheaper	to
buy	a	new	SIM	card	than	to	purchase	credit
for	an	existing	SIM	card.	In	addition,	some
Cambodian	users	have	developed	a
preference	for	keeping	different	phone
numbers	for	different	personal	relationships	–
particularly	when	they	want	to	keep	those
relationships	separate.	For	example,	they	may
have	different	phone	numbers	for	their
various	girlfriends	or	boyfriends,	or	a
separate	phone	number	for	sensitive	work
contacts.	If	the	relationship	sours	then	the
SIM	card	is	discarded	so	the	person	can	no
longer	contact	them.
In	practice	this	constant	switching	of	SIM
cards	can	cause	havoc	even	in	basic	mHealth
interventions,	such	as	sending	Short	Message
Service	(SMS)	reminders.	It	is	common	for	at
least	20%	of	all	phone	numbers	to	be	invalid
immediately	after	collection,	as	people	often
provide	one	of	their	less	used	mobile	phone
numbers	when	asked.	It	is	also	common	for	a
substantial	proportion	of	the	phone	numbers
to	become	invalid	each	month,	as	people
switch	SIM	cards	and	discard	their	old
numbers.	This	means	that	6-12	months	after
the	phone	numbers	have	been	collected	the
majority	are	invalid	and	need	to	be	collected
again.	For	example,	in	one	mobile	phone
based	survey	that	CHEMS	conducted	more
than	50%	of	the	numbers	were	invalid	only	3–
4	months	after	they	were	collected.	Keeping
the	numbers	up-to-date	is	difficult	and	time
consuming,	which	ultimately	reduces	the	cost
effectiveness	of	mHealth	interventions.
One	possible	solution	is	to	provide	incentives
for	people	to	keep	the	same	SIM	card	and
phone	number.	Participants	could	be
periodically	entered	into	a	lucky	prize	draw,
but	will	only	be	notified	about	the	result	by
phone.	However,	the	value	of	the	future	prize
needs	to	be	large	enough	to	outweigh	the
immediate	financial	benefits	of	switching
SIMs.	Typical	prizes	such	as	digital	cameras	or
gift	vouchers	have	not	been	successful	in
getting	participants	to	keep	the	same	SIM
card	for	CHEMS	programs,	although	larger	or
more	frequent	prizes	may	give	different
results.	Another	option	is	to	provide
participants	with	free	SIM	cards	that	have
subsidised	call	rates	to	all	networks.	This
would	make	it	financially	beneficial	for	users
to	keep	the	same	SIM	card,	but	is	likely	to	be
cost-prohibitive	for	large	scale	programs.
Lack	of	functionality
and	Khmer	language
capability
Another	significant	challenge	to	implementing
mHealth	programs	in	Cambodia	is	that	most
mobile	phones	are	not	smart	phones.
Although	the	availability	of	accurate	statistics
is	limited,	experience	from	CHEMS	programs
suggests	that	the	majority	of	Cambodians	are
using	basic	handsets	with	limited
functionality.	For	most	Cambodian
households	the	cost	of	even	a	basic	handset
is	substantial	relative	to	their	income.	This
means	that	mHealth	systems	for	use	by	the
general	population	are	limited	to	SMS	and
voice	messaging,	as	most	people	do	not	have
a	smart	phone	and	so	are	not	able	to	install
applications	on	their	device.
The	majority	of	mobile	phones	also	do	not
support	Khmer	(the	national	language).
Khmer	is	written	in	an	Indian-derived	script
and	the	Cambodians	successfully	resisted	an
attempt	by	French	colonizers	in	the	1940s	to
7
Romanise	the	alphabet. 	As	Khmer	is	only
8
spoken	by	around	15	million	people, 	it	is	a
low	priority	for	handset	and	operating	system
providers	compared	to	languages	such	as
Thai,	Chinese	or	Hindi.	Although	there	are	a
small	number	of	Nokia	handsets	that	support
9
a	Khmer	user	interface, 	uptake	has	been
10
slow. 	Even	when	they	are	available	users
often	find	the	process	of	sending	an	SMS	in
11
Khmer	time	consuming	and	difficult. 	Similar
challenges	may	be	faced	in	other	countries
that	have	a	unique	alphabet,	such	as	Ethiopia.
Since	most	mobile	phones	do	not	support
Khmer	language,	SMS	messages	for	mHealth
programs	need	to	be	sent	in	English,	which	is
not	understood	by	the	majority	of	the
population.	There	are	several	ways	to	address
this,	although	none	are	ideal.	One	alternative
is	to	send	picture	messages	rather	than	text
SMS,	although	many	phones	are	also	unable
to	receive	picture	messages.
Another	option	is	to	use	audio	messages.	The
user	receives	a	call	and	when	they	answer	a
pre-recorded	message	is	played	in	Khmer,
with	responses	being	given	using	numbered
options	or	a	voice	recognition	system.	While
this	solves	the	language	problem,	it	also
dramatically	increases	the	cost	of	the
message.	Sending	one	SMS	costs	around	two
cents,	while	sending	a	one	voice	message
costs	around	15	cents.	Some	mobile	networks
also	send	an	English	SMS	first	informing	the
recipient	they	have	a	voicemail	and	asking
them	to	call	a	number	in	order	to	hear	the
message.	If	the	recipient	cannot	read	the
instructions	for	accessing	the	voicemail	they
will	not	be	able	to	listen	to	the	Khmer	voice
message.
Although	organizations	such	as	Innovative
Support	to	Emergencies	Diseases	and
Disasters	(InSTEDD)	have	created	successful
voice	response	systems	in	Khmer	to
12
circumvent	the	language	barrier, 	the
inability	to	use	text	SMS	continues	to	be	a
major	limitation.	Young	Cambodians	are
already	finding	their	own	ways	around	this
problem	by	writing	SMSs	using	unofficial
Romanised	Khmer.	A	recently	launched	SMS
13
dating	service	called	Chibi 	has	been	very
successful,	with	the	majority	of	messages
being	written	in	a	hybrid	of	English	and
Romanised	Khmer.	The	creator	of	Chibi	has
developed	a	system	that	is	able	to	interpret
14
this	hybrid	language. 	However,	since	the
majority	of	users	are	young	Cambodians	who
have	greater	exposure	to	English	at	school
this	is	unlikely	to	be	a	workable	solution	for
older	users.
Sharing	mobiles
Although	more	than	90%	of	Cambodians	have
access	to	a	mobile	phone,	a	USAID
assessment	estimated	that	only	around	half
15
actually	own	a	mobile	phone. 	This	means
that	a	large	proportion	of	the	population
share	a	mobile	with	other	people,	often	their
family	members.	In	one	program	for	HIV
positive	rural	women	conducted	by	CHEMS
and	Cambodia	HIV/AIDS	Education	&	Care
(CHEC),	around	30%	of	the	women	could	not
be	reached	on	the	mobile	number	they
provided,	often	because	their	husbands	or
another	family	member	had	the	phone.	This
can	make	it	particularly	difficult	to	deliver
mHealth	interventions	on	sensitive	topics,
such	as	gender	based	violence	or	HIV.	Even
on	less	sensitive	topics,	such	as	maternal	and
child	health,	it	can	mean	that	the	intended
recipient	of	the	message	never	receives	it.
One	option	is	to	provide	participants	with	a
mobile	phone	and	SIM	card,	although	this	is
prohibitively	expensive	for	large	scale
programs.	Oxfam	and	their	local	partner
Women	for	Prosperity	took	this	approach	with
11
their	Pink	Phones	program. 	They	spent
around	$750	United	States	Dollars	to
purchase	30	mobile	phones	for	women
leaders	in	rural	areas.	The	women	leaders
used	the	phones	to	help	other	women,	for
example	by	getting	market	updates,	calling
the	police	to	respond	to	domestic	violence
cases	or	accessing	health	information.	At	$25
per	phone	plus	the	cost	of	a	SIM	card	and
credit,	scaling	up	this	intervention	would
require	a	very	large	budget.
Competition	with
commercial	spam
Cambodia	enforces	very	few	regulations
regarding	consumer	privacy	and	spam	for	the
telecommunications	industry.	Mobile
networks	regularly	send	unsolicited	mass	SMS
and	voice	messages	promoting	their	own
products,	and	as	advertisements	for	other
companies.	In	most	cases	it	is	not	possible	to
unsubscribe	from	these	messages.	This
makes	users	more	likely	to	ignore	an	SMS	or
to	hang	up	immediately	on	a	recorded	voice
message,	regardless	of	the	topic	or	sender.
Since	mobile	networks	are	able	to	make
substantial	revenue	through	these	messages
they	are	less	interested	in	sending	messages
for	targeted	mHealth	programs	that	may	have
lower	volumes	and	budgets	compared	to
advertising	campaigns	by	private	companies.
Some	mobile	networks	are	willing	to	support
mHealth	programs	as	part	of	their	corporate
social	responsibility	program.	For	example,
Smart	mobile	has	partnered	with	InSTEDD
(Innovative	Support	to	Emergencies	Diseases
and	Disasters)	to	implement	mHealth	systems
16
for	the	Ministry	of	Health. 	However,	the
proliferation	of	NGOs	and	health	programs	in
Cambodia	means	that	it	is	not	possible	for
mobile	networks	to	support	all	of	them.
Conclusion
Organizations	implementing	mHealth
programs	in	Cambodia	face	a	range	of
operational	challenges	that	can	make	even
the	simplest	interventions	unworkable.	The
potential	solutions	are	expensive	and	may
offset	any	cost-effectiveness	gains.	As	a	result,
Cambodia	could	be	left	behind	in	the	mHealth
revolution.
Of	course,	Cambodia	is	not	the	only	country
facing	challenges	in	mHealth	implementation.
The	need	to	address	socio-cultural,
informational,	economic	and	individual
vulnerabilities	in	mHealth	programs	has	also
been	identified	with	HIV/AIDS	SMS	campaigns
17
in	Uganda. 	Network	coverage	continues	to
be	a	issue	even	in	developed	countries,	such
18
as	in	rural	Australia, 	and	the	sharing	of
mobile	phones	and	language	barriers	have
both	been	raised	as	concerns	in	South	African
19
HIV/AIDS	mHealth	programs.
It	is	possible	that	over	time	the	challenges	in
Cambodia	will	disappear	as	market
competition	is	reduced	through	mergers	and
acquisitions.	A	younger	generation	of
Cambodians	will	grow	up	using	Romanised
Khmer,	and	Khmer	language	phones	may
become	more	widely	available.	Cambodians
may	also	eventually	find	that	keeping	the
same	phone	number	is	more	useful	than
getting	the	cheapest	possible	calls.	Ministry	of
Health	support	for	mHealth	programs	such	as
the	Day	3	malaria	alert	system	created	by
20
Malaria	Consortium, 	may	also	provide	the
impetus	for	change.	However,	these	changes
are	likely	to	take	many	years.	In	the	meantime
donors,	NGOs	and	government	need	to	have
a	clear	understanding	of	how	these
operational	challenges	will	be	addressed
before	implementing	new	mHealth	initiatives
in	Cambodia.
References
1.	 Hannah	 B.	 NightWatch	 2.0:	 The	 Role	 of
Mobile	 Phones	 in	 Malaria	 BCC.	Journal	 MTM
2012;1:	 11-2.
http://www.journalmtm.com/2012/nightwatch-
2-0-the-role-of-mobile
-phones-in-malaria-bcc/
2.	BuddleCom.	Cambodia	–	Telecoms,	Mobile,
Internet	 and	 Forecasts.
http://www.budde.com.au/Research/Cambodia-
Telecoms-Mobile-Internet-and-
Forecasts.html#sthash.KfXtE3Od.dpuf.
(accessed	April,	2013).
3.	Jack	W,	Suri	T.	The	Economics	of	M-PESA:	An
U p d a t e .	http://www.mit.edu/~tavneet/M-
PESA_Update.pdf.	(accessed	April,	2013).
4.	 Watson	 I.	 Wing	 Cambodia.	 Available	 at:
http://cma-network.org/drupal/download/
wing_workshop_2mar2012/CMA%20Wing%20Workshop%20-
%20WING%20and%20Microfinance%20(Ian).pdf.
(accessed	April,	2013).
5.	Ministry	of	Posts	and	Telecommunications.
Mobile	 Services.
http://www.mptc.gov.kh/view/home/default.aspx?
info_de=mptc_de_service&s_Id=1.	 (accessed
April,	2013).
6.	 Nokia.	 Nokia	 Dual	 SIM	 –	 Get	 double	 the
bene ts	 with	 a	 Dual	 SIM	 phone.
http://www.nokia.com/in-en/products/dual-
sim/.	(accessed	April,	2013).
7.	Thong	T.	Language	Planning	and	Language
Policy	 of	 Cambodia.
http://sealang.net/sala/archives/pdf8/thel1985language.pdf.
(accessed	April,	2013).
8.	 SOAS	 University	 of	 London.	 Languages	 of
South	East	Asia	at	SOAS:	Khmer	(Cambodian).
http://www.soas.ac.uk/sea/sealanguages/khmer/.
(accessed	April,	2013).
9.	 KhmerOS.	 Khmer	 Unicode	 Phone.
http://www.khmeros.info/drupal612/en/node/2623.
(accessed	April,	2013).
10.	VuthaSurf.	Nokia	speaks	Khmer	language.
http://old.vuthasurf.com/nokia-speaks-khmer-
language/.	(accessed	April,	2013).
11.	 Sophasawatsakal	 C.	 Pink	 telephones	 –
using	 technology	 to	 empower	 women	 in
C a m b o d i a .	http://policy-
practice.oxfam.org.uk/blog/2012/03/pink-
telephones-in-cambodia.	 (accessed	 April,
2013).
12.	Verboice	–	Listen	and	respond	to	the	voice
of	 your	 community.
http://ndt.instedd.org/2011/11/verboice-
listen-and-respond-to-voice-of.html.	(accessed
April,	2013).
13.	 Chibi	 website.	http://chibitxt.me/.
(accessed	April,	2013).
14.	 Lee	 T.	 Forget	 S’pore,	 Chibi	 founder	 nds
Cambodia	 a	 great	 launchpad	 for	 Asia.
http://sgentrepreneurs.com/2012/04/09/forget-
spore-chibi-founder-finds-cambodia-a-great-
launchpad-for-asia/.	(accessed	April,	2013).
15.	 USAID.	 USAID-Cambodia-RFA-442-12-
000005,	 Social	 Innovation	 Lab	 –	 Kampuchea
(SILK).	August	8,	2012.
16.	 InSTEDD	 website.	 Smart	 Mobile
(Cambodia)	 and	 InSTEDD	 Deploy	 Innovative
Tools	 for	 Public	 Health.
http://instedd.org/news-media/press-
releases/smart-mobile/.	 (accessed	 April,
2013).
17.	 Chib	 A,	 Wilkin	 H,	 Hoefman	 B.
Vulnerabilities	 in	mHealth	 implementation:	 a
Ugandan	 HIV/AIDS	 SMS	 campaign.	Global
Health	 Promotion	 2013;20(1Suppl):26-32.	
18.	Throwden	E.	Customers	grapple	with	poor
mobile	 coverage.	 Australian	 Broadcasting
Corporation	 (ABC).
http://www.abc.net.au/news/2013-04-
25/summit-to-address-poor-mobile-
coverage/4650556.	(accessed	July,	2013).
19.	De	Tolly	K,	Alexander	H.	Innovative	Use	of
Cellphone	Technology	for	HIV/AIDS	Behaviour
Change	 Communications:	 3	 Pilot	 Projects.
W3C	 2009.
http://www.w3.org/2008/10/MW4D_WS/papers/kdetolly.pdf
(accessed	July,	2013).
20.	Inbaraj	S.	Responding	to	Day	3	Falciparum
Malaria	 Positives	 in	 Real-Time.	 Malaria
Containment.
http://malariacontainment.wordpress.com/2011/04/04/responding-
to-day-3-falciparum-malaria-positives-in-real-
time/.	(accessed	July,	2013).
©	journalMTM.com	|	Journal	of	Mobile
Technology	in	Medicine	Inc.
Electronic	ISSN	1839-7808.	All	Rights	Reserved.
This	work	is	licensed	under	a	 Creative	Commons	Attribution-NonCommercial-
NoDerivs	3.0	Unported	License
