For the first time, treatment 
data could be monitored 
in real time, increasing the 
speed and the impact of 
the campaign.
SMS FOR LIFE: SIGHTSAVERS
IMPLEMENTATION DATE:  April to October 2014 
Increasing efficiencies and impact in programs to eliminate 
neglected tropical diseases 
Cameroon is endemic to multiple neglected tropical diseases (NTDs), including trachoma, schistosomiasis, 
lymphatic filariasis (Lf), onchocerciasis, and soil-transmitted helminths.1 There are 21.4 million people at 
risk for one or more of these NTDs, and in 2013 alone Sightsavers distributed 10.3 million treatments 
to protect against them in Cameroon.2 Communities are censored and treated during mass drug 
administration (MDA) either on an annual or biannual basis.  The SMS for Life platform, created and 
supported by Greenmash, was designed to connect health facilities, health district services, and the regional 
delegations of the Ministry of Public Health on one platform. In 2014, Sightsavers, along with the NTDs 
Unit of the Ministry of Public Health, used SMS for Life to collect weekly data during the onchoseriasis/
Lf MDA of Mectizan and Albendazole in the Southwest region of Cameroon. For the first time, treatment 
data could be monitored in real time, increasing the speed and the impact of the campaign.
About SMS for Life
SMS for Life in Cameroon was set up by the National smartphones, SMS, Unstructured Supplementary Service Malaria Control Programme (NMCP) in 2013, and Data (USSD), and web with data available in online reports, 
later joined by Sightsavers’ NTDs program. Though SMS by email, and as text reminders. The benefits of working 
for Life was originally designed to alleviate the issue of with Greenmash go beyond the technology itself—they also 
stock-outs at the health facility level, the program now work to get lower rates and secure shortcodes from mobile 
embraces a variety of partners in a public-private initiative, operators, are available 24 hours a day for tech support, and 
including the NMCP, Clinton Health Access Initiative, assist with user training—both on mobile, for data uploaders, 
UN Population Fund, Germany’s GIZ, North American and on the web platform for district managers.3  
Aerospace Defense Command, MTN, Malaria No More, Sightsavers worked in 10 districts; Bangem, Buea, Konye, 
Novartis, and Sightsavers. Greenmash’s mango platform is the Kumba, Limbe, Mbonge, Muyuka, Nguti, Tiko, and 
technical backbone. Cloud-based mango accepts data through 
44  n  DATA COLLECTION
SIGHTSAVERS
Tombel, which included 74 health facilities. Eight indicators before the regional appraisal meeting in November. In the other 
were collected: districts, only 40 percent of data were available during district 
 Censured (M/F) appraisal and 55 percent during the regional appraisal meeting.n
n Treated (M/F)  Lessons Learned  
n Adverse effects (M/F)
n Refusals (M/F) n Don’t reinvent the wheel. Find out what platforms are 
As usual, thousands of community-directed distributors already being used in a country and combine forces. This 
implemented the MDA across the region. But this time they will not only save time and money, but also makes sense 
brought their data to the health facilities on a strict weekly for the country to be as harmonized as possible.
basis. Health facility workers then aggregated and uploaded n Incentivize data collectors. Asking people to upload 
the data via short messaging service (SMS) using a set of data via mobile phone usually creates more work for 
codes. To assure that they sent in data, health facility workers them—a small but consistent incentive shows that their 
were sent an automated SMS each week alerting them that efforts are appreciated.
it was time to upload. If they sent in data before end of day, n Don’t train too early. Sightsavers left too much time 
they were automatically sent an incentive of phone credit.4 between training in April and when data collection 
As SMS messages with data came in from the 74 facilities, started in August; many uploaders needed a refresher.  
the 10 district managers were able to view live weekly census/ n Don’t overestimate phone literacy. Many older users 
treatment reports on the system and immediately follow up had trouble typing out SMS messages—ensure there is 
on problem areas. adequate time in any training to cover the basics. 
Evaluation and Results n Start with the paper. Though Sightsavers is using mobile, health facility workers still needed to extract data from 
paper registers and aggregate it to send in. This required a 
All eight indicators were collected through the period of the morning of training, but was essential to the program. 
Mectizan and Albendazole MDA. In total, details of 955,511 
censors and 777,631 treatments came in via SMS. Using 
SMS for Life cut down on time spent in the field by one- Conclusion
third. During an MDA, community-directed distributors 
also do a census to understand how many drugs are needed Building on the success of this pilot, Sightsavers plans to 
(this community census often differs from government continue in the Southwest region and scale into three more 
estimates, so it is necessary). Historically, census and regions throughout 2015, tracking MDAs on trachoma, 
treatment happen at the same time, with drugs being sent lymphatic filariasis, and onchocerciasis. The team will 
only as district managers receive paper-based data. Using ameliorate the training and implementation design, learning 
SMS for Life, the census was done first, and utilizing online from challenges encountered, to bring an improved system 
reports the appropriate amount of medication was sent to into new areas of Cameroon. The hope is to not only grow 
each community. District managers were also able to watch as this within Sightsavers but also bring other NTD programs 
the census happened and see how close each community was on board to cover the entire country, all the while building 
to its target census number. When a community was behind, capacity within the Ministry of Public Health and leaving 
someone could call or be sent to intervene. In the districts a lasting, and useful, legacy. The team is also planning to 
using SMS for Life, the census and treatment process lasted conduct research in 2015 and 2016 with leading health 
two months. In all other regions, it lasted three months.  economists on the efficiencies, cost savings, and impact 
improvement of such interventions. It’s essential that not 
These efficiencies increased the amount of people censured only Sightsavers, but the NTD community at large, quantify 
and effectively treated. In the areas using SMS for Life, the how moving to mobile can improve the way we deliver 
number of people censured increased 10.9 percent from programs and accelerate the path towards elimination. n
2013, and number of treatments increased 10.2 percent; 
in a neighboring area not using SMS for Life, the number Geographic Coverage: Cameroon, Southwest Region
of people censured increased 4.9 percent from 2013, and Implementation Partners: Sightsavers, Neglected Tropical 
number of treatments 3.5 percent.  Diseases Unit of the Ministry of Public Health, Greenmash  
Reporting was also much improved; where data was collect- Donor: Sightsavers
ed electronically, 90 percent of community-based data were Contact Information: Sarah Bartlett, mHealth Advisor, 
available during district appraisal meetings and 100 percent Sightsavers, sbartlett@sightsavers.org 
mHEALTH COMPENDIUM  VOLUME 5  n  45
