COMMUNITY
SPOTLIGHT
PEOPLE IN NEED (PIN)
CAMBODIA
BACKGROUND
Emerging from a recent history of political instability, suppression of development, 
and genocide, many Cambodians face signifi cant barriers to health education and 
health care. These barriers are especially prevalent in rural populations where the 
majority of the population (over 80%) of Cambodians live. In addition, many people 
living in rural Cambodia have very little disposable income and relatively low 
literacy rates. 
PHOTO COURTESY OF JIRI PASZ/PIN Traditional health practices regarding pregnancy and child rearing are still common 
and encouraged in rural communities. Many people are also not aware of danger 
signs, or that early detection is the best chance to avoid many of the prevalent issues 
poor, rural Cambodians suffer from. This creates a situation where mothers or 
caregivers tend to go to available health clinics only when the situation is dire and 
irreparable damage has already been done. The delay of seeking formalized health 
care for children is common in rural Cambodia. While the country has made signif-
icant strides in under 5 child mortality, Cambodia has maintained a high neonatal 
mortality rate (27 per 1,000 live births nationwide), which is dramatically higher in 
certain areas such as Kampong Chhnang province (45 deaths per 1,000 live births). 
Keeping these factors in mind, mHealth has the potential to improve newborn care, 
addressing an important and achievable target area for health in Cambodia.
Mobile phones are now almost universal in Cambodian society — almost 90% of 
the population owns a cell phone. Thus, there is potential for effi cient information 
dissemination amongst often hard to reach groups. People in Need (PIN) Cambodia, 
a Czech nonprofi t organization, has trialed and is now ready to expand the use of 
automated messaging mobile technology as a means of promoting health messages 
MAMA: MOBILE ALLIANCE FOR MATERNAL ACTION | COMMUNITY SPOTLIGHT 1
at a large scale to beneficiaries in the central Cambodian province of Kampong 
Chhnang. The mHealth program was developed in partnership with Open Institute 
and InSTEDD (two local non-government organizations) who assisted in developing 
the software and mobile infrastructure.
The intervention in Cambodia utilizes IVR technology using an open source platform 
called Verboice (developed by InSTEDD). Each message uploaded to Verboice and sent 
to mothers is between 60-90 seconds long — the maximum amount of time that people 
will concentrate on a recorded message without losing focus or attention. Due to the 
nature of recorded messages not all information can be provided, so the objective is to 
remind and prompt the audience to seek more information if required. 
This is achieved by visiting or contacting the closest health centre. In total, the PIN 
mHealth program disseminates seven voice-messages in a period of four weeks, 
which equates to one message being sent every three days. The topic of the messages 
is the care of newborn babies (focusing on the first vulnerable period of life, hence 
a four week long pilot program). Before developing the script for the voice-message 
content, the MAMA messages were consulted to look at the key information that 
should be included in the message and the simple manner in which such messages 
should be delivered to the target audience (mothers and caregivers of newborns). 
ADAPTATION, TRANSLATION AND LOCALIZATION
After reviewing the MAMA message templates, PIN Cambodia adapted the content 
to ensure that it resonated with the Ministry of Health’s Safe Motherhood Protocols 
and was endorsed by the government. Messages centered around newborn health 
care such as effective and exclusive breastfeeding, cord care, keeping warm and the 
early recognition of danger signs. All messages encouraged mothers to seek further 
care from health centers if there was anything wrong. The script to deliver the 
messages was designed to ensure that the main points of the messages (knowledge 
of newborn care, danger signs observed, and then visits to the health centre) would 
be memorable to subscribers. Before finalising the script, PIN Cambodia underwent 
rapid prototype testing of the messages in the target group to ensure that the users 
understood the content and were able to identify with and recall the message. 
In the end, “personified messages” were chosen to be the format of the messages. 
“Personified messages” consisted of a character narrating the voice message. Five 
influential characters from the community were identified to be suitable for re-
PHOTOS COURTESY OF JIRI PASZ/PIN cording the script: three female characters (a midwife, a village health volunteer 
and a grandmother) and two male characters (a doctor and a village chief). Despite 
results in PIN Cambodia’s feasibility survey which suggested that most of the target 
group preferred female voices, PIN Cambodia decided that male voices were also 
important to include. The PIN team decided that they wanted the messages to be 
gender inclusive to encourage fathers in particular to be involved in the care of their 
newborn. Additionally, PIN Cambodia’s earlier feasibility report indicated that only 
45% of women in the target area owned their own mobile phones, leaving a majority 
of phones belonging to their husbands. This meant that it was likely the husband of 
the target user would receive some of the voice-messages.
Messages are reinforced by a toy for babies (a hanging swing baby mobile) provided 
to mothers upon registration that illustrate the key topics covered in easy to under-
stand images. This is important to serve as a reference guide as well as reminder 
of messages given.
MAMA: MOBILE ALLIANCE FOR MATERNAL ACTION | COMMUNITY SPOTLIGHT 2
The main challenges the PIN Cambodia team encountered with regards to imple-
menting the messages were low levels of education and health literacy, coupled 
with high prevalence of traditional beliefs regarding pregnancy and child rearing 
that contributed to widespread misconceptions and misinformation. Traditional 
practices are often perpetuated by advice provided from key influencers from 
within the family unit or wider community. For example, some believe it is good to 
apply unsterile animal products to the umbilical cord after birth. These practices 
pose challenges to the effectiveness of a project aimed at changing health related 
behaviors because new mothers and their supporting partners are accustomed to 
listening to the respected senior members of their family and community for advice. 
This practice, consulting older and respected members of society for advice, is a very 
important aspect of Cambodian culture. 
Keeping these factors in mind, the PIN Cambodia team decided to center their approach 
on the concept “it takes a village to raise a baby”. While the mobile messaging program’s 
primary target audience is mothers and caregivers, it is also aimed at influencing a 
wider secondary audience or “the whole village” (mothers, sisters, husbands, midwives, 
etc.) to leverage the importance of the communal structure present in Cambodia. It 
also taps into the element of pride of raising a baby appropriately and collectively. In 
addition, the messages are delivered using characters that represent key influencers — 
e.g. a village chief, grandmother, aunty, health worker — and as such convey culturally 
PHOTO COURTESY OF JIRI PASZ/PIN relevant, trusted and traditional authority figures.
PROGRAM DESIGN AND IMPLEMENTATION
As mobile based health promotion is a fairly new concept in Cambodia, the PIN 
Cambodia team first performed a feasibility study in July 2013 of the current mobile 
usage trends by mothers, and surveyed their attitudes toward the proposed program. 
Interviews were also conducted with midwives from 11 health centers and one re-
ferral hospital in the Kampong Tralach Operational District of Kampong Chhnang 
Province, Cambodia. The PIN Health Team surveyed 78 mothers with newborns and 
12 midwives for the feasibility study. In addition, one midwife was surveyed in each 
health facility. All midwives interviewed were positive about the program and said 
that they thought mothers were likely to want to participate in a mobile voice-mes-
saging service that gave information about newborn care.
Of the mothers interviewed, all reported having access to a mobile phone which 
either belonged to them personally, to their husbands, or a family member/neighbor 
(often being family that are living on the same property). As such, the automated 
voice-messaging service was not only targeted at the mothers of newborns but also 
the family/household unit as a whole. Furthermore, a key feature of the service 
allows the voice-message to be repeated, making the information more accessible to 
other key caregivers.
Between September and December 2013, the mHealth program was piloted in Kampong 
Chhnang province with 455 participants registered to receive messages on neonatal 
care. After piloting the program, PIN undertook a Pilot Evaluation aimed at finding 
out the overall reception of program concept and response from the target audience.
REGISTRATION:
Midwives were trained by PIN and Open Institute staff on how to register the phone 
number of the subscriber for the automated voice-messaging system. These mid-
wives registered women after delivery of their babies at the local Health Centre. Past 
MAMA: MOBILE ALLIANCE FOR MATERNAL ACTION | COMMUNITY SPOTLIGHT 3
experience with mobile usage in Cambodia indicates that self-registration would be 
difficult and potentially confusing for the mother (with many pieces of information 
to be entered such as the baby’s date of birth, etc.). Midwives were therefore chosen 
to be in charge of program entry. In order to streamline the process of task manage-
ment, the PIN team developed a checklist given to midwives as a helpful reminder to 
register the target women and their families on to the mHealth service. In this phase, 
there was no cost for users for the service.
TECHNOLOGY
Automated voice messages were sent to registered phones twice a week in the first 
three weeks and then one final summary message provided in the fourth week. As 
this was the first time that the software Verboice was used in this type of program, 
PIN tested the technological aspects of the program and monitored for any issues. 
Overall, the technological aspects of the pilot worked well. PIN staff managing the 
Verboice platform were able to provide feedback of their experiences to InSTEDD to 
improve the program and include some new features that will help to streamline op-
erations. For example, PIN staff recommended that InSTEDD add a search function 
to Verboice whereby one could search a user’s phone number for monitoring and 
evaluation purposes.
PARTNERSHIPS
PIN Cambodia’s mHealth program was planned and developed with a number of key 
partners and stakeholders. This consortium will continue to expand if the project is 
fully launched and has nationwide coverage.
InSTEDD, PIN Cambodia’s key tech partner, manages the development and imple-
mentation of the Verboice platform used for delivering mHealth messages. InSTEDD 
provides the Verboice platform development and implementation at no cost. In 
addition, Open Institute facilitates interactions between PIN and Cambodian Tele-
communications Providers. 
PIN Cambodia also has a partnership with 17 Triggers, a socially focused marketing 
agency. 17 Triggers is currently involved in developing the mHealth messages and 
concept. This includes creating the designs for marketing materials and developing 
the IVR messages’ audience friendly characters and scripts. In addition, PIN Cambo-
dia partners with Women’s Media Centre an organization that provides voice talent 
and production of the final voice messages used for the mHealth program. PIN is 
planning to continue this partnership through recording an estimated 180 addition-
al messages for the expanded version of the program.
PIN Cambodia also collaborates with RACHA, The Reproductive and Child Health 
Alliance, a Cambodia based NGO. RACHA provides PIN with local health experts 
that develop base content for pre-recorded messages, as well as facilitates with 
Ministry of Health (MoH) for approval of messages. Midwives and health workers 
at a variety of community level health clinics serve as the ideal contact point for 
the program’s primary target audience, and have been established through the pilot 
phase (currently running) as vital for the success of this project.
Finally, PIN Cambodia is the process of successfully forming partnerships with tele-
communication companies in Cambodia in order to effectively deliver the mHealth 
content in future stages of rollout. The three major operators in terms of subscriber 
MAMA: MOBILE ALLIANCE FOR MATERNAL ACTION | COMMUNITY SPOTLIGHT 4
numbers are Metfone (9.5 million subscribers), Smart (5 million subscribers), and 
Cellcard (3.2 million subscribers). PIN Cambodia’s next steps include engagement 
with these providers in order to make the program more sustainable.
BUSINESS MODEL
PIN Cambodia is currently in the early phases of developing a business model. They 
envision a financial model that would potentially include a fee-based service. Over 
95% of those who have registered with the program have stated that they would not 
mind paying a nominal fee (roughly USD 0.5/month) for the services because they 
saw value in the program. PIN would also like to offer a free service to the very poor 
who are not able to pay (based on Cambodia’s established ID Poor System).
By introducing a small subscription fee for users, the project will have set secured 
revenue per user every month, which is easily defined and tracked. A portion of this 
fee will need to be allocated to telecommunication providers in exchange for their 
communications support and partnership. Due to economies of scale, this should 
contribute enough revenue to run, expand, provide very poor communities with free 
access to the program, and be profitable for the mHealth program as an entity and for 
the telecommunications provider partners.
M&E
The PIN Cambodia team working on this mHealth program has a regular process 
monitoring system in place. Each week a member of the health team does a spot 
check of registrants to ensure that the messages are getting through and to receive 
participant feedback. They also check-in with the midwives to receive feedback on 
whether the registration process is running smoothly and the midwives also call 
PIN staff to report any technical problems. Furthermore, the Verboice system keeps 
statistics on calls being made, so the team can see how long each call has been lis-
tened to, if certain messages are being cut short and if a participant has not received 
the message, and can rectify the situation immediately. While monitoring is a cru-
cial component to the program, it is very labour intensive for PIN staff. 
As previously mentioned, a more comprehensive evaluation of the pilot was 
completed in December 2013. This pilot of the mHealth program was implemented 
by one Program Manager and two support staff. The evaluation of the pilot sought to 
answer some key programmatic questions around technology, user-friendliness and 
satisfaction, and acceptance of the messages among others.
The team found that over 90% of respondents in the survey said that they received 
the messages in whole and clear form, but unfortunately most received just four 
out of the seven messages that they were sent. Almost all (close to 96%) of the 
respondents said that the timing of the calls was convenient and all (100%) said that 
the voice messages were believable, respectable and understandable. In addition, 
satisfaction with the service was 100%. Of participants surveyed, 45% reported 
learning new information about newborn care and 43% reported they brought their 
newborns to the Health Centre as a result of listening to the messages. In addition, 
70% of mothers reported they had given the messages to other caregivers (fathers, 
grandmothers, etc.) to also listen to.
The PIN Cambodia team believes that monitoring and evaluation, and providing 
real-life feedback is the key to ensuring that the program is what the target audience 
actually needs.
MAMA: MOBILE ALLIANCE FOR MATERNAL ACTION | COMMUNITY SPOTLIGHT 5
CHALLENGES
When PIN Cambodia began the program, the major bottleneck in the first few weeks 
was technology. While the team could test the technology somewhat in the ‘lab’, 
when the program went ‘live’ it was difficult to predict if the connection might time 
out, how the system would handle simultaneous calls, etc. The first few days they 
had issues with registration where sometimes the number listed for a subscriber 
could not be called. However, the midwives who handle registrations would contact 
the PIN team immediately and report the problem. The PIN team saw this as a 
positive sign that the midwives felt immediate ownership of the program. After the 
first few weeks and a system upgrade, the technical problems were smoothed out. 
Another challenge the PIN Cambodia team encountered was that some of the fea-
tures needed to make the program more efficient were not available. For example, if 
a midwife reported that a registered phone number on the system was not receiving 
messages, the team was unable to search that number to see what was going wrong. 
Instead, they had to manually check through all the numbers that were registered. 
When the team realized they needed additional features in their operating system, 
they met with InSTEDD, the program software designer and requested these new 
PHOTO COURTESY OF JIRI PASZ/PIN capabilities. Since then, InSTEDD has developed the new features requested and the 
PIN team is testing them out.
Currently, the main obstacle the PIN team faces is limited funding to undertake a 
proper impact assessment to examine health-related behavior change in the partic-
ipants of the mHealth program. In addition, the PIN Cambodia team is currently 
developing a strategy to engage the telecommunication companies in Cambodia, 
and figuring out how to develop the mHealth program into a value-added service for 
these companies. PIN Cambodia hopes that in the future, mobile phone companies 
will offer this service to all eligible customers and keep this program sustained in 
the long run with limited support from NGOs.
FUTURE PLANS
The PIN Cambodia team is currently working to make the program financially 
sustainable by 2020, design the program so that telecommunication partners can 
implement it and so that the poorest subscribers can have free access to the program. 
The team’s next step involves more efficacy research to determine how effective 
the messages are in providing users with more knowledge about newborn care, 
and undertaking further impact evaluations to assess how effective the mHealth 
approach is with regards to health care seeking behaviors, infant care practices and 
infant morbidity. The efficacy research will be done in the first half of 2014. After the 
efficacy research is complete, and depending on the results, the team plans to scale 
up the program and potentially undertake an impact evaluation. 
PIN Cambodia looks forward to engaging with other MAMA Community Members, 
to hear about their experiences, particularly with regards to the process of scaling-up 
and working with telecommunication partners.
MAMA: MOBILE ALLIANCE FOR MATERNAL ACTION | COMMUNITY SPOTLIGHT 6
The MAMA Community Spotlight series 
shines a light on some of the great work 
being done by organizations using MAMA’s 
adaptable mobile messages. Each month 
we feature a new organization that has 
downloaded our messages and is using mobile 
technology to improve maternal, newborn and 
child health. 
Inspired by these innovative programs? 
Download the MAMA messages for yourself by 
visiting www.mobilemamaalliance.org 
and completing our short questionnaire.
For inquires about working with our 
partnership, contact: 
MAMA Global
 tel: 202.887.9040 
email: info@mobilemamaalliance.org
Media Inquiries, contact: 
Mabinty Koroma 
tel: 202.862.6315 
email: mkoroma@mobilemamaalliance.org
