 
mCARE: ENHANCING NEONATAL 
SURVIVAL IN RURAL SOUTH ASIA 
and essential newborn care in resource-poor settings. 
This project is being implemented from 2011 to 2014 in 
the JiVitA Project Site in rural Gaibandha District of 
Bangladesh, one of the largest rural population research 
sites in South Asia, covering 650,000 people and where 
90% of all infants are reported to be born at home.   
ABOUT mCARE 
mCARE’s goal is to improve pregnancy registration and 
enhance survival of preterm infants in resource-poor 
settings through active pregnancy and birth surveillance, 
targeted and accountable provision of antenatal and 
postnatal care and referral facilitation. Its health 
information system includes automated reminders for 
BRIEF OVERVIEW antenatal and postnatal visits, checklists for basic home-
based newborn care, notification of labor and birth, and 
According to research conducted by West, Christian, 
emergency mobilization or referral support for rural 
Labrique and other colleagues in Bangladesh, 50% of 
women and families. 
women experiencing an obstetric crisis use a mobile 
phone to call a provider, obtain medical advice, or CHWs are responsible for pregnant women in their 
arrange transport or financial aid. The JiVitA Maternal & communities whom they monitor and ensure the 
Child Health and Nutrition Research Project has delivery of antenatal services. Their work and primary 
implemented projects where, at the onset of labor, signal functions can be enhanced using simple mobile and 
mobile phone calls were made to nurse-midwife teams cloud-based scheduling and support systems, such as the 
who were then dispatched to the home, where over mCARE mobile CHW Support System. Community 
80% of births in this population occur.. This has resulted health workers are connected to their pregnant clients 
in highly skilled birth attendance for 89% of the 500 and their newborns to improve the delivery of antenatal 
pregnancies under that pilot study. While mobile phones care by scheduling follow-up visits, by compressing the 
are becoming ubiquitous in rural Bangladesh, many time to respond to crises by allowing families to trigger 
lower socioeconomic families may not own a phone, the mobilization of referral and emergency response 
while they are often at the highest risk of increased systems, and by creating novel windows of opportunity 
maternal and neonatal mortality and morbidity. This is for intervention through innovative use of known data 
changing rapidly, as a survey of 168,000 families, such as gestational age and previous pregnancy outcome 
conducted in the JiVitA project site in rural Bangladesh to predict potentially high risk deliveries. 
in early 2012, revealed that over 70% of households in 
the study area own a personal mobile phone.  
EVALUATION AND RESULTS 
The mCARE project has developed and is testing an 
integrated mobile phone-based data system that links The project builds on a long engagement in 
rural community health workers (CHW) and their collaborative, population-based research by the JiVitA  
clients (pregnant women and newborns) in order to 1) Maternal and Child Health and Nutrition research site in 
systematize pregnancy and birth registration, 2) rural Bangladesh. The CHW-client link contains a 
effectively target the delivery of antenatal and postnatal rigorous evaluation component that measures system 
care to mothers and newborns, and 3) enhance survival functionality, usability and performance indicators prior 
of preterm infants by promotion of emergency referral to deployment and testing at scale.  
68 mHEALTH COMPENDIUM   │    VOLUME 2 
 
 SERVICE DELIVERY 
In the country's rural northwest where the mCARE CONCLUSION 
study is focused, few mothers deliver babies at hospitals mCARE is working to demonstrate that mobile health 
(>80% of women give birth at home - in the absence of technology can play a role in improving referral systems. 
skilled medical personnel - and most women are at The project has completed formative and development 
home when complications occur). For the women who stages, and Bangladesh's ministry of health has approved 
can reach health facilities to address their health testing at scale. The next step will be to measure 
problems, a preliminary study was interested to resulting improvements through a study involving 1,600 
understand whether these facilities were well equipped pregnant women. 
to address these life-threatening complications. It 
evaluated emergency obstetric care capabilities at 14  
high-volume private and public health facilities while also 
GEOGRAPHIC COVERAGE 
identifying ideal patient referral locations for the 
Gaibdandha District, Bangladesh  
mCARE system. The study determined there was 
potential to improve referral and that mobile health 
technology could play a key role. IMPLEMENTATION PARTNERS 
Johns Hopkins Bloomberg School of Public Health in 
collaboration with technical and research partners 
LESSONS LEARNED mPower-Health and the JiVitA Maternal Child Health 
 It is feasible to deploy and evaluate an mHealth and Nutrition Research Project, under the stewardship 
intervention project in an established research of Bangladesh’s Ministry of Health and Family Welfare  
setting where outcomes are well studied and 
denominators are known. This wealth of FUNDER 
information allows for both quantitative and UBS Optimus Foundation  
qualitative evaluation. 
 Complications can be averted and infant mortality CONTACT INFORMATION 
can be potentially reduced through simple, low-cost Johns Hopkins Bloomberg School of Public 
interventions during delivery and the early neonatal Health  
period, a high-risk period that can be accessed with  Alain Labrique, Director, Johns Hopkins 
mobile notification. University Global mHealth Initiative  
Tel: +1-443-287-4744, Email: 
 Systematic surveillance, pregnancy identification and alabriqu@jhsph.edu  
birth notification systems are possible to deploy in UBS Optimus Foundation  
low-resource settings, using simple technology.  Manuel Pilla, Program Associate  
Tel: +41-44-234-81-86,        
 Low-literate community workers are capable, and 
Email: manuel.pilla@ubs.com  
often have access to mobile technologies, even in 
remote, resource-poor settings. 
 
Information was excerpted from:  
Gray, Jeff. “Mobile health researchers seek to improve emergency obstetric care in Bangladesh.” National Institutes of Health  
Fogarty International Center. 12.1. (January/February 2013). Web. 
“2011 News Releases: Bloomberg Faculty Honored for mHealth Innovation.” Johns Hopkins Bloomberg School of Public Health. 4 December 2011. Press Release. 
“Maternal and Neonatal Health: mCARE.” Johns Hopkins University Global mHealth Initiative. 2011. Print. 
  MHEALTH COMPENDIUM  |  VOLUME 2 69 
