ENGAGE TB 
Providing a tool for self-screening for tuberculosis in Tanzania  
SERVICE DELIVERY 
Implementation date:  June 2014 
With funding from Bristol-Myers Squibb Foundation, Pathfinder International (PI) in collaboration with the Tanzanian 
Ministry of Health and Social Welfare (MoHSW) through the National Tuberculosis and Leprosy Program (NTLP) and 
the Kinondoni Municipal Council are working jointly to intensify activities to “Stop TB” at the community level. This 
initiative is done through Pathfinder International’s new project called ENGAGE TB.  
About Engage TB 
Tuberculosis (TB) is an airborne disease associated with the capability to conduct laboratory tests to confirm TB, 
o vercrowding and poverty.  Kinondoni Municipality is using a web login can confirm if clients test TB positive 
densely populated municipality in Dar es Salaam, with over through sputum testing into the system that were referred 
1.2 million inhabitants. It is estimated that over 4,000 people using the SMS service. Once a client has been confirmed as 
c ontracted TB in Kinondoni Municipality in 2011. To address TB positive, the Lab Technicians will register the client back 
this health challenge, Pathfinder International contracted an into the application and hence enable the client to receive 
SMS Aggregator (a company called Push Mobile) to develop reminders about Directly Observed Therapy (DOT) to help 
 
a self-screening mobile application. The software enables the with adherence to TB medication for a period of six months. 
inhabitants of Kinondoni Municipality to do TB self-screening 
a nd access the basic health information related to TB via 
Clients, who are TB Negative, will receive messages about 
short messages (SMS) through their phones by sending a behavior change to help them avoid the spread of TB and or 
code word “TB” to a network neutral toll free short code being infected by TB. 
( 15077) free of charge. The application asks a series of In addition to these direct benefits, Pathfinder international 
questions, according to the WHO TB Screening Protocol is taking part in the global campaign of attaining the sixth 
including basic information such as the symptoms and signs Millennium Development Goal (MDG) through the provision 
o f TB.  of vital TB information.. 
Apart from giving the client information, the mobile 
a pplication also provides a list of health facilities that have  
 
62  |  mHealth Compendium Volume 4 
Evaluation and Results 
Age Category Overall Completed Referred TB 
Pathfinder began implementing 
Male clients ENGAGE-TB in June 2014.  A total 
Under Five 27 18 16 5 of 540 mobile respondents 
Above Five 207 166 118 20 (inquiring about under-five and 
above five, males and females) have 
Sub-Total 234 184 134 25 
been registered into the systems, 
Female Clients 
and a total of 254 were referred of 
Under Five 22 15 13 1 which. Of these referrals, 37 
Above Five 196 147 107 11 respondents were diagnosed to be 
Sub-Total 218 162 `120 12 TB positive and have started 
Overall result 346 254  37 treatment. 
Lessons Learned 
 Introduction of the TB Self-Screening mobile application has increased access to services by community members in the 
Kinondoni Municipality; the system is simple and easy to use and has been received well by community health workers, 
health facility workers and Municipal officials 
 Shortage of health care workers in health facilities has increased the work load of laboratory staff and health facility staff 
in uploading the testing results of mobile users in the system 
 The Engage TB Self-Screening Mobile application increased the work load of community health workers, District Staff 
and lab technicians and no incentives or additional motivation was provided to them, thus affecting project performance    
 Integrating of TB Self -Screening mobile application and referral services into existing community structures, using the 
community health workers as ambassadors, enabled fast start-up and acceptance of the project into the community; This 
approach delivers TB Screening services directly to the households of clients thus ensuring access to TB screening 
services without barriers of direct and opportunity costs to the client 
Conclusion 
Engage TB project has been a learning process for Pathfinder, Geographic Coverage: Kinondoni District, Dar 
Kinondoni District Staff and community health workers in general. Es Salaam in Tanzania 
The introduction of an m-Health intervention to successful Implementation Partners: Pathfinder 
identifying the TB cases early through Self-Screening services and International, Ministry of Health and Social Welfare 
offer the required assistance to gain access to treatment and reduce (MOHSW), National Tuberculosis And Leprosy 
TB cases and multi drug TB resistance in the communities is seen as Program (NTLP), Kinondoni Municipal Council and 
a great and innovative way of achieving this goal by both the Push Mobile  
Ministry of Health and Social Welfare, The National Tuberculosis 
and Leprosy Program and the Kinondoni Health Management Team. Funder: Bristol-Myers Squibb Foundation  
Lack of funding for maintaining the Self Screening Mobile Application 
system as the project is coming to an end means the system will not Contact Information: 
be online again after end of project just a short time after launched. Pathfinder | Mustafa Kudrati 
(Mkudrati@pathfinder.org); Dr. Pasiens Mapunda 
(Pmapunda@pathfinder.org); Marion McNabb 
(Mmcnabb@pathfinder.org); Benjamin Mrema 
(Bmrema@pathfinder.org) 
 
mHealth Compendium Volume 4  |  63 
