Search
Select Language
Home About
Digital
Health
Resources Meetings
&
Presentations
Advisory
Board Global
Digital
Health
Forum
TaTkhine gGlobal Digital Health Network envisions a world where technical innovation supports improved health and
contributes to better quality, accessibility and sustainability of health services and health outcomes, particularly
cafroer
 ounfderserved populations in low resource environments.
heJroin
the
conversation!
community
A
community
nutrition
educator in
Barwani,
India, enters
data on her
mobile
phone
during a
home visit in
one of the
villages she
serves. ©
2013
Chelsea
Hedquist,
Courtesy of
Photoshare
 
Global	Digital	Health	Network	Monthly	Meeting
Please join us on October
3rd
at
10:00am
EST  for our monthly Global Digital Health Network meeting, hosted by DAI in
Washington, DC and online via webinar!
 
Cybersecurity
and
5G
in
Digital
Health
 
Electronic health records and digital health systems have allowed greater and more rapid access to potentially life-saving
information for patients around the world. Despite the benefits health data has brought the sector, these digital systems are often
exploited. In low and middle-income countries (LMICs), adoption of digital health systems is a priority for donors and governments
alike, yet in these countries digital health systems are particularly vulnerable to exploitation. This is because in LMICs there is
prevalent use of unlicensed software, out of date systems, siloed health solutions that exchange data without understanding
security vulnerabilities and protections, and lack of trained Ministry of Health staff in cybersecurity, leaving health systems
vulnerable to exploitation, misuse, and undetected data breaches. Lack of trained cybersecurity specialists within the international
development community complicates the problem further. Recent cybersecurity incidents in Mexico, Ukraine, Nigeria, and other
LMICs point to the immediate need to address the issue, particularly as the roll out of 5G and IoT approaches. During this
presentation, DAI and Project Balance will discuss why cybersecurity for healthcare professionals is critical to the global digital
health agenda by describing ongoing initiatives as well as examples of cases where projects have implemented cybersecurity
measures to protect health data.
 
Registration: Please register here on Eventbrite . Space in DC is limited to 20 participants, so please register online if you plan to
attend in person.
 
A note for in-person attendees: the space is only accessible with a key card so participants will have to sign-in at the front desk
and go up to the 8th floor, to be let up to the 10th floor.
 
Call-
in:
 
Join WebEx meeting
Meeting number (access code): 738 529 732
Join from a video system or application
Dial 738529732@dail.webex.com
You can also dial 173.243.2.68 and enter your meeting number.
 
Join by phone
Tap to call in from a mobile device (attendees only)
+1-415-655-0003 US Toll
+44-203-198-8141 UK Toll
Global call-in numbers
--------------------------------------------------------------------------
Registration	is	now	open	for	the	2019	Global	Digital	Health	Forum!
Please
visit
our
conference
website  to buy tickets, make hotel reservations, learn how to be a sponsor, apply for a travel
scholarship, and more!
Thank	you	all	so	much	for	the	overwhelming	response	to	the	call	for	abstracts.	We	received	over	400	submissions	from	61
countries	and	700	authors	and	have	sent	out	all	abstract	decisions.
2019 Global Digital Health Forum theme is: Celebrating
Innovation
and
Supporting
Proven
Practices
at
Scale.   This year’s
Forum will highlight evidence-based practices being scaled around the world as part of national digital health strategies. We will
also highlight the ways in which all of you are innovating within the ever-changing landscape of global digital health to increase
efficiency and effectiveness.
Date: December 9-11, 2019
Location: Bethesda North Marriott; Rockville, Maryland (Greater Washington DC area)
Hope to see you there!
Trinity and Steve
GDHN Co-Chairs
 
 
ADVISORY
BOARD
ORGANIZATIONS
All
Advisory
Board
Members
© 2019 The Johns Hopkins University This website is made possible by the support of the American People through the United States Agency for
International Development (USAID). The mHealth Working Group website is managed by the Knowledge for Health
(K4Health) Project. K4Health is supported by USAID's Office of Population and Reproductive Health , Bureau for
Global Health, under Cooperative Agreement #AID-OAA-A-13-00068. K4Health is
implemented by the Johns Hopkins Bloomberg School of Public Health's Center for
Communication Programs (JHU∙CCP) in collaboration with FHI 360, Management
Sciences for Health, and IntraHealth International. The contents of this website are the
sole responsibility of the mHealth Working Group. The information provided on this
website is not official U.S. Government information and does not necessarily represent
the views or positions of USAID, the United States Government, or the Johns Hopkins University.
 
Powered by
