TC311:	Technology	for	Data	Visualization	and
Analysis
Share	this:
 Tweet  Share 0  Share 0
> TC311:	Technology	for	Data	Visualization	and
All	courses Analysis
 	$495.00
 	4	weeks
Are	you	analyzing	your	data	efficiently	and	displaying	them	effectively?	Nearly	all	of	us	are	responsible	for
producing	reports	for	our	colleagues,	supervisors,	and	clients.	Good	data	visualization	is	essential	to	analyzing
your	data	quickly	and	making	an	impact	on	those	who	see	it.
Course	Description
The	importance	of	data	visualization	has	become	apparent	in	the	current	era	of	‘big	data’	that	we	live	in.
Effectively	visualizing	data	can	lead	to	recognizing	key	information	quicker	and	demonstrating	impact	more
effectively.
This	four-week	online	certificate	course	will	focus	on	building	skills	and	strategies	to	better	visualize	and	analyze
data	using	a	variety	of	tech	tools.	It	will	feature	live	interactive	guest	expert	presentations	with	leading	M&E
practitioners,	software	developers,	and	data	scientists.	It	will	also	include	a	unique	hands-on	learning	environment
with	animated	videos,	technology	demos,	practical	activities,	networking	events,	immersive	simulations	and	more.
Effective	data	visualization	requires	both	critical	thinking	skills	and	technical	skills.	During	this	course,	we’ll	walk
you	through	the	step-by-step	design	process,	which	encompasses	both	skillsets.
You’ll	learn:
What	data	visualization	is	and	why	our	brains	respond	so	well	to	graphics;
Which	up-and-coming	trends	in	the	data	presentation	field	and	in	software	development	worth	paying
attention	to;
How	to	design	charts	that	fit	your	unique	stakeholders’	information	needs	and	interests;
Which	dissemination	format	is	best	for	your	project–like	static	graphs	within	reports,	handouts,
presentations,	or	infographics,	or	interactive	graphs	within	dashboards,	websites,	animated	videos,	and	GIFs;
Chart	choosing	tips,	like	which	layouts	are	best	for	showcasing	time	series	data,	part-to-whole	relationships,
geographic	patterns,	or	nested	data;
Strategies	for	displaying	qualitative	and	text-based	data,	like	sentiment	analysis,	color-coding,	timelines,
calendars,	and	diagrams;
How	to	select	and	use	software	tools–Excel,	R,	Tableau,	mapping	programs,	and	more–that	are	best	suited	to
your	chart	type	of	choice;	and
Which	default	settings	in	your	computer	program	need	to	be	adjusted	to	ensure	that	your	graph	follows	best
practices.	For	example,	you’ll	learn	how	to	write	titles,	subtitles,	and	annotations	that	capture	your	desired
takeaway	messages;	how	to	highlight	your	key	findings	with	color;	and	how	to	ensure	that	your	visualizations
are	readable	for	viewers	with	colorblindness.
Participants	will	create	data	visualizations	and	get	feedback	from	the	course’s	experts,	facilitators,	and	fellow
participants.	For	example,	during	Week	1,	you’ll	consider	your	audience’s	information	needs,	the	dissemination
format	for	your	visualization,	what	types	of	data	wrangling	techniques	are	needed	to	get	your	dataset	ready	to
visualize,	and	key	data	responsibility	issues.	During	Week	2,	you’ll	learn	to	select	the	best	chart	types	for	your
dataset–beyond	the	overused	pie	chart	and	bar	chart–and	you’ll	begin	prototyping	your	visualization.	During	Week
3,	we’ll	dive	even	heavier	into	tools,	and	you’ll	hear	from	experts	about	Tableau,	R,	and	more.	During	Week	4,
you’ll	continue	editing	your	visualization	to	ensure	that	it	follows	best	practices	in	alignment,	color,	text,	and	more.
Your	viewers	will	understand	your	data	at	a	glance	and	retain	information	for	the	long	run.	We	hope	to	see	you
online	in	November!
For	a	more	detailed	syllabus,	please	click	here.
Course	Topics	and	Featured	Tech
Data	visualization	fundamentals
Prototyping	data	visualizations
Qualitative	data	analysis/visualization
Key	chart	types	for	M&E
Course	Objectives
At	the	conclusion	of	the	course,	participants	will	be	able	to:
critically	analyze	both	the	opportunities	and	the	pitfalls	that	emerge	when	working	with	technology	to
visualize	data.
connect	relevant	development	theories	to	the	technological	strategies	and	tools	discussed	in	the	course.
manage	specific	software	platforms	and	tools	for	data	visualization	activities
design	dynamic	and	effective	strategies	for	using	tools	and	platforms	improve	data	visualization	efforts.
develop	critical	self-confidence	for	working	with	technology	to	address	data	visualization	challenges.
Course	Methodology
This	course	is	delivered	entirely	online	over	a	period	of	four	weeks.
This	course	features	several	live	interactive	expert	presentations	each	week	with	leading	practitioners,
software	developers,	academics,	and	donors.
Every	live	event	is	recorded	and	archived	for	you	to	watch	later.
This	course	also	features	a	unique	hands-on	learning	environment	with	animated	videos,	technology	demos,
practical	activities,	networking	events,	office	hours,	participant	presentations,	immersive	simulations,	and
more.
TechChange	recommends	budgeting	a	minimum	commitment	of	5-7	hours	per	week	and	scheduling	time	for
the	course	around	your	existing	obligations.
Participants	will	have	access	to	all	course	content	for	at	least	4	months	after	course	completion	so	the
material	can	be	completed	and	revisited	later.
Price
$395	if	application	and	payment	is	submitted	September	19th,	2019
$445	if	application	and	payment	is	submitted	October	19th,	2019
$495	if	application	and	payment	is	submitted	by	course	start	date
Group	discount	rates	available.	For	more	details,	please	contact	us	at	social	[at]	techchange.org.	If	you	are	not
happy	with	your	course	experience	for	any	reason,	TechChange	is	happy	to	discuss	refunds.
This	course	is	a	part	of	our	Technology	for	Monitoring	and	Evaluation	diploma	program.	Interested	in	learning
about	more	courses?	Browse	through	our	diploma	catalog	here,	or	check	out	our	main	catalog	and	FAQ	section!
Next	Session
Nov	18,	2019	-	Dec	13,	2019
Change
JOIN	COURSE
Guest	Experts
Samhir	Vasdev
Digital	Development	Advisor	at	IREX
Read	bio	
Matt	Berg
Matt	Berg
CEO	and	CoFounder	of	Ona
Read	bio	
Amanda	Makulec
Data	Visualization	Lead	at	Excella	Consulting
Read	bio	
Leslie	Sage
Director	of	Data	Science	at	DevResults
Katherine	Haugh
Monitoring,	Evaluation,	Research,	and	Learning	Associate	at	Dexis	Consulting	Group
Nick	Hamlin
Data	Scientist	at	Global	Giving
Michelle	Ayoub
Monitoring,	Evaluation,	and	Learning	Specialist	at	IRI
Matthew	Baker
Monitoring,	Evaluation,	Research,	and	Learning	(MERL)	Specialist	at	USAID
Contact:	techsupport	[at]	techchange.org
Terms	of	Use
Privacy	Policy
Policies
©	2012-2019	TechChange
