  
  
 
mHealth for Safe Deliveries in Zanzibar 
 
 
B rief Overview 
 
More than 1,000 women die every day in 
the developing world as a result of 
complications in childbirth.  High rates of 
maternal illness and death are found in the 
Zanzibar archipelago of Tanzania, where half 
of all births still take place at home, far from 
skilled care. Post-delivery, only one-third of 
Zanzibari mothers and newborns receive 
post-natal check-ups within 42 days after 
birth, locking them out of opportunities to access post-partum care and infant vaccinations. 
With funding from the Bill and Melinda Gates Foundation, D-tree International is focused on preventing 
maternal deaths by identifying pregnant women who need a higher level of health care and subsequently linking 
them to local health facilities.   
In collaboration with the Zanzibar Ministry of Health and Social Welfare (MOHSW), this D-tree project puts 
mobile phones with a pregnancy screening and care application in the hands of lay community health workers 
to assist them in reducing the many barriers to safer child birth services and post-partum care for mothers. 
These community health workers, called traditional birth attendants (TBAs), screen and refer high risk 
pregnant women to health facilities. 
The project began in November 2011 with the purpose of reducing maternal deaths by providing a safety net 
for mothers who deliver at home and removing the logistical and financial barriers to safe births and post-
partum care for mother and child. 
  
 
  Geographic Coverage: 
Zanzibar, Tanzania 
 
 Implementation Partners: 
      D-tree International is leading a team of partners which include: 
      Etisalat | JHPIEGO | Zanzibar Ministry of Health and Social Welfare 
 
 Funder: 
Bill and Melinda Gates Foundation 
 
 For More Information Contact: 
Bill and Melinda Gates Foundation  
 Ken Warman; 
Email:  Ken.Warman@gatesfoundation.org 
D-tree 
 Marc Mitchell, President; 
52 Whitney Tavern Road, Weston, MA 02493 
   Tel: +1-617-432-6322; email: mmitchel@hsph.harvard.edu 
 
 63 
 
Service Delivery 
 mHealth for Safe Deliveries 
 
About mHealth for Safe Deliveries Comparison of the child births in health 
In accordance with MOHSW care guidelines, D-tree facilities before vs. during the pilot 
developed a mobile phone-based clinical algorithm that  
takes TBAs step by step through a screening process to 
identify pregnant women who are high risk or have any 
danger signs during pregnancy and labor. These Health Facility Births  
algorithms, running on java-enabled Nokia phones, assist (Nov. 2011-April 2012) 
TBAs to: register pregnant women; screen the women 
for risks; develop birth plans with the women; and 100%
encourage the women to deliver at a facility. 
 50% baseline
For high risk women who need the level of care only mHealth
offered at a health facility, the mobile phone application 0%
is programmed to help the TBAs contact an emergency Unguja North Pemba North
driver, record the family’s permission for emergency  
transfer, and identify the closest health facility. TBAs call In addition, TBAs reported the following results from 
the clinic to alert them that an expectant mother is on the use of the phone based tools: improved general 
the way. Working with Zantel, a local mobile service knowledge (31percent); improved knowledge about 
provider, D-Tree also built mobile banking accounts for danger signs (27 percent); and better understanding of 
each TBA into the system to pay for emergency the importance of obstetric history (14 percent). 
transport and appointments.   
 Lessons Learned 
Additional phone-based algorithms assist the same TBAs 
• As trusted community members, traditional 
to screen mother and newborn within two to five days 
birth attendants and other community-based 
after childbirth to ensure that they get the essential 
health workers are well placed to reach 
health care services that are so critically needed at this 
women with essential information. 
point in their lives.   
 • Local resources, (in this case, taxis), can effectively be utilized without having to buy 
Evaluations and Results  new vehicles through strong coordination and 
Traditional birth attendants in two districts of Zanzibar 
communication between TBAs, local leaders, 
were trained to use the application.  During the pilot 
and taxi drivers. 
implementation period of November 2011 to April  
2012, TBAs successfully registered 682 pregnant Conclusion 
mothers, 211 of which delivered during this period.  Of 
the 211 mothers who delivered, 143 (68 percent) gave The project provides evidence that women who 
birth in health facilities during the pilot compared to normally would have delivered at home can be 
only 34 percent prior to the project. In North A, 90 convinced to deliver their babies at health facilities if 
(71.4 percent) of the 126 births occurred in a health given adequate information from a trusted resource. A 
facility, and in Micheweni, 53 (62.3 percent) of the 85 front line health worker in the community can provide 
births occurred in a health facility.   excellent counseling and identify danger signs if 
 supported by good tools. 
As of July 2012, a total of 629 registered women have 
delivered healthy babies since the beginning of the 
program, and a striking 70 percent of these births have 
taken place at a health facility. 
 
Information was excerpted from: 
Mitchell, Marc et al. March 2012. Reducing Maternal Mortality: mHealth for Safer Deliveries in Zanzibar. D-tree International. 
64 http://www.globalgiving.org/projects/safedelivery/  Cell Phone Based Protocols for Safer Childbirth Enable High Risk Pregnant Women to Access Care at Health Facilities. D-tree 
International. 
 
