AdvAncing the diAlogue 
on Mobile FinAnce And 
Mobile heAlth:
country cAse studies
Lead Author, Menekse Gencer, mPay Connect 
Co-Author, Jody Ranck
March 2012 
mHealth
AcknowledgeMents
This white paper would not have been possible without the input of the many mHealth and MFS 
practitioners and experts around the world. 
We would like to thank the following professionals for their contributions to the case studies: 
Paul Mugambi, Samuel Agutu, Peter Gross, Gunnar Camner, John Owens, Mark Smith, Judy 
Gold, and Malcolm Vernon. 
In addition, we would like to thank the efforts of the individuals who contributed greatly to the 
research, writing, and review of this white paper, including Jody Ranck, Mark Smith, Margaret 
Schoening, Sushmita Meka, and Patricia Mechael.
Founding Partners:
tAble oF contents
Acronyms and Abbreviations     2
Introduction     3
Summary     4
Context     6
Use Cases for Mobile Financial Services in mHealth     7
Country Case Studies   9
Ghana: Reinventing the business model and value chain of life insurance   10
Drivers in Ghana   11
Haiti: Driving efficiencies in operations to decrease costs and achieve greater distribution   12
Drivers in Haiti   13
The Philippines: Leveraging mobile financial services for a variety of mHealth initiatives,  14
including supply chain settlement, conditional cash transfers, and co-payments for hospitals
Drivers in the Philippines   15
Kenya: Enabling payments and alternative financing of healthcare through mPesa   16
Drivers in Kenya   17
Key Challenges   19
Future Trends   19
A Look Ahead: Mobile Finance and Universal Health Coverage   21
Tables and Figures   22
Interviews   23
Appendix   24
advancing the dialogue on mobile finance and mobile health: country case studies
AcronyMs And AbbreviAtions
eHealth Healthcare practice that is supported by electronic processes and communication, such 
as electronic health records and health information systems. Mobile health, or mHealth 
(see  below), also falls under this umbrella.
MDGs Millennium Development Goals, a list of eight international development goals that all 193 
United Nations member states and at least 23 international organizations have agreed to 
achieve by the year 2015. These goals include:
1. Eradicate extreme poverty and hunger
2. Achieve universal primary education
3. Promote gender equality and empower women
4. Reduce child mortality rates
5. Improve maternal health
6. Combat HIV/AIDS, malaria, and other diseases
7. Ensure environmental sustainability
8. Develop a global partnership for development
MFS, Mobile financial services or mobile money. The use of the mobile phone to access a 
mFinance, money account which can offer financial services such as payments, savings, credit, and 
or mobile insurance.
money
mHealth Mobile health. mHealth is loosely defined in this paper as the use of information and 
communication technology to provide better access to health services for practitioners 
and patients.
MNO Mobile network operator. The private or public entities that cover mobile network ser-
vices.
SMS Short Message Service. A text messaging service component of phone, web, or mobile 
communication systems, using standardized communications protocols that allow the 
exchange of short text messages between fixed line or mobile phone devices.
UHC Universal healthcare coverage. A term referring to organized health care systems built 
around the principle of universal coverage for all members of society, combining mecha-
nisms for health financing and service provision.
2
3
introduction
It has been nearly one year since the first report, “Amplifying the Impact: Examining the 
Intersection of Mobile Health and Mobile Finance,” was published for the mHealth Alli-
ance and The World Economic Forum. 1 In that report the intersection points between 
mHealth and Mobile Financial Services (MFS) were identified and early initiatives in this 
space were highlighted. Since then, there has been tremendous momentum in the use of 
MFS, also known as mobile money, for mHealth services. Both MFS and mHealth proj-
ects continue to grow in popularity globally as donors and practitioners take advantage 
of the near ubiquity of cell phones to extend the reach of public health initiatives and ac-
cess to health services. 
In the coming years the global health community will turn more attention to the issue of 
universal health coverage, and new micro-savings and micro-insurance products are 
likely to enter developing country markets, often facilitated through the use of mobile 
money. The case studies of emerging business models presented in this paper could act 
as a launching point for a community of practice and global discussion on new business 
models in mHealth/MFS and the contribution they can make to enhance access to health 
systems and extend the reach of insurance to the poor. 
The objectives of this second report are to:
1. Identify the newest MFS and mHealth intersection use cases that have been, or 
will be, implemented in the near term that could provide significant value to health 
system strengthening including those associated with the Millennium Development 
Goals (MDGs) of reducing child mortality rates and improving maternal health; 
2. Highlight the characteristics of key markets that have the foundational prerequi-
sites in place to reap the benefits of leveraging MFS for facilitating universal health 
coverage and enhanced access to health care; and
3. Identify key challenges faced and future trends that will reduce existing barriers 
for future implementations.
This paper aims to provide further guidance and spur implementation initiatives in emerg-
ing markets by health service providers, non-governmental organizations (NGOs), mobile 
money operators, and government health policy workers that seek to enhance health 
systems for the poor through the use of MFS.
1 World Economic Forum, mHealth Alliance (2011). Amplifying the Impact: Examining the Intersection of Mobile Health and 
Mobile Finance
3
advancing the dialogue on mobile finance and mobile health: country case studies
suMMAry
As mobile network operators (MNOs) continue to try to reduce churn of customers, increas-
ing switching costs by launching mHealth and MFS becomes increasingly critical. It is, there-
fore, little surprise that these MNOs are working with health providers and governments to 
integrate mobile money into health service programs. 
What makes some markets more attractive to leverage MFS for healthcare than others? At 
the crux of every initiative is a large need that drives the effort. 
In the case of Ghana, the private sector is seeking to meet the pent up consumer demand 
for life insurance, spurred by government education around insurance, by exploring new 
business models between insurers and mobile operators to bring mobile micro-life insur-
ance to market. 
In Haiti, the devastating earthquake spurred new initiative funds to jumpstart MFS systems in 
the private sector. Mobile operators with the advantage of creating new systems from scratch 
rose to the challenge to set up a financial infrastructure quickly, while also supporting the 
expanding cholera epidemic and other critical healthcare issues of the country. They have 
been working with health providers to drive efficiencies around registration and distribution 
of the products and services across both sectors by leveraging resources across sectors. 
In markets where there is already significant MFS penetration and usage, such as Kenya and 
the Philippines, the mature MFS systems are being used to support better business models, 
higher quality of care, or increased access to health services. These initiatives have taken 
root in a variety of areas - from supporting government initiated health programs, as is the 
case in the Philippines, to providing alternative financial tools for those left out of public insur-
ance, as seen in Kenya. In other markets such as Ghana and Haiti, MFS are less mature. As 
these systems evolve, there are opportunities to incorporate extremely innovative business 
models and operations.
4
Dimensions that drive mHealth and mFinance efforts
Figure 1: Dimensions that Drive mHealth and mFinance Efforts
 
Whether driven by government policy or private sector efforts in mature or emerging MFS 
markets, a few characteristics prevail in all examples. First, there was a significant health 
concern that needed to be met. This paper outlines that in Kenya, it is the need for savings 
for maternal health; in Haiti, it was the need for basic health services after the earthquake 
destroyed many systems; in Ghana, there is a need for life insurance, due to the high cost of 
funerals; and in the Philippines, it is a range of health needs that MFS facilitates, from mem-
bership dues to co-payments. Second, MFS had already launched in the markets – it was 
well established in Kenya and the Philippines, and more recent in Haiti and Ghana. And third, 
either the business model, the quality of the services, or the accessibility of critical healthcare 
services was suboptimal without the use of MFS. In the Philippines, the business model for 
remote payments is improved by the use of MFS. In Kenya, micro-savings via MFS allows for 
improved quality of care. In Haiti, combining MFS with healthcare allows for broader distribu-
tion of health supplies such as chlorine tablets to sanitize water supply and avoid cholera.
As opportunities to improve health services for the poor are considered, the emerging case 
studies illustrated can offer important insights into some future direction. By setting up the 
right mHealth and MFS eco-systems and technology systems, health practitioners will be 
better positioned to realize the objective to improve health outcomes for the poor.
5
advancing the dialogue on mobile finance and mobile health: country case studies
conteXt
Of the three billion people who live on less than the equivalent of $2 per day, one billion have 
no access to the healthcare system. 2 These same people in the poorest economic strata live 
without basic infrastructure including water, roads, electricity, education, and financial ser-
vices. Additionally, nearly four billion (those earning between $1.25 and $4 a day) in emerging 
markets lack access to risk protection through insurance that could be provided via public-
private partnerships (PPPs). 3 Health insurance and payment mechanisms via mobiles is a 
major unmet need that the intersection of mHealth and MFS, if done properly, could help 
remedy in the next decade and help achieve new efficiencies and savings for health care 
systems.
Yet, in the midst of so little infrastructure, leapfrog innovations to serve the poor abound. 
From remote mobile diagnostics to mobile clinics that travel to patients, mHealth initiatives 
are increasing access to health services. Mobile technology is enabling those “off the grid” 
to reap the benefits of modern health services. However, despite such progress, healthcare 
financing mechanisms remains one of the biggest challenges to improving health outcomes 
for the poor. 4
Efficient healthcare financing mechanisms play an important role in producing better health 
outcomes by: 1) Improving the quality of care and performance of health workers via effective 
payment mechanisms and incentive programs; 2) Providing a social safety net and access to 
care that enables payment for services; 3) Improving efficiencies in human resource systems 
by streamlining management, procurement and payment systems that can eliminate waste; 
and 4) Improving the viability of business models in healthcare by creating more robust eco-
systems of payors for services. In the coming years it will become more evident that mHealth 
and eHealth services and business models are critical variables in the efforts to provide uni-
versal health coverage, or UHC, and should be considered part of the underlying business 
model for universal coverage.
MFS, the “off the grid” equivalent of banking, is a critical link to solving these issues for the 
poor. MFS enables financial services and payments accessible by mobile phone to an elec-
tronic money account that can be offered by the customer’s MNO. In this paradigm, mobile 
operators act as the banks for the poor. Instead of relying on ATMs and bank branches, 
customers deposit and withdraw cash from their local mobile money agents. Of the 630 mo-
bile network operators in the world, approximately 124 mobile money implementations have 
taken place and 92 more are underway. 5 These systems serve the 1.7 billion people who 
lack access to banks, but have mobile phones. 6 These are the people also being targeted 
for mHealth services in emerging markets.
2 Shah, A. (2011). Health Issues, http://www.globalissues.org/issue/587/health-issues
3 Swiss Re (2010). Micro-insurance-Risk Protection for 4 Billion People. Sigma,  
http:// media.swissre.com/documents/sigma6_2010_en.pdf 
4 World Health Organization (2005). Strategy on Health Care Financing for Countries of the Western Pacific and South-East 
Asia Regions (2006–2010) 
5 GSMA Mobile Money Tracker, http://www.wirelessintelligence.com/mobile-money
6
use cAses For Mobile FinAnciAl 
services in MheAlth
MFS can benefit mHealth efforts along the entire continuum of care at the patient level, pro-
vider level, and administrative level. At the patient level, MFS enables patients to utilize new 
financial instruments such as micro-savings, micro-insurance, and micro-credit to smooth out 
cash flow issues or to receive remote money transfers from family members to pay for health 
services. These services also enable patients to pay for transportation and healthcare services 
using mobile money accounts. At the provider level, mobile money payments enable faster 
settlement of remote payments along supply chains for health products and services, as well 
as to settle vouchers for providers of health services. On the administrative level, mobile money 
enables payments to unbanked health workers, per diem payments, and expense reimburse-
ments that are often paid in cash. It also enables electronic disbursements of performance-
based funding and conditional cash transfer programs, such as those being used throughout 
the world to encourage facility-based deliveries for pregnant women, as seen in Figure 2. 
Example: Using MFS for Maternal Continuum of Care
Figure 2: Using mobile financial services for maternal continuum of care
6 CGAP, GSMA, and McKinsey analysis using data from Demirgüç-Kunt, Beck, and Honohan (2009). “To arrive at these 
conclusions, we conducted a forecasting exercise based on relatively conservative assumptions. We assumed that for each 
country, only one mobile money service would win greater than 10% uptake by users. Further, we assumed relatively modest 
usage by consumers and stable prices. The number of mobile money implementations is based on a comprehensive survey 
of MNOs and vendor.” CGAP Brief: Window on the Unbanked: Mobile Money in the Philippines.  
7
http://www.cgap.org/gm/document-1.9.41163/BR_Mobile_Money_Philippines.pdf 
advancing the dialogue on mobile finance and mobile health: country case studies
Benefits of using MFS include development of more sustainable business models (through 
efficiencies and cost savings over conventional methods), higher quality of care, and greater 
access to care, as seen in Figure 3. In terms of business models, MFS can increase revenue 
sources by subsidizing patient fees through new value chain participants; lower costs by 
sharing operational costs that are shared between MFS and healthcare and by reducing 
costs of cash management and fraud; and enable settlement of remote payments for remote 
diagnostics and other remote health services.
It can increase the quality of care by motivating providers and patients with faster settlement 
of vouchers, salaries, supply chain payments, performance-based funding, and conditional 
cash transfers. It can also enable providers to spend less time on management of cash and 
more time on delivery of healthcare services. 
MFS can improve access to care by enabling alternative financial tools for patients including 
savings, insurance, and credit that can improve their ability to afford services. It also provides 
alternative funding to providers, such as credit for retailers whose low cash flows would 
otherwise prevent them from purchasing needed pharmaceutical inventory. Finally, it can 
motivate new providers to participate in the system due to faster settlement of funds to pay 
for their services. 
Given these benefits and considering innovation in terms of national or regional ecosystems 
of stakeholders for mHealth and eHealth services, MFS stakeholders should be at the table 
to help drive innovation and build a more sustainable ecosystem for mHealth and eHealth 
products and services. 
Mobile Financial Services Enhance Health Services in  
Three Major Categories
Figure 3: Mobile financial services enhance health services in three major categories
It is important to note that there are also risks at this intersection as well. The recent rash of 
political and financial crises in the microfinancial sector, due to the relative lack of regulatory 
oversight combined with more profit-oriented models, have undermined the financial sustain-
8
ability of both poor households and microfinancial institutions.7, 8 These lessons will need to 
be learned in the health sector given the relative immaturity of mHealth policy frameworks 
which will need to be extended to include frameworks for managing MFS systems in a man-
ner that both protects citizens and enables innovation to take place. In health there are also 
fears that controversies regarding micro-financial institutions may result in decreased trust in 
micro-insurance providers because in some countries micro-insurance is a new concept and 
people often do not grasp the fact that they may pay premiums and not receive a benefit until 
something untoward happens. These fears could possibly depress demand in some mar-
kets. One of the risks of electronic systems is that “bad things can happen faster” if adequate 
security, privacy and overall regulatory frameworks are not in place, so caution is an essential 
component to advancing the use of these systems.
cAse studies
Within the past year, mHealth has taken great strides forward in leveraging the benefits that 
MFS offer. While there are numerous examples that could be highlighted, this paper will focus 
on a few key initiatives taking place in Ghana, Haiti, the Philippines, and Kenya. The diagram 
below illustrates examples of these case studies and a few others within the maternal con-
tinuum of care.
Example: Using MFS for Maternal Continuum of Care
Figure 4: Using mobile financial services for maternal continuum of care with examples of deployments
7 Banderjee, A. (2011). Assessing the Current Crisis in Microfinance and Avoiding the Next. World Bank blog,  
https://blogs.worldbank.org/files/allaboutfinance/Microfinance.pdf
8 Arun, Thankom (2005). Regulating for Development: The Case of Microfinance. The Quarterly Review of Economics and 9
Finance, Vol. 45, Issues 2-3, p. 346-357
advancing the dialogue on mobile finance and mobile health: country case studies
Ghana: Reinventing the business model and value chain of life  
insurance 
One of the main drivers of poverty and consequent poor health outcomes is the exposure 
to catastrophic risks that low-income households face in markets where insurance is not 
commonplace. Microfinance institutions learned that sudden death and the costs of burials 
threatened financial viability of their programs and began engaging with the micro-insurance 
sector in the late-1990s, particularly in areas where HIV rates were exceedingly high. 9 The 
challenges for the insurance industry in emerging markets are to build a culture that is accept-
ing of insurance and to create products that speak to the livelihoods of the poor while also 
sustaining business models appropriate for these contexts. Mobiles offer a way to address 
some of these challenges. Ghana provides an interesting case study in light of these issues.
In Ghana a broker between reinsurers and mobile network operators known as Microensure 
partnered with two mobile operators, MTN and Tigo (Millicom) to provide their customers 
with life insurance. While both mobile operators utilize MFS for claims disbursements, the two 
mobile operators have tried different models for premiums payments. 
In one model, MTN enabled customers to pay for their premiums through MTN’s MFS. In an 
alternative model, Tigo has launched a unique and innovative business model that subsidizes 
premium payments through an airtime loyalty program. To drive loyalty and higher airtime 
minute usage, once a customer buys a threshold of airtime minutes, Tigo offers them “free” 
life insurance. In essence, Tigo subsidizes the premiums for the life insurance, but overcomes 
these costs with higher airtime revenues and reduced customer churn. To the customer, it 
appears as though he or she was rewarded for airtime usage with “free” life insurance. This 
system appears to be gaining significant traction with Tigo customers.
Ghana Tigo Model:  Life Insurance as Airtime Rewards Benefits
Figure 5: Ghana Tigo model: life insurance as airtime rewards benefits
9 USAID (n.d.). Microfinance and HIV/AIDS NOTE #3: Microinsurance for Markets Affected by HIV/AIDS.  
http://www.banyanglobal.com/pdf/Microfinance_and_HIVAIDS_NOTE_3_Microinsurance_for_Markets_Affected_by_HIVAIDS.pdf
10
Often times, when new players enter an industry, there is concern that the overall revenues of 
each player will diminish due to a new entrant in the value chain. Interestingly, in this example, 
the increase in players in the value chain (entry of the mobile operator) actually benefits the 
industry by creating a new business model to drive consumer adoption and increase the 
overall market.
Drivers in Ghana
Although Ghana does have active MFS deployments, they are not as prolific as those in 
Kenya or the Philippines. What has driven Ghana’s innovations in this space are government 
policies and consumer demand. The Ghanaian government has an extremely pro-health 
policy. Ghanaians receive considerable education by the government around the benefits of 
insurance, spurring consumer demand for insurance products. Since Ghanaians are offered 
public health insurance, with this initiative the private sector targeted life insurance – an area 
that was not addressed by the government. Finally, and perhaps most importantly, there is a 
very high need for life insurance in Ghana since it is the most expensive market in the world 
for funerals as a percentage of per capita GDP. 10
Ghana:  infrastructure, education, and need drive mobile  
micro-life insurance
                   
Figure 6: Ghana: infrastructure, education, and need drive mobile micro-life insurance
10 MicroEnsure (n.d.). M-Insurance Goes Live in Ghana. MicroEnsure website, http://www.microensure.com/news.asp?id=123
11
advancing the dialogue on mobile finance and mobile health: country case studies
For Ghana, the (1) critical need around the cost of funeral services, (2) lack of public insurance 
for life insurance, and (3) consumer demand for insurance spurred by pro-health government 
education around these services drove mobile network operators and insurance companies 
to seek to develop innovative business models to bring micro-life insurance to the poor. Ef-
forts like this, in most other contexts, will likely require substantial marketing and awareness 
campaigns around the benefits of insurance. In many markets the demand for insurance 
products is low because most users will notice the premium payments for insurance prod-
ucts, but may not see a benefit on an annual basis. In some contexts this can result in low 
re-enrollment rates. Nevertheless, public-private partnerships for micro-insurance have great 
potential to mitigate catastrophic risks for low-income households. In countries where there is 
no government-run health insurance plan, health insurance may have more immediate effects 
where the benefits are more proximal for users in terms of access to care and lower out-of-
pocket expenses for routine and emergency care. 
Haiti: Driving efficiencies in operations to decrease costs and 
achieve greater distribution
In addition to utilizing the electronic money itself, mHealth can benefit by leveraging common 
business operations shared with MFS programs. Using the same resources, operations, and 
networks to reach the same customer reduces the cost of serving the poor considerably. For 
example, the same healthcare workers that serve the poor can act as agents to register them 
for mobile money accounts. Similarly, mobile money agents can sell and distribute health 
products to the poor.
Leveraging business operations of two industries  
who serve the same customer base
Figure 7: Leveraging business operations of two industries who serve the same customer base
12
In Haiti, these types of efficiencies are now being explored. Mobile network providers are 
working with NGOs and healthcare providers to drive down costs of operations across MFS 
and mHealth value chains. By leveraging the MFS agent network, NGOs will be able to dis-
tribute critical health products such as chlorine tablets to sanitize water supplies to combat 
the spread of cholera across Haiti. In the future, midwives and other healthcare workers visit-
ing patients may be able to play the role of mobile money agents by registering patients for 
mobile money accounts and accepting and disbursing cash. These same operations could 
be appropriated for micro-insurance and micro-savings accounts used for health services 
and potentially extend the reach of insurance products to ”base of the pyramid” markets by 
driving more efficient business models for insurance products.
Drivers in Haiti
In the case of Haiti, a catastrophic event led to (1) epidemic outbreaks that had to be ad-
dressed immediately, as well as (2) the need to create a new financial infrastructure. Grants to 
the private sector to solve the MFS issue led the mobile network operators to seek adjacent 
services such as mHealth for additional revenue opportunities and to reduce operational 
costs across vertical industries to sustain their business models. Because these systems are 
relatively new, architecture developers are more aware of the potential intersections between 
MFS and mHealth and build their systems accordingly. 
Following the devastating earthquake in January 2010, the Gates Foundation and USAID 
launched a $10 million incentive fund/competition to jumpstart financial services by mobile 
phone in Haiti to expedite the delivery of cash assistance to victims of the country’s devas-
tating earthquake by humanitarian agencies. The challenge would financially reward the first 
MNO to launch MFS (first-to-market and second-to-market awards) and a scale up award 
(first 100,000 transactions and tiers thereafter). In a dual-MNO market with high degree of 
rivalry, this competition was a great ignition to the market. The two mobile network operators 
Voila and Digicel launched their mobile money programs shortly after the competition was 
launched. The infrastructure for new MFS was planted. 
While Haiti has had health concerns previously, after the earthquake, health issues reached 
new proportions with the cholera epidemics. 11 The need to reach the poor efficiently, cost ef-
fectively, and quickly to decrease further mortality rates has been critical. This case study of 
Haiti, ironically, reveals the opportunities for innovation that can appear when existing systems 
have been virtually destroyed. The urgent need around health services following the earth-
quake, combined with the large incentive challenge fund to the private sector, spurred mobile 
operators to seek more efficient methods to reach the poor. These methods included sharing 
the operational infrastructures of both mHealth and MFS around registration and distribution.
The analysis of the drivers of change at the intersection of mHealth and MFS are demon-
strating the facilitative role of donors in laying the conditions for a robust ecosystem of MFS 
interventions, entrepreneurial approaches to mHealth business model development from the 
outset, and collaboration with the government.
11 WHO (2011). Haiti Cholera Outbreak. WHO website, http://www.cdc.gov/haiticholera/
13
advancing the dialogue on mobile finance and mobile health: country case studies
With the push toward universal coverage in the coming years, it can be expected that the 
mHealth and MFS intersection will increasingly need to be thought about as an essential 
building block of the business model for universal coverage. As this domain begins to ex-
pand and the evidence base for successful ventures grows in a manner that can demon-
strate substantial efficiencies and cost-savings to the system, health planners will need to 
have a much stronger understanding of the financial systems in place to leverage this op-
portunity in an optimal manner. The cases of Kenya and the Philippines that follow further 
illustrate this point.
Haiti: Private sector + Grants + Urgent healthcare needs drive MNOs 
to find efficiencies for sustainable model
          
 
 
  
Figure 8: Haiti: Private sector, grants, urgent healthcare needs drive MNOs to find  
efficiencies for sustainable model
The Philippines: Leveraging MFS for a variety of mHealth initiatives, 
including supply chain settlement, conditional cash transfers, and 
co-payments for hospitals
The Philippines offers an important window into the potential opportunities at the intersec-
tion between MFS and mHealth due to the existence of a mature mobile money eco-system, 
universal coverage, and a Ministry of Health that has embraced mHealth as part of the 
overall effort to strengthen health systems. In the Philippines, mobile money is being used 
in a variety of ways for mHealth including membership dues and payment for stock orders 
in reproductive healthcare services using Smart Padala, conditional cash transfers utilizing 
GCash, and enabling co-payments for hospital services utilizing SmartMoney. 12, 13
14
In the case of business-to-business payments, Population Services Philipinas Inc. (PSPI), part 
of Marie Stopes International, uses mobile money within its BlueStar social franchise program. 
Members of the social franchise, who are private midwives providing services under the Blue-
Star brand, make payments to PSPI for stock orders that they have received, such as contra-
ceptive supplies, and for membership dues which they pay weekly and annually.
In the case of voucher settlement for maternal and reproductive health, Marie Stopes, Inter-
national launched a mobile-enabled voucher system with mobile money settlement for the 
providers to decrease settlement time for provider payment from weeks and months to days 
in Madagascar. Improving the efficiencies in health provider payment delivery time may also 
prove to be a driver for improving quality of care in some cases. In addition, by using elec-
tronic systems, the new voucher/mobile money program would reduce cash management 
and disbursement costs that represent a substantial portion of the overhead cost of the 
overall program. Finally, by decreasing speed of payment, the system intended to increase 
worker loyalty and reduce churn of the providers. 
Of the 282 members, 100 use this MFS option for such payments. The Smart Padala mobile 
money system enables members to go to a ministore and use a store’s account to transfer 
money to PSPIs account for a cost of 10 pesos per 500 pesos transferred. The members 
that use the MFS are generally those in the Mindanao region who do not live near bank 
branches of the two banks from which PSPI accepts payments. Thus, MFS enables PSPI to 
expand its reach and/or coverage of the social franchise network into areas where banking 
services are not easily available and to receive regular payments from these members.
Drivers in the Philippines
The Philippines is the country in which the first significant adoption of MFS systems began 
nearly one decade ago. Spurred by a strong mobile texting culture, a significantly high un-
banked population, and a need to enable remote payments in a country that spans over 
7,000 islands, 9.5 million Filipinos now use one of two mobile money systems, SmartMoney 
and GCash, each offered by the two mobile operators Smart Telecom and Globe Telecom’s 
subsidiary GXI. 
In addition to the strong MFS infrastructure set up by the private sector MNOs, mHealth 
programs have received significant support by the Government of the Philippines. With a 
strong focus on reaching the MDGs, the government has, for example, instituted the FOUR-
mula One for Health (see Figure 1) to reduce maternal and neonatal mortality by leveraging 
enhanced management infrastructure and financial services.
12 Agabin, M.H. (5 May 2011). Conditional Cash Transfer, Rural Banks, and Mobile Money Transfer: Observations and Reflec-
tions. Department of Social Welfare and Development’s (DSWD) Pantawid Pamilyang Pilipino Program (4Ps) launched a 
5-year program of the Philippine Government to provide conditional cash grants for the poorest families in identified munici-
palities as financial aid for the family’s health and for children’s education. Microenterprise Access to Banking Services,  
http://www.rbapmabs.org/blog/2011/05/conditional-cash-transfer-rural-banks-and-mobile-money-transfer-observations-and-reflections/
13 Reyes, A. L. (19 January 2011). Smart, Globe see surge in mobile money payments. The Philippine Star. Smart’s affiliate 
company includes the largest hospital chain in the Philippines (which includes Makati Medical Center). It is expected that 
mobile payments will be a key enabler and enhancer of business for Smart’s affiliate companies.  
http://www.philstar.com/Article.aspx?articleId=649312
15
advancing the dialogue on mobile finance and mobile health: country case studies
The need to reduce maternal and neonatal mortality rates, the government’s pro-health 
policies and support of the MDGs, and the significant and mature MFS infrastructure in the 
Philippines are characteristics that have made the Philippines particularly attractive for lever-
aging mobile finance for mHealth programs.
Philippines: Pervasive use of mobile finance for health spurred by  
mobile money adoption and pro-health government policies
Figure 9: the Philippines: Pervasive use of Mobile Finance for Health spurred by Mobile Money 
Adoption and Pro-health Government Policies
Kenya: Enabling payments and alternative financing of healthcare 
through mPesa
Through mPesa, a mobile-phone based money transfer service for Safaricom, Kenya pro-
vides an additional view into the potential of programs that combine mHealth with MFS. 
Given the success of mPesa and strong governmental support for future universal health 
coverage, as well as a large number of mHealth programs, Kenya, like the Philippines, sees 
MFS are being used in a number of capacities for mHealth including:
•	 At the patient level, patients are using mPesa to pay their medical bills, medical services 
at dispensaries and hospitals, and travel to medical facilities. They also use mPesa for 
payment micro-insurance premiums and to deposit into micro-savings through providers 
such as Changamka 14 
•	 At the provider level, the Safaricom Doctor’s Network is taking mPesa payments for re-
mote medical diagnostics provided to patients 15
14 Interview with Paul Mugami, Safaricom
15 Jidenma, N. (8 May 2011). Kenya’s telecoms giants roll out e-health services. The Next Web blog, http://thenextweb.com/
africa/2011/05/08/kenyas-telecoms-giants-roll-out-e-health-services/
16
•	 At the administrative level, mPesa is being used for government disbursement of funds 
to the counties and remote dispensaries; for payment of casual staff in remote hospi-
tals; and for conditional cash transfers to mothers to motivate them to have their infants 
inoculated and for other health services 14
Changamka was one of the first organizations to develop the mHealth and MFS connection 
via their micro-savings program for maternal health. Working on the assumption that it is not 
a lack of income that inhibits access to care, but rather lack of mechanisms for generating 
savings, Changamka’s initial service was a Smart Card based micro-savings initiative tar-
geting maternal health. Clients could add funds in small increments to the card via a GPRS 
terminal or mobile phone. The initial card was pre-loaded with KSh 500 which could cover 
an initial examination, lab test and treatment for one condition. A basic insurance plan was 
offered for approximately $50 that covered antenatal care, delivery and postnatal care. The 
$50 insurance package is considered fairly expensive by Kenyan standards, so the underly-
ing business model was dependent on corporate sponsors in order to be acceptable to a 
greater number of women and couples. 
While nearly 10,000 clients were using Changamka by June 2011, there were numerous 
challenges for scalability and sustainability of the business model due to the costs of Smart 
Cards, costs of GPRS terminals and lack of venture capital. 16 A new mobile-based business 
model that connects to the government-sponsored health insurance plan is currently being 
developed that could address some of the shortcomings of the initial business model. The 
new model would deploy m-vouchers coupled with health education messages via SMS. 
The m-voucher would cover costs of delivering a baby in a health care facility and a pre-
payment vehicle that facilitates cost-sharing of about 10 percent of delivery costs. The move 
from a paper voucher to the m-voucher can reduce administrative costs of the voucher 
program by approximately 15 to 27 percent. 
In addition to the financial benefit, there is a health education component that involves out-
reach to community health workers on the availability of m-vouchers (to create demand), 
a “dial-a-doctor” aspect of the Changamka platform that enables appointment reminders, 
savings and health tips, and pregnancy related information to be sent to the expectant 
mother. A peer-to-peer component is also being developed that enables women to share 
information on childbirth and pregnancy with one another in a manner that can promote 
greater transparency around health facility status, health worker availability and general 
quality of care. Changamka also utilizes radio campaigns to raise awareness of the program 
and its benefits. 17
Drivers in Kenya
Kenya launched the most adopted and ubiquitous domestic mobile money system in the 
world. From launch in 2007 until 3.5 years later, mPesa adoption had grown to 15 million 
users, representing 80 percent of the adult population. 18 Despite this new and significant 
16 Changamka Microhealth Limited. Center for Health Market Innovations,  
http://healthmarketinnovations.org/program/changamka-microhealth-limited
17 Interview with Samuel Agutu, Changamka (last three paragraphs)
18 Johnson, C., & Jaisinghani, P. (17 January 2012). Can Mobile Money Transform a Country? USAID Impact blog,  
http://blog.usaid.gov/2012/01/can-mobile-money-transform-a-country/ 17
advancing the dialogue on mobile finance and mobile health: country case studies
financial access and the government’s commitment toward future Universal Healthcare Cov-
erage (UHC) coverage, over 11 million Kenyans working in the informal sector today are without 
insurance and lack adequate funds to pay for healthcare access. In fact, 56 percent of expect-
ant mothers give birth at home often times due to lack of funds to pay for healthcare. 19 As a 
result, maternal and neonatal mortality rates are high. 
Because the vast majority of Kenyans actively use the mPesa system, and many are cur-
rently without insurance, there is a critical need to leverage mPesa to support alternative fi-
nancing mechanisms such as micro-savings, micro-insurance, and micro-credit to increase 
healthcare access which has spurred current initiatives in mHealth and MFS. 
Looking ahead, the innovative private sector MFS initiatives in healthcare may offer important 
case studies from which the government can draw insight. Leveraging the ubiquity of mPesa 
and combining it with the government’s future intentions toward universal health coverage, 
Kenya could provide a very interesting example regarding how MFS and the underlying 
business model for universal coverage may evolve in the coming years. The Kenyan govern-
ment’s plan to extend health insurance (National Hospital Insurance Fund) to the informal 
sector will likely include some form of pre-payment scheme where MFS schemes could play 
a significant role. 20
Like in the Philippines, where the government has taken an active policy to drive health pro-
grams that support MDGs using MFS for conditional cash transfers and voucher settlement 
for reproductive and maternal healthcare, in Kenya there was already strong mobile money 
penetration in the market.  Maternal and neonatal mortality rates have been high due to the 
inaccessibility of healthcare in general in Kenya, which can be mediated, in part, through 
insurance. 21  In addition, the majority of Kenyans actively use the mPesa system, Safaricom 
has worked with health providers to develop alternative financing mechanisms for the poor 
who are currently left out of public insurance.
Kenya: Strong mobile money adoption and private sector, maternal  
mortality rates, and lagging government policies
               
Figure 10: Kenya: Strong mobile money adoption and private sector, maternal  
18 mortality rates, and lagging government policies
key chAllenges
These case studies and other initiatives to leverage MFS for mHealth and other health initia-
tives are not without their challenges. As pioneers in the industry, those implementing cross-
sector initiatives have encountered a number of challenges which include:
•	 Exclusivity of partnerships with mobile money providers leads to constraints in mar-
ket coverage;
•	 Difficulties around scaling services that require significant amounts of detailed cus-
tomer information;
•	 Risks associated with trying to implement cross-sector initiatives in markets with low 
mobile money adoption;
•	 Difficulties in implementing ID management systems in markets where phones are 
shared among family members;
•	 Prohibitive setup costs for implementation due to a lack of open APIs by the mobile 
money providers; and
•	 Prohibitive setup costs due to the need to integrate with multiple mobile money pro-
viders in markets where the services are fragmented. 
Future trends
As is the case with most innovative industries, many of the challenges faced today will 
diminish over time. Specifically, a number of notable trends will continue in the next few 
years which will decrease the hurdles and increase the rate of implementations of MFS for 
mHealth and other parts of the health sector. These include: (1) increase in the global adop-
tion rates of MFS; and (2) reduction of the costs and complexities around integrating MFS 
with mHealth and broader health systems with standards defined. 
19 Anyangu-Amu, S. (15 August 2010). Kenya: Medical Smart Card Extended to Maternal Care. Inter Press Service,  
http://www.ipsnews.net/2010/08/kenya-medical-smart-card-extended-to-maternal-care/
20 Mathauer, I., Schmidt, J-O. & Wenyaa, M. (2008). Extending social health insurance to the informal sector in Kenya: An  
assessment of factors affecting demand. International Journal Health Planning and Management; 23: 51-68  
doi: 10.1002/hpm.914 pmid: 18050152
19
advancing the dialogue on mobile finance and mobile health: country case studies
Future Trends in Mobile Financial Services   
             
Figure 11: Future trends in mobile financial services
With respect to costs, there are several trends that will positively impact the market including: 
1. Open Application Programming Interfaces (APIs) by the mobile network operators for 
faster integration by mHealth providers; 
2. Interoperability hubs for mHealth service providers seeking a “one stop shop” for integra-
tion with all mobile money systems in a given domestic market; 
3. Global service providers that provide cross-border disbursement of funds;
4. Business pricing for MFS to better fit supply chain requirements; and 
5. Streamlined operations and standards for easy plug-and-play around identity manage-
ment, registration, and distribution of health and MFS. 
20
A look AheAd: Mobile FinAnce 
And universAl heAlth coverAge
The final area to address is the market for micro-insurance and the movement toward UHC 
that is accelerating in the global health arena in the next several years. Approaches to health 
financing for UHC have typically included micro-insurance, community health funds, mu-
tual health organizations, and other types of insurance products that enable informal sector 
workers to insure against catastrophic risks. Some of these programs have been linked to 
existing micro-financial institutions that recognized the need to move beyond micro-credit-
only solutions. 
One of the challenges to micro-insurance schemes has been the small risk pools and over-
exposure to catastrophic risks. Re-insurance can help to address this problem, but better 
use of technologies, such as mobiles and new partnerships to drive better data collection 
that can be utilized for the under-writing of insurance products could help the field address 
some of the critical bottlenecks at the moment. Most micro-insurance transactions are still 
conducted via paper rather than electronic or digital formats. 21 In some cases smart cards 
are being utilized, but they can contribute significantly to the costs of insurance operations 
compared to better integrated mobile solutions.  
Perhaps the biggest constraint for community financing and micro-insurance programs is 
the lack of quality data from the healthcare and financial systems for the re-insurance or un-
derwriting of insurance products. New partnerships between the two sectors that can both 
improve overall information systems and contribute to the business requirements gathering 
of enterprise architecture could play a role in opening up new business models, but there are 
currently few efforts moving in this direction, at least in the backend technology development 
arena. 
The confidence in the information systems, even in the more technologically sophisticated 
markets such as India, Thailand, the Philippines, and Malaysia is a major barrier to the in-
tegration of mHealth and MFS tools for micro-insurance. 22 This speaks to the current state 
of mHealth interventions, in general, where the bulk of the emphasis has been on front-end 
applications to the relative neglect of the back-end enterprise architecture infrastructure. The 
result is that the data flows from both sectors are not being leveraged to the extent required 
to truly take advantage of the technology innovation that is currently available. It may serve 
the community of health practitioners involved with universal health coverage to begin to play 
a catalytic role in bringing together the MFS and eHealth sectors as well as NGOs, govern-
ments, and insurers around the current state of data systems in order to create collaborative 
roadmaps for future innovation on this front.
21 Gerelle, E. & Berende, M. (2008). Technology for Microinsurance Scoping Study. Microinsurance. Paper No. 2, Microinsur-
ance Innovation Facility, International Labor Organization
22 Interview with David Lubinski, PATH
21
advancing the dialogue on mobile finance and mobile health: country case studies
tAbles And Figures
Figure 1  Dimensions that Drive mHealth and mFinance Efforts     5
Figure 2  Using MFS for Maternal Continuum of Care      7
Figure 3  Mobile Financial Services Enhance Health Services in Three Major Categories  8
Figure 4  Using MFS for Maternal Continuum of Care with Examples of Deployments   9
Figure 5  Ghana Tigo Model: Life Insurance as Airtime Rewards Benefits    10
Figure 6  Ghana: infrastructure, education, and need drive mobile micro-life insurance  11
Figure 7  Leveraging business operations of two industries who serve the same customer base 12
Figure 8  Haiti: Private Sector, Grants, and Urgent Healthcare Needs Drive MNOs to find  
  Efficiencies for Sustainable Model       14
Figure 9  The Philippines: Pervasive use of Mobile Finance for Health spurred by Mobile  
  Money Adoption and Pro-health Government Policies     16
Figure 10 Kenya: Strong Mobile Money Adoption and Private Sector, Maternal Mortality  
  Rates, and Lagging Government Policies       18
Figure 11 Future Trends in Mobile Financial Services      20
Table 1  Comparing Four Mobile Financial Services Markets     24
22
interviews
Paul Mugambi  Senior Manager – Digital Inclusion Safaricom
Samuel Agutu  CEO     Changamka
Peter Gross  CEO     MicroEnsure
Gunnar Camner  Head of Product for Tigo Cash  Millicom International/Tigo
John Owens  Chief of Party    MABS Philippines
Mark Smith  CEO     Univicity
Judy Gold  Innovation Analyst   Marie Stopes International
Malcolm Vernon  Director, Market Development EMEA, Nokia
   Nokia Financial Services
Special thank you to the following reviewers and contributors of research to 
this report
Mark Smith
Jody Ranck
Margaret Schoening
Sushmita Meka
Patricia Mechael
23
advancing the dialogue on mobile finance and mobile health: country case studies
APPendiX
Table 1: comparing Four Mobile Financial Services Markets
Mobile Money Comparisons of Kenya, Ghana, The Philippines, and Haiti
Source: GSMA Mobile Money Tracker
Global Summary: 
630 MNOs
119 live deployments of mobile money
96 planned deployments of mobile money
Region     Country Mobile  Bank  MNOs  Year        Number Mobile 
   Penetration Penetration  deployed  Deployed      of Users Money Services
Africa     Ghana  66.82  16  Tigo (Millicom) 2010  
       MTN  2009   Airtime Top Up
            Bill Payment
            M-Insurance
       Airtel  2010   Airtime Top Up
       (Bharti Airtel)
            Bank Transfer
            Bill Payment
            Domestic Money 
            Transfer
            Merchant Payment
       Txtnpay  2009   Airtime Top Up
            Bill Payment
            Domestic Money 
            Transfer
Africa     Kenya  56.39  10  Airtel (Bharti Airtel) 2009   Airtime Top Up
            Bank Transfer
            Bill Payment
            Corporate Cash  
            Collection
            Domestic Money 
            Transfer
            International Money 
            Transfer
            Loan Repayment
            Manage Bank Account
            Merchant Payment
       Safaricom 2007             15,000,000 Airtime Top Up
24
Region     Country Mobile  Bank  MNOs  Year        Number Mobile 
   Penetration Penetration  deployed  Deployed      of Users Money Services
            Bill Payment
            Domestic Money  
            Transfer
            G2P
            International Money 
            Transfer
            Linked MFI, SACCO, 
            Bank Account
            Merchant Payment
            MFI Loan Repayment
            M-Insurance
            Salary Disbursement
       Yu      Airtime Top Up
       (Essar Telecom)
            Domestic Money  
            Transfer
       Orange  2010   Airtime Top Up 
       (Telkom Kenya)
            Bank Account  
            Management
            Bank Transfer
            Bill Payment
            Domestic Money  
            Transfer
            Loan Repayment
            Manage Bank Account
            Merchant Payment
            Salary Disbursement
       Tangaza  2010   Airtime Top Up
Americas Haiti 10.79  15  Voila (Comcel) 2011  
       Digical  2010  
25
advancing the dialogue on mobile finance and mobile health: country case studies
Region     Country Mobile  Bank  MNOs  Year        Number Mobile 
   Penetration Penetration  deployed  Deployed      of Users Money Services
Asia     Philippines 66.51  26  Globe Telecom 2004       1,000,000 Airtime Top Up
Pacific
            Domestic Money  
            Transfer
            International Money  
            Transfer
            Merchant Payment
            MFI Loan Repayment
            M-Insurance
            Salary Disbursement
            Text-a-Deposit
            Text-a-Withdrawal
       Smart (PLDT) 2003       8,500,000 Airtime Top Up
            Bill Payment
            Domestic Money  
            Transfer
            International Money  
            Transfer
            Linked MFI, SACCO,  
            Bank Account
            Loan Repayment
            Merchant Payment
            MFI Loan Disbursement
            MFI Loan Repayment
26
27
The mHealth Alliance champions the use of mobile technologies to improve 
health throughout the world. Working with diverse partners to integrate mHealth 
into multiple sectors, the Alliance serves as a convener for the mHealth com-
munity to overcome common challenges by sharing tools, knowledge, experi-
ence, and lessons learned. The mHealth Alliance advocates for more and better 
quality research and evaluation to advance the evidence base;  seeks to build 
capacity among health and industry decision-makers, managers, and practi-
tioners; promotes sustainable business models; and supports systems integra-
tion by advocating for standardization and interoperability of mHealth platforms.  
The mHealth Alliance also hosts HUB (www.healthunbound.org), a global online 
community for resource sharing and collaborative solution generation.
 
Hosted by the United Nations Foundation, and founded by the Rockefeller Foundation, Vodafone Foundation, 
and UN Foundation, the Alliance now also includes HP, the GSM Association, and Norad among its founding 
partners. For more information, visit www.mhealthalliance.org.
Become a member of a coalition of like-minded organizations with an interest in improving 
health outcomes through mobile technologies. Apply for mHealth Alliance membership at 
www.mhealthalliance.org/membership.
 
1800 Massachusetts Avenue, NW,
Suite 400
Washington, D.C. 20036
202.887.9040 (phone)
202.887.9021 (fax)
info@mhealthalliance.org
Our thanks goes to lead author, Menekse Gencer, of mPay Connect. You can learn more 
about mPay Connect at http://mpayconnect.com.
