  
  
S IMpill® Medication Adherences Solution 
  
B rief Overview 
 
Drug adherence is a growing concern to governments, healthcare systems, clinicians and other stakeholders 
(e.g., tax payers) because of mounting evidence that non-adherence is prevalent and associated with adverse 
health outcomes and higher costs of care. Rosen et al (2007) found that, on average, 40 percent of patients 
enrolled in sub-Saharan African antiretroviral therapy (ART) programs had discontinued their treatment after 
two years. Some examples of poor patient medication adherence include not taking the medication on time, in 
the correct doses, or at all.   Reasons for not following the proper medication regimen include: lack of 
transportation, bad weather, a worsening condition that prevents them from leaving home, unpleasant side 
effects, confusion, forgetfulness, language 
barriers, and feeling “too good” to need 
medicine. Patients who neglect to take their 
medications as prescribed pay a price in 
poorer health, more frequent need for health 
services, and a higher risk of death.  
A number of mobile technology products 
have been developed to counteract these 
challenges. One such product is SIMpill® a 
real time drug adherence solution, which 
uses SMS to send messages to patients if they 
forget to take their medication as prescribed  
and alerts care givers, family members and 
friends if patients continues to neglect to 
follow their prescription. 
 
 
  Geographic Coverage: 
South Africa 
   Implementation Partners: 
 SIMPill, Tellumat  
  Funder: 
SIMpill, Western Cape Provicial Department of Health 
 
 For  More Information Contact: 
SIMpill 
 Brendan Rens, Director; 
Mortlake Business Centre 20 Mortlake High Street London SW14 8JN; 
Tel: 020-8392-6603 or 07810- 850-307; 
Email: brendan.rens@simpill.co.uk  or info@simpill.com 
 
 71 
 
Service Delivery 
 
SIMpill® Medication Adherences Solution 
About SIMpill the prescribed schedule will trigger an SMS message 
The SIMpill® Medication Adherence System is a sent to the patient’s phone to caution him that the 
medication management system that monitors the medication should not be taken at the later time, and 
patient’s medication intake and will remind the patient in informing him when next to medicate.  Data on levels of 
real time if the patient forgets to take the medication as compliance and responses to reminders is reported to 
prescribed. the health worker caring for the patient.  
  
The system allows for: Evaluation and Results 
• Real-Time data and analysis of the patients From July 2006 to April 2007, SIMpill conducted a pilot 
intake of medication; drug adherence study of 155 tuberculosis patients at 
• Reminders to the patient when a medication three clinics in the Cape Town area in collaboration 
event is missed; with the Western Cape Department of Health. After 
• Escalated reminder service available to patients used the SIMpill for 10 months, drug adherence 
approved key caregivers; stabilized between 86 - 92 percent with a treatment 
• Warnings when patients take their medication success rate of 94 percent, according to the study, 
at incorrect times; and SIMpill: 
  • Real-time prescription management.  
 • Increased the number of patients who keep 
Using a proprietary web-based program, SIMpill’s appointments with the physician; 
adherence monitoring system detects non-compliance in • Increased self-reported cases of adherence 
real time. Its unique system can escalate a timely, • Improved health conditions; and 
appropriate response to fit the needs of the patient • Helped 90percent of patients comply with 
and/or caregivers. treatment compared to the typical 22- 60-
percent compliance in the SIMpill intervention 
 
Lessons Learned 
• In areas where internet connectivity is 
unavailable, the SIMpill system will have limited 
use given that the computer that stores the 
adherence information and sends out 
automated SMS is web-based. 
• SIMpill’s proprietary software might result in an 
unnecessarily high cost of development and 
 increases the likelihood of software coding 
 problems.     
When the patient opens his bottle of medication, an  
automatic SMS message is sent from the bottle’s SIM 
card to the patient’s health facility, which records that Conclusion 
the medication has been taken.  In the event that the Despite some of the limiting factors associated with the 
patient does not take the medication as scheduled, a web-based proprietary software, the SIMpill pilot 
reminder is sent to the patient’s mobile phone via SMS.  successfully demonstrated that SMS can be used to 
Another SMS message is sent to the mobile phone of a reminders patients about taking their medication as 
designated caregiver, family member, or friend advising prescribed.  
that the medication has not been taken, if the patient  
still does not comply within a certain timeframe.   
Opening the bottle to take the medication outside of 
Information was excerpted from: 
http://www.simpill.com/howsimpillworks.html 
Use of Mobile Technology to Improve Family Planning and Reproductive Health Programming: A Synthesis of Evidence; Draft Report 
72 On Cue Compliance  http://healthmarketinnovations.org/program/on-cue-compliance; Barclay, E. Text messages could hasten tuberculosis drug compliance  The Lancet, Volume 373, Issue 9657, Pages 15 – 16, 3 January 2009  http://download.thelancet.com/pdfs/journals/lancet/PIIS0140673608619388.pdf 
Unge C, Södergård B, Marrone G, Thorson A, Lukhwaro A, et al. (2010) Long-Term Adherence to Antiretroviral Treatment and Program Drop-Out in 
a High-Risk Urban Setting in Sub-Saharan Africa: A Prospective Cohort Study. PLoS ONE 5(10): e13613. doi:10.1371/journal.pone.0013613 
 
 
