Mobile	for	Development


10	Years	of	Mobile	for
Development
Latest	Blogs  
Latest	Resources  
FOLLOW
 	 
SUBSCRIBE	TO	OUR
NEWSLETTER

M4D	DONORS

Overview
Mobile	for	Development
Mobile	for	Development
The	Mobile	for	Development	team	drives	innovation	in	digital
technology	to	reduce	inequalities	in	our	world.
Singularly	positioned	at	the	intersection	of	the	mobile	ecosystem	and	the	development	sector,	we
stimulate	digital	innovation	to	deliver	both	sustainable	business	and	large-scale	socio-economic	impact
for	the	underserved.
Our	unique	research	and	insights	platform	advances	digital	innovations	and	implementations	that
empower	underserved	populations	to	build	a	better	future.	Our	in-market	expertise	informs	partnerships
between	the	mobile	industry,	tech	innovators,	governments	and	the	development	sector.	And	our
unparalleled	convening	power	motivates	conversations	and	inspires	action.
To	date,	we	have	impacted	the	lives	of	58	million	people.	And	counting…
Celebrating	10	Years	of	Mobile	for	Development
Latest	News
Building	the	Assistive	Tech	programme	–	growing	our	engagement
“Without	mobile	phones,	we	would	be	in	darkness.”	Collected	through	our	digital	access	gap
research	in	Kenya	and	Bangladesh	with	our	partner	Altai,	this	quote	from	an	older	...
Looking	ahead:	Digital	tools	for	natural	resource	management
While	there	is	a	growing	body	of	evidence	that	digital	technologies	have	the	potential	to	improve
natural	resource	management	activities	in	developing	countries,	current	...
Reflections	on	the	2019	GOGLA	E-waste	Festival
In	July	2019,	the	GSMA	attended	GOGLA‘s	‘E-waste	Festival’	in	Nairobi,	an	event	designed	to	bring
the	off-grid	solar	industry	together	to	create	new	ideas,	partnerships	and	...
Hello	world!
The	year	2019	has	seen	an	unprecedented	rise	in	awareness	of	the	environmental	challenges	we
are	facing	as	humanity;	a	change	that	can	be	seen	at	the	global,	organisational,	...
Lessons	from	Lumkani:	Building	resilience	to	fire	in	South	Africa’s	informal	settlements
The	GSMA	Mobile	for	Humanitarian	Innovation	Fund	supports	a	portfolio	of	13	projects	globally,
each	leveraging	mobile	technology	to	positively	accelerate	the	digitisation	of	...
A	right	to	identity	is	a	right	to	a	future
The	GSMA	Digital	Identity	programme	continues	to	play	a	key	role	in	exploring,	advocating	and
raising	awareness	of	the	opportunity	for	mobile	to	improve	access	to	official	...
GSMA	Mobile	for	Development	contributes	to	all	17	of	the	UN
Sustainable	Development	Goals.
The	Sustainable	Development	Goals
What	We	Do
Industry	Programmes
Future	Networks
Identity
Internet	of	Things
GSMA	Documents
Advocacy	Initiatives
External	Affairs	&	Industry	Purpose
Mobile	for	Development
Public	Policy
Spectrum
The	Mobile	Economy
Services
GSMA	Intelligence
IMEI	Services
PathFinder
TAC	Allocation
Network	Settings	Exchange
Convening	the	Industry
MWC	Barcelona
MWC	Shanghai
MWC	Los	Angeles
Mobile	360	Series
4YFN
Join	us!
Legal
©	Copyright	2019	GSM	Association.
The	GSM	logo	is	registered	and	owned	by	the	GSM
Association.
