 
REAL-TIME BIOSURVEILLANCE PROGRAM  
Utilizing information and communication technologies to improve early detection 
and notification of infectious disease outbreaks   
Epidemiology Unit Officials in India and Sri Lanka 
face problems in receiving health information in a 
timely manner which would enable the prevention 
of diseases from reaching epidemic states. 
Statistics on a priority list of infectious 
disease  data, from regional and community health 
centers, continue to be gathered and analyzed 
largely through paper-based forms and 
procedures, and notifications are issued from the 
regional health administrations to local authorities 
using paper-based reporting. Experts in the field of 
biosurveillance and health informatics have argued 
that improvements in disease detection and 
notification can be achieved by introducing more 
efficient means of gathering, analyzing, and reporting patient data in a prescribed format that is transmitted to 
of data from multiple locations as well as on a larger a centralized database. The ICT system utilizes General 
set of disease and syndromic information.  New Packet Radio Service (GPRS), while also storing records 
Information and Communication Technologies (ICTs) on the phone during times of limited or no connectivity. 
are regarded as an important means to achieve these 
efficiency gains.  Health facility health records, such as demographic 
information, symptoms, suspected and diagnosed 
The Real-Time Biosurveillance Program (RTBP) was a diseases are collected through the mHealthSurvey that 
multi-partner research initiative that studied the feeds into the TCWI, a browser-based statistical analysis 
potential for new ICTs to improve early detection and software tool that uses cutting edge algorithms to 
notification of disease outbreaks in Sri Lanka and India. detect adverse events. Health officials are notified of the 
RTBP established a pilot project involving village-level adverse events using the Sahana Alerting module 
nurses in select districts, and an attempt to scale up the through SMS, email and web. Sahana is a free and open 
project began in March 2011 based on evaluation of the source software collection of disaster management 
pilot.  modules that work as a platform for integrating multi-
organization response efforts that provide critical 
Implementation date: June 2008 to December information to responders’ communication needs.  
2010  
Evaluation and Results 
About RTBP 
Initial findings show significant efficiency gains in terms of 
RTBP provides the ability to detect and monitor a wide disease reporting, outbreak detection, and health 
variety of health events involving communicable, non- alerting. Over the 15-month study, the project’s three 
communicable, reportable and non-reportable diseases, components were successfully integrated into an 
and follows WHO’s general recommendations for operational system, which collected more than 450,000 
disease surveillance systems. The RTBP infrastructure is and 130,000 patient records in Sri Lanka and India, 
composed of an interconnected network between respectively. A cost analysis also identified 35% savings 
healthcare workers via a mHealthSurvey mobile phone in both countries when compared to the existing 
(J2ME) application, T-Cube web interface (TCWI) and systems. Public Health Inspectors in Sri Lanka were able 
Sahana Messaging/Alerting Module. Village level nurses to detect a Chickenpox outbreak well in advance so 
are provided mobile phones with the mHealthSurvey they were able to notify the regional healthcare 
custom software installed to message individual out- workers, enabling them to be better prepared. Similarly, 
28 mHEALTH COMPENDIUM   |   VOLUME 3 
 
REAL-TIME BIOSURVEILLANCE PROGRAM  
Utilizing information and communication technologies to improve early detection 
and notification of infectious disease outbreaks    DATA COLLECTION 
Nurses in India detected diarrhea outbreaks and real-time reporting of patient records from community 
identified the source of origin, which was a religious health centers. However, further research is needed to 
festival gathering. The value of collecting data on non- better understand the challenges associated with scaling 
communicable diseases and non-priority communicable such a system up to a regional or national level. Further 
diseases were evident when TCWI revealed trends and work needs to be done to optimize data entry over low 
population segments in specific geographic locations that cost mobile devices, to address usability and training 
were vulnerable to life-style-associated and respiratory requirements for the analytics platform, and to continue 
diseases. Central healthcare workers were taking to enhance and integrate health notification into national 
advantage of the Sahana Alerting tool to share and regional systems and practices.  
investigation information with field-level health 
-------------------------------------------------------- 
inspectors through SMS. Previously, the inspectors 
would have had to make a long journey to the central Geographic Coverage: India, Sri Lanka 
office to collect this paper-based information, and then, 
return to their village to conduct the investigation.  Implementation Partners: Carnegie Mellon University's 
Auton Lab, USA; Epidemiology Unit, Ministry of Health and 
Nutrition, Sri Lanka; Indian Institute of Technology-Madras; 
Lessons Learned LIRNEasia; National Center for Biological Science, 
 Frontline health workers found the standard mobile Bangalore, India; National Institute of Communicable 
phone numeric keypad difficult to use, particularly Diseases, Ministry of Family and Welfare, Tamil Nadu, 
when entering large numbers of records India; Sarvodaya Shramadana Movement; University of 
Alberta 
 Many records entered into the system contained 
errors that could likely be eliminated through Funder: Canada’s International Development Research 
improved user interface design and a mobile phone Center (IDRC)  
application 
Contact Information:  
 While desktop computers, provided by the Partner Name: Nuwan Waidyanatha, Senior Research 
government, were harder to maintain and not often Fellow (nuwan@lirneasia.net) 
used, healthcare workers took it upon themselves IDRC: Laurent Elder, Program Officer (lelder@idrc.ca) 
to maintain the mobile phones as they served a dual 
References: 
purpose for both official and personal use. 
1. Sampath, W.G.C. et al. 2010, Real-time Bio-surveillance Pilot 
 TCWI was able to apply statistical methods to Programme in Sri Lanka: Lessons Learned, Sri-Lanka Journal of 
detect data inconsistencies and entry errors; which Bio-Medical Informatics 1(3): 139-154 
the project verified as a result of occasional false 2. Gow G.A. et al. 2010, Using Mobile Phones in a Real-Time 
reporting to maintain statistics to implicate job Biosurveillance Program: Lessons from the Frontlines in Sri 
security  Lanka and India, 2010 IEEE International Symposium on 
Technology and Society (ISTAS ’10), Wollongong, New South 
Wales, Australia 
Conclusion 3. Waidyanatha, N.2010, Evaluation of an Information 
Communiation Technology Pilot in Support of Public Health in 
The project demonstrated that new ICTs can 
South Asia, International Development Research Center 
dramatically reduce turnaround time for outbreak 
4. Waidyanatha, N. 2008, Real-Time Biosurveillance Program: A 
detection and alerting from weeks to a matter of days 
Research Proposal, LIRNEasia  
or even hours. It also demonstrated the feasibility of 
 
using low-cost mobile phones and existing commercial 
Photo credits: LIRNEasia 
cellular infrastructure and services to enable affordable, 
  mHEALTH COMPENDIUM   |   VOLUME 3 29 
