 
ACT FOR BIRTH, UGANDA 
Ensuring safe delivery through fetal heart rate monitoring and a mobile phone-
based mortality audit system 
In Uganda, almost half of births take C = Connecting Communities: Village 
place in facilities.  However, even Health Team (VHT) members equipped 
when emergency care is available, with mobile phones and maternal and 
many opportunities for saving lives newborn health training are directly 
are missed. In 2010, there were an connected to referral facilities. VHTs 
estimated 6,000 maternal deaths, assist with referral of mothers and 
39,000 neonatal deaths and 38,000 newborns with danger signs, report 
stillbirths. Poor quality care at the births and deaths at the community level, 
time of birth, including the lack of and conduct pre- and postnatal visits to 
fetal monitoring during labor, has promote best maternal and newborn 
been highlighted as a key gap care practices, including care seeking, 
through Uganda’s maternal and facility based deliveries and the 
perinatal mortality audit process.  identification of danger signs. 
The baby’s heart rate is one of the 
most important markers of distress T = Technology and Training: The 
in labor and a key indicator of the innovative wind-up Doppler FHRM is 
need for prompt intervention. Current devices for powered by human energy and designed 
monitoring labor in high-income countries can be by South African non-profit medical device company 
expensive, complex, electricity-dependent and Powerfree Education Technology. It is paired with 
unreliable in resource-limited settings ,where they training on intra-partum care, and thus, empowers 
may be ill-suited for use.    health workers to provide better care.  
ACT for Birth, Uganda is an initiative to improve quality 
of care at birth using high-impact, low-cost technology Evaluation and Results 
to promote timely decision-making for safe and ACT for Birth consisted of four phases. The year-long 
successful delivery. The project involved testing an startup phase included meetings with stakeholders, 
innovative fetal heart rate monitor (FHRM) and an feasibility assessments, baseline data collection using 
action-oriented mobile phone-based mortality audit maternity register data and protocol development.  
system. The integrated pilot was implemented in Uganda During Phase Two, health workers and VHTs were 
by Save the Children’s Saving Newborn Lives Program trained and facilities equipped with FHRMs and mobile 
and partners from 2011-2013. phones. Project implementation (Phase 3) occurred 
from July 2012 – July 2013. Regular support and 
Implementation date: April 2011 to 2013 
supervision meetings were held to assess progress and 
evaluate implementation. The final phase included 
documentation and dissemination of findings. 
About  ACT for Birth 
ACT for Birth comprises three components: Audit and Accountability: Mortality audits can reduce 
deaths by up to 30% if data are used effectively and 
A = Audit and Accountability: Uganda’s national paper- clearly linked to action. Working with the Ministry of 
based mortality audit forms were adapted to a mobile Health (MOH), the project simplified the MOH death 
phone platform to capture and input information on audit form and adapted it for use on cell phones to 
maternal and neonatal deaths and stillbirths in real time make it more user-friendly. Twenty-five health workers 
by midwives that is the fed into a central database. It involved in service delivery were trained to capture data 
captures information on causes of deaths and missed using the adapted audit software which allows midwives 
opportunities for care. Data is analyzed on-site and used to code the direct cause of death, as well as the 
to inform decision-making for improved quality of care.  avoidable factors linked to each death.  During the 
50 mHEALTH COMPENDIUM   |   VOLUME 3 
c. Ian P. Hurley, Save the Children 
 
ACT FOR BIRTH, UGANDA 
Ensuring safe delivery through fetal heart rate monitoring and a mobile phone-
based mortality audit system  SERVICE DELIVERY 
project period, all five maternal deaths were audited. In Conclusion 
addition, 75% (121/162) of all newborn deaths were In light of ACT for Birth’s findings and engagement of 
audited, compared to 7% (9/123) during the baseline.   the National Newborn Steering Committee with the 
Connecting Communities:  The intervention to link women project, the Ugandan MOH is currently updating the 
to health facilities through VHT also proved successful.  Maternal and Perinatal Death Review strategic plan and 
As a result of the training provided, VHTs were highly guidelines. There is strong government 
motivated to perform their work, health workers knew commitment and high potential for uptake of the 
and respected them and honored the referrals they whole package, including audit and the FHRM 
made, and the communities developed trust in them. and Helping Babies Survive Labor training, as 
well as the connection between the district, 
Technology and Training:  In the endline evaluation, 17 of VHTs and health facilities. Additionally, the training 
the 25 health workers interviewed indicated that they package is being adapted for pre-service training for 
had recently received in-service training on intrapartum nurses and midwives in partnership with the Ministry of 
care. All who attended thought that the trainings were Education and Academic Institutions, and the Uganda 
effective. However, training alone is not sufficient to Association of Ob/Gyn.  
maintain skills; ongoing supervision and mentorship are 
also essential. Correct use and completion of -------------------------------------------------------- 
partographs during deliveries was also monitored and Geographic Coverage: Nakaseke District, Uganda  
markedly improved during the course of the project.  
Implementation Partners: Save the Children, in 
The Doppler FHRM registered high levels of success in partnership with the Ugandan Ministry of Health, the 
Nakaseke in terms of acceptability, usefulness, and Association of Obstetrics and Gynaecology of Uganda, 
appropriateness. Health workers and mothers found the Powerfree Education Technology, MTN 
devices effective in monitoring the fetal heart rate 
before, during and after contractions.  However, there Funder: Saving Lives at Birth Grand Challenge partners, 
were noted challenges related to the inability of the including USAID, the Government of Norway, the Bill & 
device to display the remaining battery life.  Melinda Gates Foundation, Grand Challenges Canada, and 
the World Bank 
 
Contact Information:  
Lessons Learned Save the Children: Hanifah Sengendo, Chief of Party, 
 ACT for Birth functioned as an integrated whole Saving Newborn Lives (+256-414-510-582, 
resulting in a sustainable package ready for scale up.  hanifah.sengendo@savethechildren.org) 
USAID: Rachel Gordon, Presidential Management Fellow/
 The level of quality improvement would not have Program Manager, Saving Lives at Birth (+1-202-712-4361, 
been reached if any of the three interventions were rgordon@usaid.gov) 
implemented as a stand-alone solution.    
 At the health facility level, quality of care and References: 
accountability improved through the training, 1. ACT For Birth Final Report, Save the Children 
technology and frequent audit meetings. 2. http://savinglivesatbirth.net/blog/13/04/30/act-birth-improving-
quality-care-uganda 
 The use of an electronic audit platform was 
3. http://savinglivesatbirth.net/summaries/53 
successful and is promising even in sites with limited 
4. Mbonye AK, Sentongo M, Mukasa GK, Byaruhanga R, 
connectivity due to cell phone adaptation. 
Sentumbwe-Mugisa O, Waiswa P, et al. Newborn survival in 
 Improved knowledge and skills of VHTs improved Uganda: a decade of change and future implications. Health 
accountability. Policy and Planning 2012,27 Suppl 3:iii104-117.  
  mHEALTH COMPENDIUM   |   VOLUME 3 51 
