Using mobile technology to improve 
community health supply chains in Malawi
Photo by cStock
24  n  CSTOCK
cSTOCK
The combination of mobile technology, user-friendly dashboards, 
and quality-improvement teams have improved the reliability of 
supplies of life-saving commodities in community-based health 
programs.
In 2015, nearly 6 million children under the age of five died from treatable causes such as pneumonia, diarrhea, and 
malaria.1 Integrated Community Case Management (iCCM) is one strategy for reducing childhood mortality by having 
community health workers (CHWs) trained to treat children under five close to home. However, investments in training 
CHWs to treat these children are often undermined by weak supply chains which are unable to consistently deliver 
medicines to CHWs. 
The Supply Chains for Community Case Management Project’s (S4CCM) goal was to find proven, simple, and 
affordable solutions for the supply chain challenges faced by CHWs in Malawi, Rwanda, and Ethiopia. iCCM was 
first introduced in Malawi in 2008. Two years later, John Snow International, Inc. (JSI)’s SC4CCM project conducted 
a baseline assessment that revealed poor medicine availability, with only 23% of CHWs having in stock the four key 
lifesaving medicines needed to treat all three targeted childhood illnesses on the day of the survey. A lack of visibility 
into stock levels at the community level and weak coordination and management practices used to respond to the 
needs of the CHWs were identified as the primary causes of the weak supply chain. However, the survey results also 
identified an opportunity, with 94% of CHWs owning simple mobile phones and 85% having network coverage at least 
some of the time.2
About cStock
In collaboration with Malawi’s Ministry of Health (MOH), feedback to the CHW when the order is ready or if they JSI designed the Enhanced Management (EM) approach. are out of stock. Urgent matters, such as stock-outs or 
EM was developed to promote superior team performance low stock levels, are communicated through SMS alerts.
practices and the use of data to inform decisions and im-
2. A user-friendly dashboard: The web-based dashboard 
prove supply chain performance to increase the availability provides visibility of real-time CHW logistics data 
of medicines for community health programs. The following 
three key components ensure the program’s success: for district- and central-level managers. The system transforms two reported data elements into more than 
1. cStock: The overall goal of cStock is to improve 10 supply chain indicators that are displayed on the 
reporting and visibility of community health logistics dashboard as easy-to-use, relevant graphs and reports 
data. It is a RapidSMS-based reporting and resupply that facilitate rapid decision-making. These data can be 
system that facilitates timely data transmission and used for coordination, planning, and identification of 
communication between the CHWs and the facility stock issues. 
that supplies them with medicines. Using a streamlined, 3. District product availability teams (DPATs): They 
demand-based reporting and resupply process, stock complement cStock, building strong leadership and 
data reported by the CHW triggers the re-order creating teams of CHWs that work together to support 
process, whereby cStock automatically calculates the goals of the intervention. They are comprised of 
resupply quantities and transmits a request via SMS to district management, health center (HC) staff, and 
supervisors at health facilities. The facilities then send CHWs. DPATs have a common goal of improving 
mHEALTH COMPENDIUM  SPECIAL EDITION 2016  n  25
availability of essential medicines, and are designed All cStock users received a two-day training at the launch of 
to regularly use data provided by cStock to monitor the pilot. In addition, quarterly monitoring and implemen-
community supply chain performance and address tation support were provided throughout the pilot period 
supply chain challenges. HC staff meet CHWs every and feedback received was used to refine cStock and other 
month when they come to HCs for resupply; districts accompanying tools and training.
meet with CHW supervisors every quarter. 
Program Design Process
Formative research, including quantitative and qualitative In designing the system and workflows, consideration was 
assessments, was conducted from May to June 2010 in 10 given to ensure that key stakeholders have access to the data 
districts across Malawi’s three geographical regions. Based on they need, and in a format that is easily accessed and in-
the results of the assessment, the project explored and con- terpreted. User inputs during the initial design phase were 
sulted stakeholders on many different intervention options, limited mainly to defining the workflows in terms of the 
focusing on transportation, motivation, and technology, and recipients, content, timing, and format of the messages. The 
considered issues of affordability, scalability, and sustainabil- initial design of the dashboard was rudimentary, with limited 
ity as criteria for selection. Two intervention packages were time invested, and included only the basic supply chain 
then designed and piloted over 18 months (see evaluation metrics identified by the supply chain experts. The decision 
and results). to begin with a simple dashboard was based on users’ lack 
The design and development of cStock is based on a us- of experience with receiving, visualizing, and acting upon 
er-centered and iterative approach that combines the knowl- real-time supply chain data. After the users gained experience 
edge of supply chain experts with user experiences. The core in using online reports, and a better understanding of how 
principles of the design are to keep it simple; design with the they could use logistics data to measure and monitor supply 
end-user in mind; focus on feasibility, practicability, rele- chain performance, the project engaged the users for input 
vance, and usability; build ownership from all stakeholders on the dashboard design.
throughout the process; and plan for scale and sustainability Monitoring data were also used to design some targeted in-
from the outset. The system was also designed to align and tervention-support activities, including sending group SMS 
integrate into the current system by including workflows messages to users on common data entry errors and con-
that streamlined existing procedures and practices, reducing ducting extra training sessions for HC staff on how to run 
workloads rather than increasing them. effective meetings. Throughout the pilot, monitoring data 
were also shared with stakeholders, including MOH central 
staff and implementing partners, to get their input and ideas 
on addressing challenges.  
Figure 1.  
Sample cStock dashboard 
Growth in Scale 
The scale-up approach was defined by four primary strategies 
over two years (2013–2014). Strategies included gaining 
MOH endorsement, maintaining close engagement and 
coordination with partners, creating a dedicated cStock task-
force, and developing a national product availability team. 
In this way, the necessary political will, buy-in, continuous 
engagement, and ownership was in place to maximize the 
potential for sustainability over time. 
1. MOH endorsement: The MOH initially endorsed 
scale-up of cStock (but not DPATs) before the project 
had completed a full evaluation. The endorsement 
was triggered by enthusiasm for the unprecedented 
levels of access to community logistics data, positive 
26  n  CSTOCK
feedback from users, and high adoption of the system. conducted the trainings with MOH, while the project 
After conclusion of the pilot, the evaluation data provided technical support and quality control. 
clearly showed that although supply chain performance 3. Creation of a taskforce: An MOH-led taskforce that 
improved with the implementation of cStock, includes key stakeholders was set up to monitor the 
performance was significantly better with the EM progress of the scale-up, assist in resource mobilization, 
package that combined both cStock and the DPATs. and contribute to the development of a five-year 
Based on these findings, the MOH endorsed the full transition plan. The plan outlined a structured and 
EM package. deliberate process on how to sustain cStock and DPATs 
2. Continued engagement and coordination with for the next five years and build capacity within the 
partners: A vital part of planning for scale entailed the MOH to take full ownership of the system so that EM 
project’s ongoing engagement and coordination with becomes a core business practice of the health system. 
local partners, led by the MOH. This served to broaden 4. Development of the National Product Availability 
ownership for the intervention and avoid duplication. Team: The MOH also established a National Product 
As a result, multiple partners financed and supported Availability Team (NPAT) to manage the EM approach. 
the scale-up of cStock and DPATs to districts outside This team meets to review data on performance and 
the original pilot districts. cStock, with DPATs, is now provide leadership and support as needed to ensure all 
implemented and used in all of Malawi’s districts. districts can realize the full benefits of the EM approach. 
During the scale-up phase, partners financed and jointly 
Evaluation and Results
The project tested two different intervention packages: EM and strengthening key supply chain processes. The evaluation 
(cStock plus DPATs) and Efficient Product Transport (EPT) compared results from baseline to midline and compared 
(cStock plus bicycle maintenance) over 18 months (2011– each intervention group with the non-intervention compari-
2013). Each package was tested in three districts, and four son group. cStock proved to be feasible and acceptable in all 
districts from the baseline assessment were used as a compar- six districts; however, combining cStock with DPATs (three 
ison group. The monitoring and evaluation strategy includ- districts) resulted in significantly better supply chain perfor-
ed three large mixed-method evaluations, one at baseline mance and supply reliability.3-5
(2010), a second after the testing phase (midline—2013), 
n Data visibility improved from baseline in all districts 
and a third after the scale-up phase (endline—2014). where cStock was implemented, but improved more sig-
The midline evaluation compared the effectiveness of the two nificantly in EM districts: Results showed average CHW 
intervention groups (EM and EPT) in reducing stock-outs reporting rates of 94% in EM districts and 79% in EPT 
mHEALTH COMPENDIUM  SPECIAL EDITION 2016  n  27
Photos by cStock
100%
98% 99% % % %97% 97% 98% 98% 99 99 99 99
% 99%
% %
93%
96 96
90% % % 91
% 91% %
88 88 90%
80 %% 85 84% 8683
79% 79% 80%
75% 75% 76%
% 73%71 %
60 67
% 69
63% 63%
40 Figure 2.  
Mean reporting rates to 
20 cStock by HSAs, on all 
commodities in EM (n=393) 
and EPT (n=253) districts, 
January 2012–June 2013 
Jan Feb Mar Apr May Jun Jul Aug Sep Oct Nov Dec Jan Feb Mar Apr May Jun
2012 2013
AVERAGE EPT (EFFICIENT PRODUCT TRANSPORT)= 79%
AVERAGE EM (cSTOCK PLUS DPATs)= 94%
districts over the testing period (January 2012–June The endline evaluation assessed scale, sustainability, and 
2013). At baseline, only 43% of CHWs interviewed institutionalization. The evaluation consisted of qualitative 
reported that they submit some kind of logistics report case studies and quantitative analysis of cStock data in two 
(see Figure 2 above). original districts and two new districts. The results proved 
 Supply reliability was found to be significantly higher in that cStock is easily scaled and provides a simple process for n
EM districts compared to EPT districts. Supply reliabil- reporting on and resupplying community-level products in 
ity was defined as the mean percent CHW stock-out a systematic way. In addition, the benefits (coordination, 
rates by product over 18 months (January 2012–June communication, and collaboration) and challenges(transport, 
2013). Stock-outs for all products ranged between 5–7% resources, and time) of the DPATs were quickly realized in 
in the EM group and between 10–21% in the EPT the new districts and highlighted the importance of intense 
group. These differences were statistically significant at implementation support at the initial stages.
6 
the p=0.000 level for all products (Figure 2).
Lessons Learned in Program Implementation and Scaling
The overarching lesson from this research is that mobile reduced rates as part of their corporate social responsibility 
health strategies in isolation cannot create a reliable and to the health sector. The efforts proved successful, with one 
robust public health supply chain. However, if these strat- MNO providing a three-year waiver for SMS costs and the 
egies are implemented as part of broader supply chain other reducing SMS costs by 40% and only charging for 
system strengthening activities that address the larger system incoming messages. 
constraints, mHealth solutions can be game changing. Other Achieving broader ownership beyond a few champions: 
implementation challenges during development, deploy- Turnover of district champions, staff who were the primary 
ment, and scale-up ranged from issues related to setting up trainers and leaders for the EM approach at the district level, 
the technology to the question of government readiness to resulted in some loss of momentum for the uptake of cStock 
assume ownership of the system after the initial implement- and for conducting DPAT meetings. It is important to plan 
ing project ends.  for new staff training to ensure continuity and quality of 
Setting up a mobile information technology system: The two intervention implementation. Training should also build a 
mobile network operators (MNOs) initially charged com- sense of ownership and develop champions. For instance, 
mercial rates for SMS messages. Recognizing the difficulties finding opportunities for district staff to attend larger 
that the MOH would have in sustaining these costs without meetings where they can proudly present their successes at a 
continued donor support, the project engaged in intensive national level or across districts can motivate champions. To 
advocacy efforts with both MNOs, urging them to provide mitigate staff turnover effects, trainings during the scale-
28  n  CSTOCK
up phase included more district-level staff and all program Fund grant, and MOH staff have taken full responsibility 
coordinators whose programs extend to the community level for all system administration for cStock and support for the 
were included as DPAT members. DPATs. JSI no longer has staff dedicated to cStock and only 
Developing MOH readiness for system maintenance and provides ad hoc support to the MOH as needed. cStock con-
data storage / server hosting: Building capacity within the tinues to operate at full scale and is integrated into existing 
MOH to manage the cStock system has taken time and re- structures and processes for the CHWs.  n
sources. The capacity to host the data in the private sector is 
still emerging. Therefore, the decision was made to outsource 
data storage and software maintenance to US-based compa-
nies. While outsourcing is the appropriate choice at present, Snapshot: cStock
in-country capacity for hosting and maintenance should be 
Geographic Malawi
revisited as the program scales. Coverage
Future Plans Implementation 2011 to presentDates
Implementation Malawi Ministry of Health (MOH)(implementing)
While most innovation projects strive to move from pilot Partners JSI (design, pilot, and scale-up) 
to practice, achieving goals of scale-up and sustainability are Dimagi (software developers)
often a challenge. Over the project period EM achieved full Save the Children (scale-up)World Health Organization (scale-up)
scale and began the journey toward being integrated as an 
Donor(s) Bill & Melinda Gates Foundation (pilot)
organizational practice. Following the close of the SC4CCM mHealth Alliance International Working Group 
project in 2015, JSI placed a secondee in the MOH for 12 Grant (sustainability)
months to transfer skills in managing cStock and the DPATs. USAID/President’s Malaria Initiative
The secondee worked closely with MOH staff to fully estab- Global Fund
lish the NPAT and institutionalize national support for the Contact Sarah Andersson, Senior Technical Advisor, John 
innovation. cStock is now being funded through the Global Information Snow, Inc. (JSI), sarah_andersson@jsi.com
References & Additional Resources
Reports: 
Strengthening Supply Chains at the Community Level: findings from the SC4CCM project in Malawi, Rwanda, and Ethiopia http://sc-
4ccm.jsi.com/files/2015/01/SC4CCM-Findings-Report_FINAL.pdf 
From Pilot to Practice: lessons on scale, institutionalization and sustainability from the (in-progress) journey of the SC4MM project 
http://sc4ccm.jsi.com/files/2014/11/Pilot-to-Practice-Brief.pdf 
Malawi Intervention Strategy for Improving the Community Health Supply Chain: Implementation and M&E Plan 
http://sc4ccm.jsi.com/files/2012/10/Malawi-Implementation-Plan.pdf 
References:
1. WHO. Child mortality rates plunge by more than half since 1990 but global MDG target missed by wide margin. 2015.  http://www.who.int/
mediacentre/news/releases/2015/child-mortality-report/en/
2. SC4CCM. 2010. Malawi Community Health Supply Chain Baseline Assessment Report.  Arlington, Va. SC4CCM. http://sc4ccm.jsi.com/
files/2013/10/Malawi-Baseline-Report_FINAL.pdf 
3. Chandani Y, Andersson S, Heaton A, Noel M, Shieshia M, Mwirotsi A, et al. Making products available among community health workers: 
Evidence for improving community health supply chains from Ethiopia, Malawi, and Rwanda. J Glob Health [Internet]. 2014 Dec;4(2). 
Available from: http://www.jogh.org/documents/issue201402/Chandani_FINAL.pdf
4. Shieshia M, Noel M, Andersson S, Felling B, Alva S, Agarwal S, et al. Strengthening community health supply chain performance through an 
integrated approach: Using mHealth technology and multilevel teams in Malawi. J Glob Health [Internet]. 2014 Nov 4(2). Available from: 
http://www.jogh.org/documents/issue201402/Shieshia_FINAL.pdf
5. SC4CCM. Malawi Community Health Supply Chain Midline Evaluation Report [Internet]. Arlington, VA: JSI Research & Training Institute, Inc.; 
2013 [cited 2014 May 21]. Available from: http://sc4ccm.jsi.com/files/2013/11/Malawi-Midline-Report_FINAL.pdf 
6. SC4CCM. Malawi SC4CCM Project Endline Evaluation Report [Internet]. Arlington, VA: JSI Research & Training Institute, Inc.; 2014. Available 
from:  http://sc4ccm.jsi.com/files/2014/11/Malawi-Endline-Report.pdf 
mHEALTH COMPENDIUM  SPECIAL EDITION 2016  n  29
