mHEALTH AND 
NEONATAL RESUSCITATION
A Review of Interventions, Approaches and Applications
Namita Agravat, MPH
December 2013
Prepared for the United Nations Commission 
on Life-Saving Commodities Neonatal  
Resuscitation Technical Reference Team
Acknowledgements
Thank you to the mHealth Alliance for commissioning this report, and to Madhu Deshmukh, William 
Philbrick, and Avrille Hanzel who provided oversight and guidance to the preparation of the report.
A significant expression of appreciation goes to Ada Kwan who contributed both technical and 
editorial input during the finalization of this report. 
Much appreciation and respect also go towards those interviewed during the construction of 
the report: Emily Bancroft, VillageReach; Sherri Bucher, University of Indiana; Natalie Campbell 
and Beth Yaeger, MSH; David Cantor and Olivia Velez-Benenson, MCHIP; Patricia Coffey, PATH; 
Maria Freytsis, Independent Consultant; Craig Friderichs, GSMA; Lily Kak, USAID; Bill Keenan, AAP; 
Steve Ollis, D-Tree International; Manjari Quintanar-Solares, PATH; Sandhya Rao, departing USAID; 
Fay Venegas, PATH; and Donna Vivio, USAID.
The report was designed by Eighty2degrees, LLC. 
 
PHOTO CREDITS: 
David Evans: page 7, 13; Albert Gonzalez Farran: page 11; Francis Gonzales: page 10, 14, 29; Chelsea 
Hedquist: cover, page 8, 9, 15, 16, 19, 27, 30,40; Josh Nesbit: page 23, 33; Grey Pritchard: page 32; 
Chelsea Solmo: page 6, 20, 31; DataDyne: page 12, 28, 34, and Dalberg Global Development Advisors: 
page 24.
mHEALTH AND 
NEONATAL RESUSCITATION
A Review of Interventions, Approaches and Applications
Namita Agravat, MPH
December 2013
Acronyms and Abbreviations Table of Contents
AAP American Academy of Pediatrics Acknowledgements ............................................................................................................................................................. 2
CCEM Cold Chain Equipment Management Acronyms and Abbreviations ..........................................................................................................................................4
CRVS Civil Registration and Vital Statistics
ENAP Every Newborn Action Plan 1 Introduction to Child Mortality and mHealth ................................................... 7
GSMA Global System for Mobile Communication Association
HBB Helping Babies Breathe 2 Background .............................................................................................................. 9
ICT Information Communication Technology 
IPA International Pediatric Association 3 Methodology ...........................................................................................................12
LMIC Low- and Middle-Income Countries
LMIS Logistics Management Information System
4 mHealth Opportunities in Neonatal Resuscitation .........................................15M&E  Monitoring & Evaluation
MCHIP Maternal and Child Health Integrated Program A.  Client Education and Behavior Change and Communication ................................................. 16
MDG Millennium Development Goals Wired Mothers ...................................................................................................................................... 16
ODK Open Data Kit Mama .........................................................................................................................................................17
PATH Program for Appropriate Technology in Health B.  Sensors and Point-of-Care Diagnostics ............................................................................................17
PDA Personal Digital Assistant C.  Birth Registries and Vital Events Tracking ...................................................................................... 18
SIAPS Systems for Increased Access to Pharmaceuticals and Services Program D.  Data Collection, Reporting, and Electronic Health Records .................................................... 19
TB Tuberculosis mHBB (Mobile Health Babies Breathe) Pilot in Kenya ......................................................... 19
TWG Technical Working Group MCHIP Maternal and Newborn Quality of Care Survey ........................................................21
UNCoLSC United Nations Commission on Life-Saving Commodities E.  Electronic Decision Support – Information, Protocols, Algorithms, Checklists ...............23
UNFPA United Nations Family Planning Association F.  Provider-to-Provider Communication and User Group Consultation ..................................23
UNICEF United Nations Children’s Fund G. Provider Work Planning and Scheduling .........................................................................................24
URC University Research Corporation H.  Provider Training and Education .........................................................................................................24
USAID United States Agency for International Development I.  Human Resource Management ............................................................................................................25
WHO World Health Organization
J.  Supply Chain Management ...................................................................................................................25
K. Financial Transactions and Incentives ..............................................................................................26
5 Gaps in Knowledge and Barriers to Adoption ...............................................28
6 Recommendations for Saving Lives...................................................................31
Client Awareness and Education ...............................................................................................................31
Birth Registration and Data Collection ...................................................................................................31
Provider Training .............................................................................................................................................32
Supply Management ......................................................................................................................................32
7 Conclusions .............................................................................................................34
Appendix A. List of Key Informants for Interviews ..............................................................................................35
Appendix B. Examples of Barriers to High-Quality Resuscitation Services for Newborns Born 
without the Ability to Breathe  ................................................................................................................. 36
References ............................................................................................................................................................................ 38
7
1
Introduction 
to Child  
Mortality  
Reducing child mortality rates has been made a global and mHealth
priority. In existing policy, this is evident through the 
United Nations (UN) Millennium Declaration that established eight Millennium 
Development Goals (MDGs) in 2000 to improve conditions for the world’s 
poorest and with the more recent Every Woman, Every Child effort launched 
by the UN Secretary-General. Progress has occurred – 4.4 million more children 
survive every year compared to 20 years ago (1). However, MDG 4, which aims 
to reduce child mortality by two-thirds from 1990 to 2015, is not on track, 
and it will not be achieved in the near future without stronger and directed 
investments and efforts in reducing neonatal mortality (2). 
Each year, approximately four million babies do not survive the first month of 
life. The majority of these deaths occur in low- and middle-income countries 
(LMICs). For 23% of these deaths, death is attributed to birth asphyxia, which 
is the failure to initiate and sustain breathing at birth.a For the majority, death 
is avoidable since knowledge of basic interventions already exists, but the 
right resources do not reach the most at-risk communities. 
With the number of mobile phone subscriptions expected to surpass the world 
population of seven billion in 2014, a technology exists for the first time that 
can reach individuals who live in all corners of the world (3,4). In the past decade, 
the explosion in popularity of mobile technologies and wireless networks has 
made many interested in the mobile potential to improve population health. This 
has led to mHealth, which is medical and public health practice supported by 
EACH YEAR, APPROXIMATELY mobile devices, such as mobile phones, patient monitoring devices, personal digital assistants (PDAs), and other wireless devices. There is no excuse to 
FOUR MILLION BABIES DO leverage mobile to do as much as possible to reduce the number of unneces-sary deaths among newborn children. The objective of this paper is to review 
NOT SURVIVE THE FIRST existing mHealth interventions, successful approaches, and applications, as well as identify gaps in knowledge for the use of mHealth in neonatal resuscitation.
MONTH OF LIFE a These figures underestimate the issue as an estimated 1.02 million intrapartum stillbirths occur every year with 
an unknown number of these stillbirths could have been live births but misclassified as a fresh stillbirth, which is 
when the skin is still intact suggesting that death occurred within the 12 hours before delivery (6).
9
2
From another perspective, approximately 10 million Background
of the 136 million babies born every year around the 
world require simple stimulation at birth to breathe. Six million require basic 
resuscitation with a bag or mask, and less than one million require more 
advanced resuscitation. Table 1 demonstrates the three categories of resus-
citation interventions (immediate assessment and stimulation of the newborn 
baby, basic newborn resuscitation, and advanced newborn resuscitation) and 
the actions involved in each one to prevent birth asphyxia. 
However, the interventions in Table 1 are successful only if they can be applied 
immediately during the event in which they are required, such as in the delivery 
room or home within seconds after the birth of a newborn, Thus, the reality 
reflects the need for better access and delivery of neonatal resuscitation 
equipment and its correct usage by the birth attendants. In the majority of the 
countries where newborn deaths are attributed to birth asphyxia, delivering 
interventions for effective reduction of asphyxia-related neonatal deaths are 
hindered by inadequate resuscitation training of health workers who interface 
with women during labor and delivery; insufficient resuscitation equipment to 
APPROXIMATELY 10 MILLION  TABLE 1 Three categories of resuscitation interventions that can prevent 
birth asphyxia (5)
OF THE 136 MILLION BABIES Immediate assessment Immediate assessment, warming, drying and 
and stimulation of the tactile stimulation (rubbing with the drying 
BORN EVERY YEAR AROUND newborn baby cloth, rubbing the back or flicking the feet) of the newborn at the time of birth
THE WORLD REQUIRE  Basic Newborn Airway clearing (suctioning if required), head Resuscitation positioning, and positive pressure ventilation 
SIMPLE STIMULATION AT with bag and maskAdvanced Newborn Basic neonatal resuscitation (as above) plus 
BIRTH TO BREATHE Resuscitation endotracheal intubation, supplemental oxygen, chest compressions, and medications
10 mHEALTH AND NEONATAL RESUSCITATION
health facilities with maternity wards; on this list, which have the estimated 
and low levels of health workers who potential to save 200,000 newborn 
are able to deliver care to women lives per year (10). To achieve the delivery 
during home deliveries (6). Improving of neonatal resuscitation equipment 
these conditions requires enabling and devices, the UNCoLSC’s Neonatal 
ingredients within the environment, Resuscitation Technical Working Group 
such as national attention towards (TWG)b was formed to systematically 
essential neonatal care, governmental identify best practices for scaling 
promotion of health workers who sup- up interventions, identifying barriers 
port home births, and better data on in current implementation and gaps 
vital registrations (6,7). Additionally, neo- in knowledge, and addressing other 
natal resuscitation guidelines should be issues related to reducing neonatal 
tailored for resource-limited settings, mortality through the development of 
since they are designed for health pro- technical standards. 
viders with assumed extensive training 
and appropriate technology (8). The TWG is keen to explore the use of 
mHealth to track the availability and 
As part of the Every Woman, Every maintenance of resuscitation equip-
Child effort, the UN Commission on ment, to increase health worker training 
Life-saving Commodities (UNCoLSC) and the appropriate utilization of the A METHOD WAS DEVELOPED 
was formed to get affordable, effective resuscitation equipment, and to moni-
medicines and simple health com- tor and evaluate facility-level data. As a 
modities to the women and children first step to understanding the potential TO CATEGORIZE PROGRAMS 
who need them most. The UNCoLSC of mHealth in neonatal resuscitation, 
has identified 13 essential commod- this paper describes existing mHealth WHERE mHEALTH AND/OR 
ities which can save women and approaches and tools to support access 
children who are dying from prevent- to neonatal resuscitation equipment OTHER ICT WAS USED WITHIN 
able causes (9). Neonatal resuscitation and devices.
equipment and devices are included THE CONTEXT OF A NEONATAL 
b The lead convener of the TWG is USAID, and partners include AAP/IPA, MCHIP, the mHealth Alliance, PATH, Save 
the Children / Saving Newborn Lives, UNFPA, UNICEF, URC, SIAPS, and WHO (46). RESUSCITATION PROGRAM
12 METHODOLOGY 13
3
Methodology To achieve the objective of this paper, a landscape scan 
of mHealth and the use of information and commu-
nications technology (ICT) for neonatal resuscitation, literature review, and 
interviews with identified key informants who are involved in neonatal resus-
citation work were conducted. This included reviewing the UNCoLSC Report 
and Implementation Plan, along with documents and recommended literature 
describing existing mHealth tools and programs. A review of peer-reviewed 
and grey literature addressing mHealth and neonatal resuscitation was con- The three categories above were • Do you have any other sugges-
ducted in PubMed, Google Scholar, PLOS, in addition to searches on Google. identified as possible and promising tions for documented or published 
com. Established search terms for the literature review included: “mHealth”, areas of intervention or opportuni- resources for review with respect 
“newborn resuscitation”, “neonatal resuscitation”, “ICT”, “mobile”, “newborn”, ties for mHealth. The objective was to gaps and barriers in neonatal 
and “neonatal”. The search was combined by a review of mHealth case stud- to address issues and challenges for resuscitation?
ies and program descriptions from knowledge management portals, such as neonatal resuscitation, as identified by • Do you have any suggestions for 
K4Health, the mHealth Alliance website, and other websites recommended the experts and members of the TWG. other individuals with whom to 
by the TWG and key informants. Relevant white papers, articles, theses, and speak on the topic of neonatal 
reports were also reviewed. For the interviews, key informants were resuscitation and/or related ICT 
selected from a random convenience innovations?
Extracted information from the stated sources above was identified and sample with input from the TWG. 
synthesized if it had relevance to neonatal resuscitation activities, including Appendix A is a list of the individuals The information collected was reviewed 
reducing barriers to both implementation and the scale up of existing pro- interviewed. The main questions that and synthesized. TWG members re-
grams, as well as filling gaps in knowledge. Existing case studies and best guided the interviews included: viewed and provided feedback to initial 
practices for mHealth in neonatal resuscitation were identified and reviewed drafts of this paper.
by TWG members. A method was developed to categorize programs where • Do you know of any current pro-
mHealth and/or other ICT was used within the context of a neonatal resus- grams utilizing mobile technology 
citation program. Categories focused on, but were not limited to, the use of to support neonatal resuscitation?
mHealth in supporting: • What documented or published 
resources do you know of regard-
• Supply and maintenance of newborn resuscitation commodities ing mobile technology and neonatal 
• Training of skilled birth attendants, including nurses and midwives trained resuscitation?
on neonatal resuscitation • Taking a step back, where do you 
• Monitoring and evaluation of neonatal resuscitation programs think are the gaps and barriers in 
neonatal resuscitation programs?
14 15
4
mHealth  
Opportunities 
in Neonatal  
Generally, the utility of mHealth has been in improving Resuscitation
access to and quality of health. Given the experience 
and successes of mHealth pilots in addressing existing gaps and barriers within 
maternal, neonatal, and child health, as well as the potential to take mHealth 
to scale with the near ubiquity of mobile technologies, donors, implementers, 
and governments are enthusiastic about scaling up mHealth (11). Although 
mHealth is nascent and large-scale implementation of mHealth projects has 
been limited to date, there is some evidence demonstrating how mHealth 
can be effectively applied to support interventions along the reproductive, 
maternal, neonatal, and child health (RMNCH) continuum of care. More spe-
cifically for neonatal health, mHealth is being most commonly applied as a 
tool for health workers who are the point of contact for newborns and women 
during delivery (12,13), but at the time of writing this paper, a systematic review 
of mHealth applied to neonatal resuscitation has not yet been conducted. 
Most recently though, USAID, Dimagi, Inc., and CORE Group have developed 
an mHealth Field Guide for Newborn Health (14). 
While there is a lack of experience in integrating mHealth into neonatal resus-
citation activities, the use of mHealth to reduce the incidence of birth asphyxia 
with effective resuscitation interventions, if well-planned and implemented 
mHEALTH IS BEING MOST  in the context of existing efforts and programs, could potentially address 
some of the barriers in implementing interventions that reduce the number 
COMMONLY APPLIED AS A of asphyxia-related neonatal deaths. Labrique, et al. (2013) recently published a framework of 12 common mHealth applications (see Table 1) used as health 
TOOL FOR HEALTH WORKERS system strengthening tools across the RMNCH continuum of care (11). This framework is useful for conceptualizing opportunities for using mHealth to 
WHO ARE THE POINT OF support neonatal resuscitation (12,13).
CONTACT FOR NEWBORNS AND Labrique, et al. (2013) presented definitions for each of the 12 applications, which can be useful in finding opportunities where mHealth can be lever-
aged during the delivery of neonatal resuscitation interventions. Illustrative 
WOMEN DURING DELIVERY examples of the relevant applications are described below in the context 
16 mHEALTH AND NEONATAL RESUSCITATION mHEALTH OPPORTUNITIES IN NEONATAL RESUSCITATION 17
healthcare providers. The program Sensors and point-of-
also provided health messages based care diagnostics B
on gestational age through pregnancy 
and six weeks after delivery as well Given the split-second response time 
as appointment reminders. While the required for birth asphyxia, use of 
program identified constraints, such as mHealth-supported point-of-care diag-
who owned the phone in the family and nostics for decision-making would not 
where the family resided, there was an be ideal. Reaction time for providers is 
increase in skilled attendance at delivery within one minute after birth, requiring 
for the Wired Mothers group compared all actions to have a quick response. 
to the control group (60% vs. 47%) (15). Providers need to be adequately trained 
ahead of time and not rely on this sort 
MAMA of technology at the point of care.
The Mobile Alliance for Maternal Action 
(MAMA) program provides gestation-
al-age-appropriate health information TABLE 3 
of neonatal resuscitation. Examples delivering at a health facility, effective to the mobile phones of pregnant Twelve common mHealth  
applications for health systems 
include mHealth strategies that are cur- messaging must be developed for the women. As the due date for childbirth strengthening (11)
rently being implemented, as well as clients as well, such as for pregnant nears, the messages become more 
potential areas in which mHealth could women, who can tend to the traditional frequent and focus on preparing for 1 Client education and behavior 
be leveraged, which were conceptual- practice of delivering at home. Behavior delivery, including where it will occur (11). change communication
ized using the framework. change programs that encourage insti- 2 Sensors and point of care 
tutional delivery can be challenging The Neonatal Resuscitation Devices diagnostics
since the change requires a shift in what Case Study prepared by Coffey, et al. 3 Registries/vital events tracking
A Client education and may be a cultural norm. Below are two (2013), highlights that pregnant women 
behavior change and 4 Data collection and reportingexamples of mHealth being used for and the community may not be aware 
communication behavior change and communication that asphyxiated babies could be saved 5 Electronic health records
around delivery practices. While these by appropriate resuscitation equipment 6 Electronic decision support-
Neonatal resuscitation programs gen- programs may not fully change cul- and skills (7). Having this awareness information, protocols, 
erally focus on the supply side of health tural norms and practices, they may could empower pregnant women and algorithms, checklist
services, such as the capacity of health be a step in the right direction towards communities to demand that providers 7 Provider to provider 
care workers as they are the ones encouraging delivery in health facilities. be prepared to resuscitate their babies communication and user group 
responsible for recognizing danger should the need arise, which in turn, consultation
signs and acting quickly to administer Wired Mothers could motivate pregnant women to 8 Provider work planning and 
neonatal resuscitation when needed. The Wired Mothers program in Zanzibar deliver at the health facilities equipped scheduling
One of the biggest challenges to suc- contained two components. The first for such emergencies (7). Messages tar- 9 Provider training and education
cessful neonatal resuscitation, from a used SMS and supplied mothers with geting the community and pregnant 
10 Human resource management
broader level, is the need for skilled registered phones and unidirectional women, in particular, around the value 
health personnel. Delivering at a health text messaging. The second used a and use of resuscitation equipment 11 Supply chain management
facility rather than at home can ensure mobile phone voucher system and pro- could be included in messaging pack-
the presence of skilled health personnel vided two-way communication between ages similar to those developed in the 12 Financial transactions and 
incentives
during delivery. However, to encourage ‘wired mothers’ and their primary Wired Mothers and MAMA programs.
18 mHEALTH AND NEONATAL RESUSCITATION mHEALTH OPPORTUNITIES IN NEONATAL RESUSCITATION 19
C Birth registries and vital registration of births, along with the events tracking registration of deaths, is a component 
of a nation’s civil registration and vital 
The majority of stillbirths and neonatal statistics (CRVS) system. Birth regis-
deaths happen in countries that have tration establishes legal identity for a mobile phones to send information through features available on mobile 
very little data that can guide relevant child and serves to facilitate access to from the community through an elec- technologies. Data collection using 
programs (6). Without vital registration essential services, as well as protect tronic information path to regional and mobile-based data entry saves time 
(VR), not only is information on the against child trafficking (17). While birth national health authorities. The Uganda in tracking records and providing 
cause of death missing, but also the registration is important from child pro- system, called MobileVRS, will begin quick informational feedback loops 
lack of vital registries prevents the mon- tection and public health perspectives, registering deaths in early 2014, and the (19). Examples below include specific 
itoring and tracking of events when: death registration is just as important registration of deaths including deaths experiences with technologies and 
(1) neonatal resuscitation was required, from a public health perspective. In the occurring during the neonatal period platforms typically used for mobile-
but not given, or (2) it was given, but case of neonatal resuscitation, death can provide information on the number based data collection in the context 
had an adverse outcome. The reporting registration of babies provides infor- of deaths attributed to birth asphyxia of neonatal resuscitation, as well as in 
of cases requiring neonatal resuscita- mation to public health authorities so or the number of babies who could not other contexts that can be adapted for 
tion should ideally track adverse events that they can begin constructing the be resuscitated. neonatal resuscitation.
and the steps taken to mitigate compli- appropriate public health responses to 
cations. End users of this information address the prevalence of certain health mHBB (mobile Health Babies 
would be policymakers, particularly conditions or issues. While there are Data collection, Breathe) pilot in Kenya
since the information provides evidence efforts to improve death registration D reporting, and The most relevant example of data 
supporting an audit of causes of death in LMICs, those efforts lag in compar- electronic health collection for neonatal resuscitation 
and facilitates the case management ison with global efforts to promote utilizing mHealth is the mHBB pilot cur-
of mothers for service providers. An birth registration.  records rently being conducted and reviewed 
audit additionally helps policymakers in Kenya. A group from the University 
and health authorities in determining UNICEF has been supporting the use This section combines electronic data of Indiana launched the mHBB pilot to 
the skills of providers and availability of of RapidSMS, a mobile phone appli- collection and reporting with electronic look at M&E efforts that support the 
equipment. This sort of information can cation, to register births, issue birth health records, particularly because of rollout of the Helping Babies Breathe 
help in planning and directing capac- certificates and maintain a database the functionalities in common among (HBB) program, which works to ensure 
ity support and resources for neonatal of new births in countries such as the three areas with recordkeeping. all babies are born in the presence of 
resuscitation.  Uganda (11,18). The information collected This section overlaps conceptually with a skilled birth attendant through neo-
using mobile phones is then relayed, the previous section describing birth natal resuscitation curricula tailored 
With regard to the policy context, using SMS and web-based technol- and death registration systems; how- to low-resource settings (20). HBB has 
the Global Strategy for Women’s ogy to district, regional, and national ever, for the purpose of describing the rolled out widely; however, data collec-
and Children’s Health and the Every health and civil registration authorities. applications, the main importance in tion has not kept pace with the scale of 
Newborn: An Action Plan to End In Nigeria, RapidSMS was developed keeping registration and data collec- its roll out. The mHBB program being 
Newborn Deaths (ENAP) within the as a monitoring tool to identify in tion as two distinct applications in this piloted includes both web-based and 
Every Woman, Every Child effort real-time, center-by-center birth reg- report is that birth and death registra- mobile-based systems using an open-
focus attention on newborn health istration disparities (18). RapidSMS can tion data are relatively non-existent source ICT solution. Using Open Data 
and identify actions for improving sur- then prompt and facilitate appropriate in LMICs. Using mHealth for data col- Kit (ODK), the mHBB pilot collects 
vival, health, and development. One of action. In the same way it is used for lection strategies, on the other hand, data on training and implementation 
the strategic objectives of the ENAP birth registration, tools like RapidSMS often involves turning existing paper- of HBB. Information collected fall into 
is to count every newborn (16). The can be used to register deaths, using based processes into automated ones three categories:
20 mHEALTH AND NEONATAL RESUSCITATION mHEALTH OPPORTUNITIES IN NEONATAL RESUSCITATION 21
MCHIP Maternal and Newborn 3. Facility inventory
Quality of Care Survey 4. Health worker interview and knowl-
MCHIP (Maternal and Child Health edge test
Integrated Program) has developed 
a toolkit of Maternal and Newborn When these surveys were initially de-
Quality of Care surveys with various veloped, smartphones with Windows 
assessment capabilities. Relevant parts operating system were used. However, 
within this toolkit include surveys in the the size of the device seemed to make 
following areas: a difference in the ability to conduct 
the survey effectively. A larger view-
1. Clinical practice observation of ANC ing screen offers the ability to see 
2. Clinical practice observation of more questions on the observation 
Labor and Delivery checklists than devices with smaller 
H B B  T R A I N I N G
SET-UP REGISTRATION PRE-TEST HBB COURSE POST-TEST SURVEYS REFRESHER 
Trainer coordi- Trainees notified Trainee registers Trainer receives Trainee completes Trainees and Just-in-time video 
• Training-related data, including This response seemed to cut across nates with health by SMS message for course and SMS confirmation Written Knowl- Trainers complete refresher trainin, 
facility administra- with request to completes Written of Trainee edge post-test Course Surveys with pre-test/ 
initial and refresher training reg- gender, age, and experience with tor and other register for course. Knowledge registration using SMS text using either SMS post-test 
istrations and course information devices. Some of the challenges faced MOH officials to Pre-test using messaging. messaging or questions. Trainees receive Trainee attends 
identify avai;able SMS text smart phone.
• M&E, such as learner-centered were that the pilot was meant to test confirmation and course; Trainer trainees and set messaging.
course reminders completes course 
up HBB course.
evaluations both web-based and mobile-based via SMS. evaluations.
• Quality improvement, including tools; however, the web connections 
resuscitation debriefings and peri- were unexpectedly very poor. This 
natal death audits required more rapid development of S S
SMS 
the mobile tool, which led to problems TECHNOLOGY Messaging
Motivational 
The facilities involved in the pilot rep- with the format in which data were PLATFORM: Messaging Incentives
resent varying levels of volume for received. Several iterations of the data Data- Web 
base Server
delivery, network coverage and expe- collection forms had to be piloted (21).
rience with ICT solutions among health 
workers. When possible, the program This activity is still in the pilot stage 
BI-DIRECTIONAL HBB 
collects data both manually on paper with results expected during the spring STAKEHOLDER HBB Community Champions Regional National 
International 
and electronically to allow for compar- of 2014. Figure 1 highlights the many REPORTING: Providers Health Health Orgs OrgsWorkers Orgs
ison. The schematic below presents potential reporting domains based FacilityPOTENTIAL 
the functionality of the mHBB system on the success and scale-up of the REPORTING DOMAINS:
being tested. mHBB pilot (12,21,22). In the long term, Resuscitation Debriefing Birth Registry Morbidity/Morality Resource allocation
mHBB may capture additional M&E IndicatorsEarly postnatal follow-up Supply chain logistics; commodities tracking
Based on initial qualitative feedback, data that relate to the RMNCH con- Perinatal Audit NR Commodity Surveys Cost-analysis
the mobile tool was well received by tinuum through other efforts such Clinical Mentoring HMIS indicators 
health care workers. Time savings from as Helping Mothers Survive, Helping M&E indicators 
using the mobile tool relative to the Babies Survive and the Survive and 
paper tools were quickly recognized. Thrive Global Development Alliance. FIGURE 1. mHBB data collection and reporting system. Credit: Sherri Bucher, University of Indiana.
U R
E  A C C
C E
E S
 
S S
R E  A CU C E
C S
E
22 mHEALTH AND NEONATAL RESUSCITATION mHEALTH OPPORTUNITIES IN NEONATAL RESUSCITATION 23
viewing screens. Based on feedback systems lent itself well to mHealth 
from MCHIP, the ideal device for the applications. With respect to neonatal 
survey was found to be a 7-inch tablet resuscitation, any ICT could help in accu-
and the surveys can now be used on rate and timely reporting of cases and 
Android, iPhone, iPad and Windows outcomes related to neonatal resuscita- initiative for the digital transfer of used as tools to provide guidance for 
mobile devices (23). tion, but the data desired vary. Data can Health Management Information selecting, cleaning, assessing, and 
include information on training, availabil- System (HMIS) data via mobile replacing equipment.
Two of the tools developed have spe- ity of equipment, frequency of services, phones. mTrac provides a mechanism 
cific questions related to neonatal as well as outcomes. The type and forms for community members to report 
resuscitation and can be conducted at of data being collected can dictate the on service delivery challenges, and Provider-to-provider 
different types of health facilities. The type of data collection tool used. Below empower District Health Teams by communication and F
Labor and Delivery observation assess- are details of additional options. providing timely information for user group consultation
ment is conducted by trained medical action (28). One of the key functions of 
staff observers and includes the fol- Formhub makes basic Excel forms mTrac is in supply-chain management Mobile devices also facilitate commu-
lowing neonatal resuscitation checks: instantly accessible on an Android of medical commodities. nication between and among health 
• Preparation for delivery – review phone or the web.  The data can then workers. For instance, if a mother 
of equipment and supplies that be aggregated, shared, and visualized CommCare Mobile allows for data to were transferred to a higher-level facil-
should be set out in preparation to allow for greater understanding of be sent over standard phone networks ity after her baby received neonatal 
for delivery information (11,24). for real-time inspection on the web. resuscitation, there may be a need for 
• Immediate care – review of neona- In Zambia, for example, rural clinics additional communication between 
tal resuscitation checklist which is ODK, as mentioned earlier in reference are connected to a central server, but health workers at the health facilities 
included as a part of the complica- to the mHBB activity, is an open-source community health workers also have where she was seen. This can be facil-
tions checklists suite of tools that helps organizations access to patient data through their itated in a timely manner through the 
• Clean-up after neonatal resuscita- author, field, and manage mobile data mobile phone to help them conduct mobile technologies.
tion – review of partograph and/or collection solutions. Authors design a follow-up (29).
chart for completeness form, setup a server, and connect the Other opportunities may exist in provid-
device to that server (11,25). ing training and supervision between 
If neonatal resuscitation is not observed, Electronic decision health care workers at different facili-
providers may be asked knowledge FrontlineSMS requires a computer E support – information, ties. Similar to telemedicine, health care 
questions to capture their preparation running on Windows, MacOS or Linux. protocols, algorithms, workers can provide support to one 
for neonatal resuscitation. The Health The FrontlineSMS application needs another via mobile devices regarding 
Worker Interview and Knowledge Test to be downloaded and a compatible checklists neonatal resuscitation. While point-
ask about professional and refresher mobile phone with sufficient credit for of-care support during delivery may 
training in neonatal resuscitation. Both sending and receiving text messages is Given that the time from decision to not be the most ideal time to refer to 
of these relevant tools are available required (11,26). Commercial systems such administration of neonatal resuscitation a mobile device, a health care worker 
upon request (23). as DataDyne have developed Magpi for is typically within the first minute after could contact a colleague when she 
users to develop mobile questionnaires birth, mobile-focused decision support or he suspects neonatal resuscitation 
Various mHealth data collection tools and provide real-time maps and data tools at point of care are not an ideal may be required at delivery based on 
exist insofar as data collection was visualization (11,27). option in improving neonatal resuscita- having observed risk factors or danger 
one of the first applications for which tion services. As part of preparing for signs from a pregnant mother. There 
mHealth was used. The ease in translat- In Uganda, through RapidSMS, mTrac neonatal resuscitation, mobile phone may also be benefits from contacting 
ing paper-based systems to electronic was developed as a government-led applications with checklists could be another health care worker at another 
24 mHEALTH AND NEONATAL RESUSCITATION mHEALTH OPPORTUNITIES IN NEONATAL RESUSCITATION 25
Depending on the availability of however, is a different type of com-
devices, health workers could stream modity and should accordingly be 
videos for continuing education on handled differently when it comes 
neonatal resuscitation. Viewing videos to supply chain management. Unlike 
for continuing education in between single-use commodities such as 
trainings may prove valuable in ensur- medicines, neonatal resuscitation 
ing readiness for these workers. As equipment is generally used multiple 
resuscitation equipment becomes times (with the exception of suction 
more available in facilities, guidance bulbs, in some cases). Stock-outs 
on disassembling and cleaning will be and “restocking” requests therefore 
facility for post-procedure support to in-service training that health workers needed. Mobile devices could also be function differently. One way to look 
ensure proper follow-up. have with respect to neonatal resus- used to help stream videos on cleaning at the equipment is to relate it to cold 
citation. Once training schedules are and storing resuscitation equipment. chain equipment for vaccines, such 
in place for in-service training, pro- Additionally, mobile phones or tab- as refrigerators, cold rooms, and cold 
Provider work planning 
G grams like RapidSMS can be used to lets could provide access to reference boxes
 (33,34). These are items that are 
and scheduling send reminders for trainings by SMS (18). materials, such as that of Helping also purchased for a facility and have 
Other uses of SMS include requesting Babies Breathe, for independent review to be maintained until they no longer 
While mHealth applications can be used and monitoring trainings for new or by health care workers. function properly, at which time, they 
for time management, such as planning inexperienced staff. Knowledge quizzes will need to be replaced. 
work and organizing schedules, they are could also be received and transmitted 
not prioritized for directly supporting by SMS. Human resource I PATH has developed a Cold Chain neonatal resuscitation services at this management Equipment Manager (CCEM) software 
time. However, it is important to ensure eMOCHA is an open-source mHealth tool which is a Microsoft-Access-based 
the presence of a health provider prop- application that can provide point-of- Human resource management mHealth application (35). The tool has three main 
erly trained in neonatal resuscitation in care interactive multimedia training & applications were not identified as functions:
health facilities at all times. education, among other tools. There is an area that would directly support 
currently an application available for neonatal resuscitation services. As • A geographic database of health 
download on the Google Play store mentioned before, however, it is import- facilities 
Provider training and 
H called “TB Detect” that provides up-to- ant to ensure the presence of a neonatal • A data entry system targeting low- education date TB-related education (11,31). resuscitation-trained provider in the resource environments 
health facility at all times. • A modeling engine for generating 
Adequate training is imperative for The non-profit, eHealth villages, pre- cold chain equipment forecasts 
supporting timely and effective sented an example in Kenya when a 
neonatal resuscitation services. “In patient was admitted and the baby was Supply chain J This tool is more of an eHealth tool. order to maintain provider skills and at risk of prenatal asphyxia (sic). The management However, there may be strong poten-
ability to manage birth asphyxia, provider had on-demand delivery of tial for incorporating an mHealth 
birth attendants require quality pre- medical information on an iPad and was Most of the commodities presented in component.
and in-service training, with routine able to research resuscitation. When the UNCoLSC’s report of 13 life-saving 
refresher trainings” (30). the baby was born not breathing, the commodities are single-use medicines, Through its “Health Tech” workplan, 
provider performed neonatal resus- which require constant updates on PATH plans to conduct a durability 
The MCHIP Quality of Care toolkit citation. This provider now conducts stock-outs or orders to replenish. and cleaning assessment of neonatal 
helps to identify levels of both pre- and further training for other staff (32). Neonatal resuscitation equipment, resuscitation equipment in the field 
26 mHEALTH AND NEONATAL RESUSCITATION
during the spring of 2014. This assess- vouchers were incentivized to contact 
ment should give a better indication of health care providers (15). Given that 
the lifespan of neonatal resuscitation many births occur at home, this may be 
devices. The development of quantifi- an additional strategy for encouraging 
cation tools and forecasting guidelines facility delivery.
are also underway. These tools and 
guidelines will also help identify how To provide an example of how vouchers 
many pieces of equipment are needed can be transferred through mobile-
in a facility.  Based on this information, based systems, mPesa, which is a 
mHealth applications can be used to mobile money transfer program being 
provide reminders to conduct checks implemented in several countries, can 
on the stock status of equipment and provide another perspective; however, 
potentially put in requests to replace it should be strongly noted that con-
equipment. Ideally, the mHealth solu- ditional cash transfers should not be 
tion would connect directly into the provided to incentivize neonatal resus-
country’s LMIS system (36–38). citation. In the case of Kenya and the 
use of mobile phones for SMS remind-
While more involved than likely neces- ers and conditional cash transfers to 
sary in the case of neonatal resuscitation, improve immunization, mothers who 
SMS for Life uses mobile phones, SMS received reminders completed the fol-
messaging and electronic mapping to low-up survey and then received funds 
track stock levels of essential malaria through mPesa (40).
medicines on a weekly basis (39).
Financial transactions 
K and incentives 
Mobile is also starting to play a role 
in transferring money or credit over 
wireless networks, which can be lev-
eraged in health interventions that use 
financial transactions and incentives. 
Wired Mothers offers mobile phone THE LACK OF A LARGE BODY 
vouchers for two-way communication 
between mothers participating in the OF EVIDENCE DEMONSTRATING 
program and primary health provid-
ers. Mothers can use the vouchers to THE ATTRIBUTIVE IMPACT 
access advice and if necessary, call for 
ambulance service (15). An evaluation of CONNECTED TO mHEALTH  
the Wired Mothers program indicated 
that women who received phones with HAS BEEN PROBLEMATIC
28 GAPS IN KNOWLEDGE AND BARRIERS TO ADOPTION 29
5
Gaps in 
Knowledge 
and Barriers few opportunities for collaboration and health priorities, information systems 
to Adoption efficient use of resources. Instead of architecture and interoperability issues A number of barriers and challenges can potentially creating independent, parallel systems, and the existence of standards. These 
undermine the integration of mobile technology into efforts need to leverage existing ini- barriers can be addressed at the coun-
not only neonatal resuscitation interventions, but also any health intervention tiatives into one interoperable system try-level by presenting more substantial 
(see Appendix B). This is the case for mobile technology used by communities, to both maximize effectiveness and evidence of the benefits of mHealth 
as well as the health sector. First, the effective use of mHealth is obviously streamline processes (43). interventions and by helping to estab-
dependent upon the availability of phones. At the household level, mobile lish global and national level strategies 
phones in LMICs are typically owned by, or under the control of men (41). On There is a need to address barriers to and guidelines for mHealth implemen-
the health service delivery side, women, who constitute most of the community scale and sustainability of mHealth tation and integration into existing 
health workers, often use phones that are shared with household members or (which is connected to the transition policies (43). Country Ministries of Health 
with other members of the community. Second, depending upon the location, from pilots (19,43). mHealth projects would need to take an active role for 
network coverage and the inability to charge phones are omnipresent issues in require wide availability of mobile mHealth applications to be success-
most rural areas in LMICs. Third, low literacy in communities may limit the ability devices, consistent sources of credit ful, achieve scale, and be sustainable. 
to use certain phone features such as SMS (42). Accordingly, strategizing the use for phone time, trained legions of health This requires continued advocacy for 
of mHealth must consider the availability of phones among community health workers and ongoing management of countries to adopt policies related to 
workers, gender dynamics, network coverage, availability of electricity, and the servers and other equipment con- mHealth or eHealth (44). Ministries of 
literacy rates. When mobile devices are not readily available, project planning nected to using mobile and web-based Health are already very stretched for 
and budget considerations would need to factor in the funding required to technology. These are just some of the resources and while pilot programs may 
obtain mobile devices, access a working network and energy sources, and build factors that need to be considered be encouraging, their ability to take on 
the capacity of health workers who would be responsible for using the phones. when planning to go to scale. ownership may be limited.  
The lack of a large body of evidence demonstrating the attributive impact Applications related to mLearning (the Also, until standard neonatal resusci-
connected to mHealth has been problematic. There is, however, well-estab- use of mobile technology for educa- tation equipment is available globally, 
lished evidence that supports data collection using PDAs, the earlier form of tional or learning purposes, such as there will be significant variations 
mobile technology used in LMICs. An increasing number of studies are eval- health worker training) have not been throughout countries in implementing 
uating the impact of mobile phone technology in data collection and other widely studied as of yet. There are sev- mHealth programs to support neonatal 
areas outlined under the framework outlined above. Yet, even as the body eral promising ideas but a look at the resuscitation services. Currently, there is 
of evidence grows, there is a need for evaluation research to keep pace with effectiveness might also be a valuable no consistent guidance on the lifespan 
the advancement of mobile technology (43). endeavor (43). of equipment, and there are inconsis-
tencies in the quantity required in a 
The tendency to create parallel independent mHealth implementation systems Policy barriers also play a role in particular health facility, current stock 
constitutes a major operational concern, particularly considering the number mHealth. Some examples of policy bar- levels of the equipment, and the best 
of pilots operating in a country. These systems often work in silos, creating riers include network coverage, national methods for cleaning the equipment.
31
6
Recommendations 
As we think through the opportunities for for Saving Lives
applying mHealth to neonatal resuscita-
tion, the best strategic direction would be to target areas with the potential 
for the most direct impact that can be achieved practically in the short term, 
and to build upon existing experience. Using this strategy, recommendations 
for using mHealth in the area of neonatal resuscitation include focusing how 
mHealth can be operationalized for client awareness and education, data col-
lection, provider training, and supply management based on the information 
received on existing mHealth applications, gaps and barriers, as analyzed 
under sections 4 and 5 above.  
Client awareness and education
Improving client awareness and education on neonatal resuscitation is an 
important component for improving neonatal resuscitation activities in appro-
priate situations. Although mHealth strategies have not been applied directly 
for supporting neonatal resuscitation, several efforts have been implemented 
where pregnant women are able to receive mobile-based health messages 
corresponding to how advanced their pregnancy is all the way until the post-
natal period. Incorporating information related to birth asphyxia or neonatal 
resuscitation in these messages would be relevant to include in the existing 
mHEALTH IS BEING MOST  mHealth programs for maternal health. Additionally, these messages could 
also serve as a way to monitor and register birth outcomes, since they already 
COMMONLY APPLIED AS A register pregnant women.
TOOL FOR HEALTH WORKERS Birth Registration and Data collectionDeveloping birth and death registration systems can capture the number of 
WHO ARE THE POINT OF births occurring as well as identify the causes of deaths among babies, and data collection for neonatal resuscitation includes a focus on tracking numbers 
CONTACT FOR NEWBORNS AND of health care workers trained, frequency of resuscitation, and the quality of care provided. Targeting resources (e.g. supplies and training resources) to 
locations which experience a disproportionate number of preventable neo-
WOMEN DURING DELIVERY natal deaths related to lack of resuscitation capacity will require linking all 
32 mHEALTH AND NEONATAL RESUSCITATION
these data points to outcomes in order a frequent basis. This is an area where 
to track progress over time. There are mHealth can provide some innovation.
several mHealth data collection tools in 
existence that could be applied in track- Support from mHealth for training could 
ing neonatal outcomes as they relate occur at multiple levels. Specific appli-
to neonatal resuscitation efforts. The cations could be developed or added to 
mHBB pilot, for instance, is currently existing interventions to include:
tracking provider training through 
mobile technology, but if supported, • Reminders for refresher trainings
this effort could link to morbidity • Requests for trainings for new staff
and mortality indicators. The MCHIP • Providing videos to be used as 
Quality of Care survey provides tools continuing education in between 
to monitor providers when conducting in-person trainings. Videos could be 
neonatal resuscitation. focused on performing resuscitation 
and proper handling of equipment 
Collecting relevant information can when not in use, such as disassem-
help in pinpointing other gaps in pro- bling, cleaning, and storing
viding adequate neonatal resuscitation • Conducting knowledge checks 
services. Just as data collection over through text messages for health 
time has helped to indicate the need care staff, particularly those who 
for improved resuscitation services, it may not be performing neonatal 
can also help to identify whether or not resuscitation regularly
gaps are occurring related to training, 
equipment, or elsewhere. Lessons can Supply Management
be drawn from the various projects that Also critical to the provision of neo-
have already integrated mobile tech- natal resuscitation is the availability 
nology for data collection. and status of the equipment. mHealth 
support for supply management could 
Provider training include reminders to check equipment 
Crucial to the success of neonatal as well as a link to the central LMIS to 
resuscitation is the training of provid- request new equipment. The Cold Chain 
ers. In many facilities, the provision of Equipment Manager tool adapted for PLANNING ANY mHEALTH 
neonatal resuscitation services may mobile devices may be a good example 
be infrequent. Training is often only for managing neonatal resuscitation APPLICATION SHOULD BE DONE 
provided during pre-service yet there equipment. The critical aspect of this 
may be a need for more frequent in-ser- would be that inventory management IN CONJUNCTION WITH OTHER 
vice or refresher trainings to reinforce of neonatal resuscitation equipment 
skills and improve recall of resuscitation would need to be distinguished from HEALTH INTERVENTIONS AND 
knowledge, especially for those who do inventory management of medical 
not need to conduct resuscitation on commodities that are used once. mHEALTH SYSTEMS
34 APPENDIX 35
Appendix A
List of key informants for interviews
7 Emily Bancroft, VillageReach
Sherri Bucher, University of Indiana
Natalie Campbell, MSH
Conclusions David Cantor, MCHIPmHealth has not been leveraged fully for reducing neo- Patricia Coffey, PATH
natal mortality rates related to birth asphyxia; however, Madhu Deshmukh, CARE
many opportunities exist for improving access and delivery of effective inter- Maria Freytsis, Independent consultant
ventions, such as neonatal resuscitation. This paper has used the framework Craig Friderichs, GSMA
presented by Labrique et al. (2013) to identify opportunities for mHealth Lily Kak, USAID
within the context of neonatal resuscitation. Using this framework, mHealth Bill Keenan, AAP
examples have been provided for client education and behavior change Steve Ollis, D-Tree
and communication, sensors and point-of-care diagnostics; birth registries Bill Philbrick, mHealth Alliance/UNICEF
and vital events tracking; data collection, reporting, and electronic health Manjari Quintanar-Solares, PATH
records; electronic decision support for information, protocols, algorithms, Sandhya Rao (email), departing USAID
and checklists; provider-to-provider communication and user group consul- Olivia Velez, MCHIP
tation; provider time management; provider training and education; human Fay Venegas, PATH 
resource management; supply chain management; and financial transactions Donna Vivio, USAID
and incentives. Specific recommendations for where mHealth can have the Beth Yaeger, MSH
largest health impact from neonatal resuscitation and thus reduce the number 
of birth-asphyxia-related deaths have been identified. These areas include 
data collection, provider training, and supply management. Recommendations 
have been drawn from existing strategies that leverage mHealth and applied 
to the needs for better newborn health data, such as vital registration, to 
inform decision making; inadequate training for health workers that interact 
with women during labor and delivery both at health facilities and households; 
and poor supply of necessary neonatal resuscitation equipment and devices 
at the moment when birth asphyxia complications occur.  
Planning any mHealth application should be done in conjunction with other 
health interventions and mHealth systems. Investing in mHealth interventions 
purely focused on neonatal resuscitation would likely not be as cost-effec-
tive, especially if the mHealth intervention is designed and implemented as 
stand-alone and not integrated into the larger efforts of the health system. In 
addition, it seems premature to look into the development of these types of 
applications until there is more consistent guidance on the care and longev-
ity of the equipment. At this time, there does not appear to be any specific 
mHealth support that can be provided that would strengthen systems where 
equipment is not available. Where it is available, the above suggestions could 
be taken to create pilots to be used for learning and scaled as we learn more.
36 mHEALTH AND NEONATAL RESUSCITATION APPENDIX 37
Appendix B Appendix B 
Examples of barriers to high-quality resuscitation services for (continued)
newborns born without the ability to breathe 
Credit: USAID Assist (45)
Service Delivery Common Barriers Health System Common Upstream Barriers to Effective Delivery of Resuscitation 
Barrier Category (National, Regional &  Services
District Management)
Organization & • Lack of recognition and systematic referral and transport of high-risk 
Processes of Care pregnancies or abnormal labor to referral level facilities. National Policy & • Weak national leadership and governance (e.g. assigned national 
Leadership
• No designated area & process for emergency resuscitation (ready table newborn point person, steering committee, comprehensive action plan)
with functional clean equipment and designated competent providers • Inadequate designated funding for newborn health and resuscitation
available all maternity shifts)
• Lack of operational strategy to translate policy into practice and 
• Poor adherence with evidence-based resuscitation standards, including monitor progress 
failure to promptly recognize newborn asphyxia
• Out-of-date resuscitation standards
• Lack of clear staff roles and organization of post-partum care to 
• Lack of clear policy regarding specific provider cadres authorized to 
support immediate effective teamwork in the event of an adverse event
provide resuscitation services and lack of certification protocols
Provider &  • Lack of initial and regular refresher clinical training in evidence-based • Lack of national policy and guidelines on commodities procurement, 
Staff Support basic neonatal resuscitation distribution and maintenance
• Lack of supportive supervision to oversee provider and staff • No required accreditation, licensing and re-accreditation and licensing 
competency and performance procedures (facility and provider level)
• Lack of quality improvement and basic data management skills Human Resources • Weak and no regulation of pre- and in-service competency-based 
Support
Basic Infrastructure training, refresher training, and continuous supportive supervision to • No designated and equipped “newborn corner” resuscitation space in 
& Commodities help maintain provider clinical competencedelivery room
• Poor manager skills to effectively manage commodities procurement, 
• No functional, sterilized resuscitation commodities (bag and mask) distribution and maintenance
available 24/7 in delivery areas
• Inadequate professional development opportunities for manager and 
• Non-functional and/or unclean equipment due to poor maintenance provider cadres
• No routine quality assurance processes related to equipment • Low pay and lack of incentives to maintain provider and staff 
maintenance (e.g. checklists for essential procedures with designated engagement, performance and competence
responsible staff and routine supervision checks)
• Lack of oversight and accountability mechanisms
• Difficulties and delays in anticipating commodities needs and procuring 
replacements for malfunctioning commodities Commodities and • Weak standardization of effective commodities forecasting and 
Logistics Support procurement, distribution and tracking systems (national, regional/
Monitoring & • Facility medical records and registers do not systematically measure district); market shaping (global and local)
Improving Outcomes intra- and post-partum adverse events, timeliness of recognition 
of adverse event, quality of clinical interventions and associated • Poor oversight of product quality and technical specifications 
health outcomes • Weak regulatory efficiency for sustaining demand/supply, inventory 
• Facility providers/managers do not collect, manage and analyze monitoring of resuscitation commodities
available facility data for continuous improvement of health care 
services; national/regional and district managers do not analyze Routine Health • No vital registries
routine health information data to continuously strengthen  essential Information Systems
• Weak or no data collection related to facility and/or population 
supporting health system functions
incidence of intra-partum adverse events, services provided, and 
• Facilities do not monitor and audit maternal and perinatal adverse neonatal outcomes as part of routine health information systems
events using standardized procedures and documentation forms
• Poor quality of available data 
• No routine analysis and use of available data
• Weak data management skills among providers, managers and facilities
38 mHEALTH AND NEONATAL RESUSCITATION REFERENCES 39
References 22. Bucher S, Esamai F. Using mobile phones to support neonatal resuscitation training in Africa Summary. 2013. 
23. Cantor D. ICF International. Personal communication. 2013. 
24. Airhihenbuwa CO, Obregon R. A critical assessment of theories/models used in health communication for HIV/
AIDS. J Health Commun [Internet]. Taylor & Francis; 2000 Jan [cited 2014 Jan 29];5 Suppl(sup1):5–15. Available 
from: http://dx.doi.org/10.1080/10810730050019528
25. Janz NK, Becker MH. Health Education & Behavior. 2009; 
26. Elder JP. Behavior Change and Public Health in the Developing World [Internet]. SAGE; 2001 [cited 2014 
1. USAID. Child survival call to action: Ending preventable child deaths, summary roadmap. 2013. 
Jan 29]. Available from: http://books.google.com/books?hl=en&lr=&id=WuHF2qI_kdcC&pgis=1
2. Lawn JE, Cousens S, Zupan J. Neonatal Survival 14 million neonatal deaths: When? Where? Why? 
27. Koskinen E, Salminen J. A customizable mobile tool for supporting health behavior interventions. 
2005;891–900. 
2007;5907–10. 
3. International Telecommunications Union (ITU). ICT Facts and Figures: The World in 2013. 2013. 
28. Fogg BJ. A Behavior Model for Persuasive Design. 2009; 
4. International Telecommunications Union (ITU). ITU releases latest global technology development figures 
29. Freimuth VS. Theoretical foundaiton of AIDS media campaigns. In: Fitzpatrick MA, Freimuth VS, editors. 
[Internet]. 2013 [cited 2013 Jul 12]. Available from: https://http//www.itu.int/net/pressoffice/press_releases 
AIDS: A communication perspective. Hillsdale, NJ: Eribaum; 1992. p. 91–110. 
/2013/05.aspx
30. Every Woman Every Child. UN Commission on Life Saving Commodities Implementation Plan. 2012. 
5. Lee ACC, Cousens S, Wall SN, Niermeyer S, Darmstadt GL, Carlo WA, et al. Neonatal resuscitation and 
immediate newborn assessment and stimulation for the prevention of neonatal deaths: a systematic review, 31. Elder JP, Ayala GX, Harris S. Theories and intervention approaches to health-behavior change in primary care. 
meta-analysis and Delphi estimation of mortality effect. BMC Public Health [Internet]. 2011 Jan [cited 2014 Jan Am J Prev Med [Internet]. Elsevier; 1999 Nov 1 [cited 2014 Jan 29];17(4):275–84. Available from: http://www.
23];11 Suppl 3(Suppl 3):S12. Available from: http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2458/11/S3/S12 ajpmonline.org/article/S0749-3797(99)00094-X/abstract
6. Lawn JE, Shibuya K, Stein C. No cry at birth: global estimates of intrapartum stillbirths and intrapartum-related 32. Linder M. Mobile health technology: touching lives across the globe. Health Manag Technol [Internet]. 2012 Jun 
neonatal deaths. Bull World Health Organ. 2005;83:409–17. [cited 2014 Jan 29];33(6):6–7. Available from: http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/22787942
7. Coffey P, Kak L, Narayanan I, Bergeson Lockwood J, Singhal N, Wall S, et al. Case study: Newborn resuscitation 33. Bancroft E. VillageReach. Personal communication. 2013. 
devices, Prepared for the United Nations Commission on Life-Saving Commodities for Women and Children. 34. PATH. Cold Chain Technologies. Technology Solutions for Global Health. Seattle, WA; 2013. 
2012. 
35. Fishbein M, Ajzen I. Belief, attitude, intention and behavior: an introduction to theory and research. 1975 [cited 
8. World Health Organization. Guidelines on basic newborn resuscitation. Geneva; 2012. 2014 Jan 29]; Available from: http://trid.trb.org/view.aspx?id=1150648
9. Every Woman Every Child. UN Commission on Life-Saving Commodities for Women and Children 36. Coffey P. PATH. Personal communication. 2013. 
Commissioners’ Report. 2012. 
37. Venegas F. PATH. Pesronal communication. 2013. 
10. Every Woman Every Child. Newborn Resuscitation [Internet]. 2012 [cited 2014 Jan 20]. Available from:  
http://www.everywomaneverychild.org/component/content/article/1-about/309-newborn-resuscitation- 38. Yeager B. Management Sciences for Health. Personal communication. 2013. 
devices--product-profile-). 39. Crawford R. The boundaries of the self and the unhealthy other: reflections on health, culture and AIDS. Soc 
11. Labrique AB, Vasudevan L, Kochi E, Fabricant R, Mehl G. mHealth innovations as health system strengthening Sci Med [Internet]. 1994 May [cited 2014 Jan 29];38(10):1347–65. Available from: http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/
tools: 12 common applications and a visual framework. Glob Heal Sci Pract. 2013;1(2):160–71. pubmed/7517576
12. Freytsis M, Velez O. Mobile Tools for Health Workers Targeting Neonatal Health in Low-Resource Settings: 40. Wakadha H, Chandir S, Were EV, Rubin A, Obor D, Levine OS, et al. The feasibility of using mobile-phone 
A Realist Review. re. 2013. based SMS reminders and conditional cash transfers to improve timely immunization in rural Kenya. Vaccine 
[Internet]. 2013 [cited 2014 Jan 29];31(6):987–93. Available from: http://www.sciencedirect.com/science/
13. Philbrick WC. mHealth and MNCH State of the Evidence, Trends, Gaps, Stakeholder Needs, and Opportunities article/pii/S0264410X12017446
for Future Research on the Use of Mobile Technology to Improve Maternal, Newborn, and Child Health. 2013. 
41. Zurovac D, Otieno G, Kigen S, Mbithi AM, Muturi A, Snow RW, et al. Ownership and use of mobile phones 
14. Keisling K. mHealth Field Guide for Newborn Health. Washington, DC; 2014. among health workers, caregivers of sick children and adult patients in Kenya: cross-sectional national survey. 
15. Lund S, Hemed M, Nielsen BB, Said a, Said K, Makungu MH, et al. Mobile phones as a health communication Global Health [Internet]. 2013 Jan [cited 2014 Jan 29];9(1):20. Available from: http://www.globalizationand 
tool to improve skilled attendance at delivery in Zanzibar: a cluster-randomised controlled trial. BJOG health.com/content/9/1/20
[Internet]. 2012 Sep [cited 2013 Nov 11];119(10):1256–64. Available from: http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/ 42. Medical Research Centre, Government of Sierra Leone, University of Sierra Leone, Text to Change, Royal 
pubmed/22805598 Tropical Institute, Powered by MDG 5, et al. Technical brief: mHealth for maternal and newborn health in 
16. Rogers EM. Diffusion of Innovations, 4th Edition (Google eBook) [Internet]. Simon and Schuster; 2010 [cited resource-poor and health system settings, Sierra Leone. 2011. 
2014 Jan 29]. Available from: http://books.google.com/books?hl=en&lr=&id=v1ii4QsB7jIC&pgis=1 43. Mechael P, Batavia H, Kaonga N, Searle S, Kwan A, Goldberger A, et al. Barriers and Gaps Affecting mHealth in 
17. UNCEF. State of the World’s Children 2013. 2013. Low and Middle Income Countries : Policy White Paper. 2010;1–79. 
18. Fogg BJ. A Behavior Model for Persuasive Design. 2009. 44. Internet Society of Ghana, IICD. Ghana establishes ICT policy strategy for the health sector [Internet]. 2000. 
Available from: http://www.iicd.org/articles/IICDnews.import1417/
19. Qiang CZ, Yamamichi M, Hausman V, Altman D. Mobile Applications for the Health Sector. 2011;(December). 
45. USAID ASSIST. A Quality Framework for Improving and Sustaining High-impact Newborn Resuscitation 
20. American Academy of Pediatrics. Helping Babies Breathe: The Golden Minute. 2013. 
Services at Scale in Low-resource settings. 2013. 
21. Bucher S. Assistant Professor of Research, Indiana University School of Medicine and USAID-AMPATH 
46. Narayanan I. Draft UN Commission on Life-Saving Commodities: Update on Resuscitation Commodities. 2013. 
Partnership. Personal Communication. 2013. 
1750 Pennsylvania Avenue, NW 
Suite 300
Washington, D.C. 20006
202.887.9040 (phone)
202.887.9021 (fax)
www.mhealthalliance.org
