M   obiles for Qu ality Improvement (m4QI) – 
S HOPS Project 
 
B rief Overview 
 
Many developing countries have a severe shortage of health 
providers, and many of the providers who are working have only 
limited access to up-to-date clinical protocols, or face-to-face 
trainings. Mobile phones offer an innovative channel through which 
to provide cost-effective approaches for clinical training and support 
for improving quality of care. 
 
SHOPS’ partners Abt Associates, Jhpiego, and Marie Stopes 
International (MSI), collaborated in a mobile learning and 
performance support pilot called Mobiles for Quality Improvement 
(m4QI) conducted in Uganda during the period September 2010 –
August 2011. The goal of m4QI was to demonstrate the potential 
for positive behavioral change in service delivery by reinforcing face-
to-face induction training lessons provided to Marie Stopes staff. 
Research supports the theory that spaced reinforcement of training 
combined with testing can significantly improve long-term 
knowledge retention and facilitate behavioral change. 
 
The objectives of m4QI were to develop and test a technology-supported approach to performance 
improvement including processes for identifying performance gaps in adherence to clinical protocols, a 
platform to manage and automate the delivery and receipt of text message reminders and quizzes to address 
the gaps, and production of actionable data to improve effectiveness of supportive supervision and follow-up. 
To support scalability and replicability, the pilot platform was designed for users of low-end phones, and those 
without Internet access. 
 
 
  Geographic Coverage 
Uganda 
 
 Implementation Partners: 
Abt Associates Inc. leads a team of partners that includes: 
Banyan Global | Jhpiego | Marie Stopes International | Monitor Group | O’Hanlon Health 
Consulting 
              
 Funder: 
USAID 
 
 For More Information Contact: 
USAID  
 Margaret Farrell;  
                                       Tel: +1-202-1712-0458; email:mfarrell@usaid.gov 
SHOPS 
 Pamela Riley; 
4550 Montgomery Avenue, Suite 800 North, Bethesda, MD 20814-3343;  
Tel: +1-301-247-5000; email: pamela_riley@abtassoc.com 
 
 65 
 
Service Delivery 
 
 
Mobiles for Quality Improvement (m4QI) – SHOPS Project 
About m4QI site to an average of 1.3 messages per provider at the 
The pilot was conducted with 34 family planning staff least active site. 
working in six geographically dispersed service delivery 
sites which included three MSU Health Centers and Through structured interviews conducted at the end of 
three MSU Outreach Teams that offer family planning the pilot, providers reported the following: 
services.  
 • Being motivated by reminders to adhere to 
A Uganda software development organization, Appfrica, hand-washing rules;  
was selected to develop FrontlineSMS: Learn, which • Referring to training manuals when 
allows for the delivery and receipt of text messages of receiving a quiz question about treatment 
daily instructions, tips, and quizzes to target behaviors protocols;  
related to infection prevention, client care, and • Re-learning steps in instrument sterilization 
adherence to standards and guidelines. Adapted from they had forgotten; and  
the FrontlineSMS platform, this open source application • Using tips about pain management to more 
is intended to work in environments with low-end closely attend to clients.  
phones and no access to internet. The text message 
software used in the pilot program is freely available The pilot was also described as promoting team learning 
from FrontlineSMS: Learn. and further research on text questions, and increased 
 use of training reference manuals and clinical guideline 
The m4QI platform was hosted and managed by staff of documents. 
MSU‘s research department, who were responsible for 
locating a computer, acquiring a modem and SIM card to Lessons Learned 
attach to the computer, downloading and installing the • Technology-supported interventions require 
FrontlineSMS: Learn software, entering the participants dedicated human resources. 
phone numbers, adding messages and scheduling their • Planning and budgeting for mobile learning 
delivery, and monitoring the software operation.  initiatives should include broad internal 
 stakeholder input.  
Evaluation and Results • Adequate participant orientation is critical to 
A total of 3,449 messages were sent to project ensure engagement in text message training 
participants, with an 86.5 percent success rate of interventions. 
• A process for prepayment of airtime subsidies 
receipt. Post-pilot interviews with participants suggested is needed when personal phones are used for 
high acceptability of text messages for performance workplace purposes.  
improvement, with generally positive comments, though  
some negative feedback included the lack of message Conclusion  
clarity and frustration with technical problems.  The m4QI pilot produced a process and software tool 
that can be replicated globally to improve service 
A total of 251 incoming messages were received from delivery in low-resource settings. It allows trainers to 
participants in response to questions delivered, with a manage the delivery of reinforcement and assessment 
decrease in response rates observed while modem messages to providers, and to make data-driven 
issues were being resolved at the beginning of the programmatic decisions for supportive supervision and 
project as well as when participants were notified follow-up training. The results of the m4QI pilot 
toward the end that evaluations were beginning, regarding self-reported behavior change support 
indicating the project would be ending. The average expanded applications with larger-scale populations, in 
response rate was 19 percent, with wide variation in various countries, across a wide range of provider 
response rates by location and by cadre, varying from an training needs. 
average of 11 responses per provider at the most active 
Information was excerpted from: 
Riley, Pamela and James BonTempo. November 2011. Mobiles for Quality Improvement Pilot in Uganda. Bethesda, MD: Strengthening Health 
66 Outcomes through the Private Sector Project, Abt Associates Inc.   
