Preliminary results 
from the pilot study 
showing improvements 
in vaccination timeliness 
suggest mTikka  
will improve health 
outcomes by increasing 
timely immunization rates.  
mTIKKA
IMPLEMENTATION DATE:  September 2013 to December 2014 
A virtual vaccine record, reminder, and session management 
system designed for frontline immunizers
Bangladesh has a population of more than 162 million with more than 1 million births every year.  
The mTikka system was designed to assist Government of Bangladesh frontline immunizers in providing 
timely immunizations to newborns and children under five by addressing barriers identified during 
formative research. Barriers identified include the inability to track a child’s vaccination history, the lack 
of timely vaccination reminders, the lack of incentives for families to take children to be vaccinated, and 
limited awareness about vaccine effectiveness. 
mTikka provides solutions to each of these barriers. To ensure availability of vaccination history, mTikka 
maintains a copy of the child’s immunization record on the server that is also accessible by the caregiver’s 
phone number or scanning of a unique identifier code bracelet given to each child at registration. To 
provide timely reminders, mTikka sends server-generated short message service (SMS) reminders to 
the mobile number linked to children’s records the day before they are due to attend an immunization 
session. Additionally, the health assistant (HA) pushed alerts the morning of a vaccination session when 
the HA is actually present and ready to provide immunizations. 
To address lack of incentives, mobile flexi-loads were given to vaccine advocates (VA)—individuals 
nominated by the family to receive and relay these SMS alerts on their behalf—to incentivize sharing 
immunization reminders and alert messages with the families who nominated them. Lastly, to address 
limited awareness about vaccine effectiveness, in each child’s registration form in mTikka is a vaccine 
beliefs survey, comprised of 10 true-false questions and answers that serve as a guide for HAs with 
which to counsel mothers and caregivers on basic vaccine facts. 
80  n  SERVICE DELIVERY 
Kelsey Zeller
About mTIKKA Based on this pre-post design, the effect of the mTikka 
system on immunizations, session attendance, and vacci-
he mTikka system is a virtual vaccination registry and nation beliefs were analyzed and preliminary results show T immunization performance tracking system designed to a significant increase in timely vaccination coverage among 
reduce barriers to timely vaccination of infants in rural children who interacted with the mTikka application during 
the post-mTikka period compared with children in the 
Bangladesh. mTikka optimizes record-keeping, manages pre-mTikka phase.
workflows, and connects families to routine immunization 
services. mTikka is currently deployed in two unions of 
Gaibandha District, in rural northwest Bangladesh by Johns Lessons Learned 
Hopkins Bloomberg School of Public Health, mPower, and 
the Ministry of Health of the Government of Bangladesh.  Several existing features of the mTikka system that could be 
It includes an Android-based mobile application, web portal, optimized in the future for improved usage and identified, 
server, and SMS portal. The mTikka mobile application, include:  
when loaded onto locally available smartphones, allows n The immunization workforce in Bangladesh varies 
the health worker to digitally register children, track their widely in terms of comfortably interacting with mobile 
immunization records, connect with nonadherent families phones and changing immunization practices. In future 
before vaccination sessions end, and send SMS reminders trainings additional effort will be made to keep the 
to families when their children are due for immunization fast-paced learners interested in the trainings after 
services. mTikka does this by calculating, on the server-side, they’ve mastered the basic functionality, and to move 
vaccination due dates based on an infant’s date of birth and at a more comfortable pace for those workers who have 
vaccination history. It also integrates information on when more difficulty with the device and system functionality.  
outreach vaccination sessions are scheduled in the area into n Uptake by clients of the birth notification SMS is 
the scheduling logic to inform parents not just when their crucial for increasing early access to mTikka during 
children are due for immunization but when their child children’s most vulnerable period.
could actually receive the vaccination from a nearby center. 
Using this information, the server automatically sends a re-
minder SMS to parents or caregivers the day before a child’s Conclusion 
next vaccine dose is due. The immunizer pushes another type 
of SMS, called an announcement SMS, to clients, alerting Based on usability and feasibility testing, implementation of a 
them of the time and place of the vaccination session. mobile system like mTikka is feasible in the rural Bangladesh 
The core functions included in the mTikka system were context. Preliminary results from the pilot study showing 
based on known barriers to vaccine schedule adherence but improvements in vaccination timeliness suggest mTikka will 
were further optimized to the rural Bangladesh setting after improve health outcomes by increasing timely immunization 
an extensive formative, user-centered design phase, focused rates and should therefore be a candidate for expanded im-
on identifying both demand and supply-side obstacles to plementation. Conducting formative research was vital to ap-
timely immunization. propriately mapping and transferring the paper-based immu-
nization process into an intuitive, optimized mobile-powered 
system. Future iterations of the mTikka system will include 
Evaluation and Results more health workers, infants, and a broader geographical area 
enabling additional reporting on health outcome changes that 
Field-testing of mTikka focused on usability of the sys- may be triggered by the mTikka system.  n
tem and feasibility of implementation. Additional data on 
immunization records, vaccine beliefs, and attendance at 
immunization sessions was also collected. There were 210 
mother-infant pairs first enrolled and surveyed on socio-
economic status, mobile phone usage, etc. During the next Geographic Coverage:  Two unions (Kuptala and Konchibari) of 
10 weeks the mothers sought immunization care as they the Gaibandha District in rural, northwestern Bangladesh 
normally would, with the government workers not yet using Implementation Partners: Johns Hopkins University; mPower 
the mTikka application. Follow-up interviews were conduct- Social Enterprises; Government of Bangladesh 
ed after the 10-week period. A second set of mother-infant Donors: Bill & Melinda Gates Foundation, Grand Challenges 
pairs were enrolled and the same interviews and follow-ups Exploration Grant 
were conducted, except that the government workers used Contact Information: Dr. Alain B. Labrique, Associate Professor, 
Johns Hopkins University, alabriqu@gmail.com 
the mTikka system during the 10-week period.  
mHEALTH COMPENDIUM  VOLUME 5  n  81
