GRAND CHALLENGE EXPLORATION 
PHASE 1 PROJECT 
Community health workers using mobile phones to improve maternal, newborn 
and child health outcomes in Mozambique  
SERVICE DELIVERY 
Implementation date: November 2010 to October 2012 
As part of its growing mHealth program, World Vision implemented a Bill & Melinda Gates Foundation funded Grand 
Challenge Exploration (GCE) Phase I Project to complement the activities of Strengthening Communities through Integrated 
Programming (SCIP) Ogumaniha: an ongoing, community-based, multi-sectoral project to improve the health and livelihoods 
of children, women, and families funded by USAID Mozambique. SCIP empowers community health volunteers (CHVs) in 
mobilizing communities to increase access to maternal, newborn and child health (MNCH) services using the 2003 Home 
Based Life Saving Skills (HBLSS) methodology. HBLSS training takes place through community meetings using materials 
designed for low-literacy settings to recognize life-threatening problems in pregnant women and newborns.  
About The Grand Challenge Exploration Phase I Project 
The Grand Challenge Exploration Phase 1 Project in operating skills and implementation of the CommCareTM 
M ozambique utilized the Gates-funded MOTECH Suite program, as most selected CHVs had limited experience 
(MTS), a sustainable, scalable, open source mobile solution using phones. 
which includes CommCareTM, a job-aid for mobile health 
w orkers. The GCE project took place in the Licuar and The CHVs visited homes of pregnant women and newborns, 
Namacata communities within the Nicoadala district where each responsible for assisting at least 15 families in his/her 
male and female CHVs were selected from within the SCIP community. The CHVs registered the information of any 
 
project intervention areas to receive training. The CHVs had pregnant woman in their care using the CommCareTM 
a minimum seven years of experience and an estimated 40 program on the phone as early in the pregnancy as possible.  
p 1 ercent were functionally literate , many having limited CHVs followed the prenatal and postpartum care algorithms 
formal education. They were not paid and did not receive with their clients, following text and/or audio prompts 
direct incentives for participation. through non-urgent questions, reminders, and advice on  
 
Training sessions on the use of the Pregnancy and ensuring safe pregnancy. In case of danger signs, the CHVs 
Postpartum Modules installed on mobile phones through applied first aid procedures, contacted health facility 
CommCareTM were conducted. Training focused on basic personnel for clinical management support, and referred the  
64  |  mHealth Compendium Volume 4 
client to a health facility. The CHVs continued these follow- any necessary adjustments in the implementation of the 
up visits to the pregnant woman until parturition, and then project. 
once within one week after delivery for postpartum care. 
Refresher trainings were conducted periodically to improve 
All data were transmitted from phones to the Project’s the skills of CHVs using CommCareTM and to gather input 
database for collation and analysis. The Project Coordinator regarding advantages, challenges, and impacts of mobile 
monitored data quality, assessed CHVs’ work and made phone use.  
follow-up supervision visits. The data were used to inform 
Evaluation and Results 
The project was evaluated based on the analysis of CommCareTM data and interviews (written and verbal) with CHVs and 
project participants. Data from the CommCareTM application and health facility records were analyzed, primarily using Epi-
Info version 3.5.3. Frequencies for all parameters measured were calculated, including clients who experienced one or more 
danger signs.  Additionally, two CHV focus group discussions, with a total of 19 CHVs (79 percent), were conducted to gain 
understanding of the project, its interventions, successes, challenges, and lessons learned. The CHVs had the opportunity to 
provide feedback about the program and areas for improvement. 
Initial results conclude that the use of the mobile phone modules improves the quality of services delivered by CHVs as 
demonstrated by danger sign identification and referral rates.  
Key qualitative findings reported by CHVs included the following: 
 Enhanced communication with health facility personnel through the use of the mobile phones  
 Expedited referral process benefited women with both minor and significant complications  
 Increased confidence of clients in CHVs provision of services because of the mobile technology  
 Increased client trust in the CHVs because they are asking the same questions that are asked by hospital staff  
Lessons Learned 
 Allow time for users to become familiar with using phones; Consider providing reading glasses to users who may have 
trouble reading the phone screens 
 Consider a solar charger as a power source for the phones; It is a 
cheaper, long-term solution Geographic Coverage: Nicoadala district in 
 Illiteracy needs to be accounted for—in this project an audio Zambezia Province, Mozambique  
application was added to the module 
 Make expectations of phone use clear upfront, and address misuse Implementation Partners: World Vision, Inc. 
of phones 
Funder: Bill & Melinda Gates Foundation  
 Provide standardized materials in appropriate local languages so 
translators are not needed  Contact Information: 
World Vision | Sherrie Simms (626-340-1132, 
Conclusion sherrie_simms@wvi.org); Dennis Cherian, 
Senior Director of Health (202.572.6380, 
The use of mobile phones by CHVs to follow-up with pregnant and 
dcherian@worldvision.org) 
postpartum women assists with identification, referral and expedited 
management of minor and major complications to health facilities in Gates Foundation | Joseph Torres, GCE 
these communities, where literacy levels were not high. Mobile Program Coordinator 
technology increased credibility of CHVs in the community and (GCE@gatesfoundation.org) 
strengthened linkages with the formal health system.  
1High illiteracy rates are ubiquitous among community resources living in rural areas of the developing world. This might constitute one of the most 
important barriers to address in improving their skills and resolution capacity. 
 
mHealth Compendium Volume 4  |  65 
