 
GLOBAL TRACHOMA MAPPING PROJECT 
GIS mapping to achieve the Global Elimination of Blinding Trachoma by 2020 
Trachoma is a neglected tropical disease (NTD) that Field data are collected using the ArcGIS mapping 
affects over 21 million people and is endemic in 53 platform and Open Data Kit-based software, a flexible 
countries. While it has been eliminated in most smart phone-based tool that runs on devices using the 
developed countries, it is still the world’s leading Android operating system. Global Positioning System 
infectious cause of  blindness and affects the poorest (GPS) readings are also taken for every household 
communities. Women and children living in hot, dry surveyed. Data are then securely transferred from the 
and dusty areas with poor access to water and field to a central web-based reporting and data 
sanitation are especially susceptible. An estimated 229 management tool, where they are quickly analyzed, 
million people worldwide live in highly trachoma approved and shared by Ministries of Health, using a 
prevalent areas and are at risk of going blind if dynamic web-interface. WASH (waster, sanitation and 
repeated infections are left untreated. Ethiopia is the hygiene) and other NTD mapping is also conducted to 
most adversely affected country by Trachoma. In gain a broader picture of poverty and development 
Oromia and Tigray regions alone, over 30 million issues affecting trachoma endemic populations. If there is 
people are at risk. limited cellular connection, data are stored in the mobile 
device’s micro SD card and uploaded when the survey 
To aid in identifying, treating and eliminating trachoma in team can access the internet or a cellular connection. 
Ethiopia and worldwide, the International Trachoma 
Initiative (ITI), NGOs and academic institutions, led by Data will be available in-country through the country’s 
the UK non-profit Sightsavers, launched the Global own Health Management Information System. Once 
Trachoma Mapping Project (GTMP). The GTMP is the approved by the MOH, data are published, shared and 
largest disease-mapping project ever attempted. In two updated through the open-access Trachoma Atlas 
and one half years, up to 4 million people will be website which contains free country maps with 
surveyed in over 1,200 suspected-endemic districts in population-based trachoma prevalence data at the 
more than 30 countries, including more than one-third district level.  
of African countries. Mapping will be completed by 
March 2015 to facilitate countries implementation of the 
SAFE Strategy (Surgery, Antibiotics, Facial cleanliness, Evaluation and Results 
Environmental improvement) to treat and prevent In June of 2013, trachoma prevalence data collected by 
trachoma and reach the WHO-endorsed Global 40 survey teams as part of the project's first phase in 
Elimination of Blinding Trachoma by 2020 (GET2020) Ethiopia’s Oromia (252 districts) and Tigray (48 
target. districts ) regions was approved by the Regional Health 
Bureaus and the Ethiopian Federal Ministry of Health. 
Data from household surveys are collected on 
This gives health officials the ability to plan trachoma 
smartphones via the LINKS System. ITI is the steward 
elimination programs for over 30 million people at risk 
for the data, which are made available in categorical 
in these areas.  
form on open-access disease maps on the Trachoma 
Atlas website (www.trachomaatlas.org).  As of September, 1 million people in Ethiopia, Nigeria, 
Malawi, Mozambique, Solomon Islands and Yemen have 
Implementation date: December 2012 
been checked for trachoma. 
 
About Global Trachoma Mapping 
Lessons Learned 
Over 300 survey teams have already been trained to 
 Standardization is key to scale-up 
gather prevalence data. Each team is comprised of one 
grader and one data recorder who are supported by  External support is welcomed by countries and 
coordinators, drivers, field supervisors, local guides, and communities 
logistics and finance personnel. 
24 mHEALTH COMPENDIUM   |   VOLUME 3 
 
GLOBAL TRACHOMA MAPPING PROJECT 
GIS mapping to achieve the Global Elimination of Blinding Trachoma by 2020  DATA COLLECTION 
Geographic Coverage: 
Worldwide 
Implementation 
Partners: International 
Coalition for Trachoma 
Control, African Medical 
and Research Foundation, 
CBM, Blantyre Institute 
for Community 
Ophthalmology, Fred 
Hollows Foundation, 
Helen Keller 
International, 
International Trachoma 
Initiative,  Johns Hopkins 
University, Kilimanjaro 
Centre for Community 
Ophthalmology, Light for 
the World, London 
School of Hygiene & 
Tropical Medicine, 
Mission to save the 
Helpless, Orbis, 
 Organisation pour la Prévention de la Cécité, Sightsavers,  Electronic data capture and web-based review offer 
The Carter Center 
significant advantages over paper-based data capture 
and discussion via email Funder: UK Department of International Development 
 Training teams in new (not home) environments (DFID) 
allows them to learn more effectively 
Contact Information:  
Sightsavers: Freya Paleit, Global Media Manager 
(fpaleit@sightsavers.org) 
Conclusion DFID: Iain Jones, Economic Adviser, Health Services 
The Global Trachoma Mapping Project is providing Team, Human Development Department (I-
accurate, rapid and robust data.  It will aid partners, Jones@dfid.gov.uk) 
MOHs, and other organizations in tailoring trachoma 
elimination programs to produce a more integrated, References: 
efficient and evidence-based global response to 1. Sightsavers. Ethiopia completes trachoma mapping in two 
trachoma and reduce the devastating personal and regions. June 24, 2013. Press Release. 
economic impact on those affected by the NTD. The 2. Sightsavers. Global survey to identify 180 million at risk of 
project will assist endemic countries in establishing the blinding disease begins in Ethiopia. Date unknown. Press Release. 
SAFE strategy by 2015, thereby allowing time to achieve 3. Sightsavers. Trachoma. No date. Web. 
the World Health Assembly’s goal of Global Elimination 4. Mapping the world’s trachoma hotspots. IRIN Global. 2013. 
of Blinding Trachoma by 2020 (GET2020)  Web. 
5. ArcNews. Winter 2012/2013. GIS Helps fight world’s leading 
---------------------------------------- cause of preventable blindness.  
  mHEALTH COMPENDIUM   |   VOLUME 3 25 
