TC114:	Basics	of	Digital	Safety
Share	this:
 Tweet  Share 0  Share 0
> TC114:	Basics	of	Digital
All	courses Safety
 	$495.00
 	4	weeks
In	our	digitally	connected	world,	new	risks	to	our	data	and	privacy	have	emerged.	This	four	week	online	certificate
course	will	focus	on	building	knowledge	and	strategies	to	ensure	your	digital	safety.
Course	Description
In	our	digitally	connected	world,	new	risks	to	our	data	and	privacy	have	emerged.	Governments	are	using
technology	to	attack	infrastructure	and	surveil	its	own	citizens.	How	do	you	ensure	that	your	data	and	beneficiary
data	are	safe?
Understanding	information	communication	technology	infrastructure	is	just	as	important	as	understanding
technology	tools	and	strategies	for	digital	safety.	We	will	cover	a	broad	range	of	topics	to	provide	a	strong
understanding	the	fundamentals	of	digital	safety	and	digital	security.
This	four	week	online	certificate	course	will	focus	on	building	knowledge	and	strategies	to	ensure	your	digital
safety.	Each	week	will	feature	an	interactive	risk	assessment	exercise	to	develop	a	key	skill	to	protecting	your	data
and	beneficiary	data.	It	will	also	feature	live	interactive	guest	expert	presentations	and	include	a	unique	hands-on
learning	environment	with	animated	videos,	technology	demos,	practical	activities,	networking	events,	immersive
simulations	and	more.
Course	Topics	and	Featured	Tech
Intro	and	Safety	Basics:	Overview	of	risk	assessments,	understand	how	the	Internet	and	computer	networks
function,	and	some	key	skills	(e.g.,	creating	good	passwords)
Mobiles:	Overview	of	how	mobile	networks	function	and	specific	risks	from	mobile	usage
The	Human	Factor:	Introduction	to	social	engineering,	privacy	and	anonymization
Advanced	Topics:	End-to-end	encryption	and	secure	communication
Course	Objectives
At	the	conclusion	of	the	course,	participants	will	be	able	to:
create	a	risk	assessment	that	considers	digital	security,	aspects	of	physical	security,	and	psychosocial	factors
critically	analyze	both	the	opportunities	and	the	pitfalls	that	emerge	when	working	with	technology	for	digital
safety
connect	relevant	development	theories	to	the	technological	strategies	and	tools	discussed	in	the	course
manage	specific	software	platforms	and	tools	for	ensuring	digital	safety
design	dynamic	and	effective	strategies	for	using	tools	and	platforms	to	improve	digital	safety
develop	critical	self-confidence	for	working	with	technology	to	address	digital	safety	challenges
Course	Methodology
This	course	is	delivered	entirely	online	over	a	period	of	four	weeks.
This	course	features	several	live	interactive	expert	presentations	each	week	with	leading	practitioners,
software	developers,	academics,	and	donors.
Every	live	event	is	recorded	and	archived	for	you	to	watch	later.
This	course	also	features	a	unique	hands-on	learning	environment	with	animated	videos,	technology	demos,
practical	activities,	networking	events,	office	hours,	participant	presentations,	immersive	simulations,	and
more.
TechChange	recommends	budgeting	a	minimum	commitment	of	5-7	hours	per	week	and	scheduling	time	for
the	course	around	your	existing	obligations.
Participants	will	have	access	to	all	course	content	for	at	least	4	months	after	course	completion	so	the
material	can	be	completed	and	revisited	later.
Next	Session
None	upcoming...
Change
Contact:	techsupport	[at]	techchange.org
Terms	of	Use
Privacy	Policy
Policies
©	2012-2019	TechChange
