 
TXTALERT FOR PATIENT REMINDERS 
BRIEF OVERVIEW 
The biggest challenge for people with 
chronic conditions is to stick to their 
medication. For conditions that require 
lifelong treatment, like HIV and diabetes, 
patients go through many daily challenges. 
Some of these challenges include forgetting 
to take their drugs, feeling sick (nauseous) 
when they do take the drugs, and fear or 
reluctance to go to the doctor regularly, as 
this would potentially entail more drugs, 
more injections, blood samples, etc.  
Drug resistance is a very dangerous and 
often life-threatening condition where 
prescribed treatments cannot successfully 
treat a condition and cure the patient. Drug 
resistant tuberculosis (TB) has very high 
fatality rates. Drug resistance is generally 
preventable if patients stick to, and complete, their department by reminding patients of their visits while 
prescribed treatment. also allowing them to easily and cost-effectively follow 
up on a patient who has missed an appointment. The 
Another huge challenge is to have patients come to the aim was to allow for appointment reminders and to 
doctor at regular intervals. In rural and resource-poor create a facility where patients could contact the clinic 
communities, challenges with transport and gaps in to reschedule or confirm an appointment – at no cost to 
communication between the patient and the treatment the patient.  
provider often result in patients "dropping off 
treatment" or becoming "lost to follow up". Once a txtAlert is a server-based system that works in 
patient is "lost to follow up" or off the treatment radar, conjunction with a hospital/clinic's medical record 
it is often very hard to track them down and system (MRS) to remind patients of their upcoming 
reintroduce them onto treatment. appointments.  In clinics where an existing electronic 
MRS is in place, txtAlert will then integrate with that 
txtAlert is a server-based system that works in MRS.  In clinics where no electronic MRS exists, 
conjunction with a hospital/clinic's medical record Praekelt Foundation can develop a custom interface to 
system (MRS) to remind patients of their upcoming input appointment data and manage patient bookings 
appointments. more effectively. 
txtAlert now has four different iterations: 
ABOUT TXTALERT 
 txtAlert ARV: This version of txtAlert sends 
txtAlert was first piloted in 2007 in partnership with 
appointment reminders to users to reduce loss to 
Right To Care, one of the biggest ARV (antiretroviral) 
follow up at clinics. Additionally, users can send a 
treatment providers in South Africa. Right to Care was 
free “Please Call Me” SMS to a designated number 
struggling with large numbers of patients who miss their 
to reschedule appointments. 
appointments, who simply drop off treatment, or 
become "lost to follow up". They wanted a mechanism  txtAlert CD4: This version of txtAlert delivers 
which would strengthen their patient tracking CD4 count results to patients who have been tested 
70 mHEALTH COMPENDIUM   │    VOLUME 2 
 
 SERVICE DELIVERY 
for HIV but may not return to the clinic to collect phone and has not disclosed their status. 
their CD4 counts results, and therefore may not 
know that they qualify for ARV treatment.  Lack of electronic medical records systems in clinics 
and hospitals presents a major challenge for roll-out 
 txtAlert PMTCT: This version of txtAlert sends of this service  
reminder SMSs to pregnant women who are follow 
a PMTCT protocol, and can also include general  Buy-in from clinic staff is critical to the success of a 
maternal support messages for moms during their txtAlert project  
pregnancy. These SMSs are aimed at helping women 
to adhere to this treatment based on various 
criteria and results of tests entered into the Medical CONCLUSION 
Records System. txtAlert has shown positive results in studies so far and 
has a number of variations that can be used for different 
 txtAlert TB: This is the latest iteration which disease – and reminder protocols. Plans for expansion of 
Praekelt is currently developing, and will send the project include integration into additional Medical 
reminders for patients on TB-treatment, to help Record Systems, including OpenMRS . 
them complete their treatment. It will also have a 
built-in self-reporting mechanism for patients to 
report their progress in TB treatment completion. GEOGRAPHIC COVERAGE 
Gauteng and KwaZulu-Natal Provinces, South Africa  
EVALUATION AND RESULTS IMPLEMENTATION PARTNERS 
In the initial trial of txtAlert at the Theba Lethu clinic, Praekelt Foundation developed the core technology; 
significant results were achieved in reducing the number Partners: Virtual Purple, Therapy Edge, Provincial 
of missed appointments.  Missed appointments have Department of Health, KwaZulu-Natal, Right to Care, 
fallen from 30 percent to 4 percent, and loss to follow Wits Reproductive Health & HIV Institute (WRHI), 
up has declined from 27 percent to 4 percent as well. UNICEF South Africa  
There are currently over 18000 users of the system at 
three different clinics in Gauteng, South Africa. FUNDER 
Vodacom Foundation South Africa, USAID, Right to 
The Wits Reproductive Health & HIV Institute (WRHI) 
Care, UNICEF South Africa  
is conducting a study on txtAlert Standard and CD4 
users at two of these clinics as part of the Vodacom 
mHealth Initiative. Thus far, results show that those CONTACT INFORMATION 
patients receiving SMSs in the CD4 program started Praekelt Foundation  
ARV treatment earlier than those not receiving SMS  Marcha Bekker, Business Development 
results. Manager  
Email: marcha@praekeltfoundation.org  
The PMTCT version of txtAlert currently has 6000 Vodacom Foundation South Africa  
participants enrolled in a study at 33 clinics and two  Mthobeli Tengimfene, Executive Head of 
hospitals in KwaZulu-Natal. The results of this study will CSI Projects 
be published in September 2013.  Email: Mthobeli.Tengimfene@vodacom.co.za  
UNICEF South Africa  
 Dr. Sanjana Bhardwaj, Senior PMTCT 
LESSONS LEARNED and Pediatric AIDS Specialist   
 The language and tone of the SMS reminders is Email: sbhardwaj@unicef.org  
critical – especially in cases where a user shares a 
  MHEALTH COMPENDIUM  |  VOLUME 2 71 
 
 
 
