Dimagi delivers open source and innovative technology
to underserved communities around the world. 
Scalable Mobile Services 
for Frontline Programs
Helping your organization integrate 
mobile solutions from start to scale
OVERVIEW
At Dimagi, we build open source, cloud products 
that support the complex workflows required to Definitions
strengthen frontline programs. Cloud products (e.g., 
Salesforce, SurveyMonkey, Dropbox) are increasingly 
popular as they dramatically reduce running costs Cloud Products: much less expensive than alternatives, 
and enable organizations to do complex tasks especially as a project matures
themselves without having to set up a server or hire 
programmers.  Cloud products are also the prominent Complex Workflows: essential for supporting frontline 
solution for mobile services (mServices) tasks that workers (logic, client tracking), but not for simpler 
require simple workflows (e.g., FormHub, Magpi). We mServices tasks
expect cloud products to also emerge as the most 
successful mServices technologies for advanced Open Source: essential for government handoff and 
workflows, including supporting Frontline Workers implementation at scale
(FLWs) and supply chains. Open source solutions 
will be required for any program expected to scale 
nationally and be transferred to local ownership. 
Three important criteria for scalable software to support FLWs
Cloud Complex 
Product Workflows
A few others
Many others Several others
No others A Few others
Dimagi builds the only open 
source cloud products that 
support advanced workflows Open
Source Figure 1. Overview of a selection of for frontline programs. mServices technologies
Note: Dimagi technologies can (Categorization of the above tools 
was based on public information 
also be managed on a local available at the time of publication).
server. Many others
CLOUD PRODUCTS OPEN SOURCE
A Cloud Product is software that is hosted by a Software is open source if it is made freely available 
software provider and made available through a and can be redistributed.  Alternatives to open 
public website. Cloud products allow users to do source code are proprietary software or codebases. 
everything necessary through a public website to Using open source code is especially beneficial if a 
utilize the software. Common examples are Facebook project is going to scale, or if there is a need to transfer 
or Dropbox.  In mServices, the most common the technology to a government. It is important to 
alternative to cloud products are customizable note that utilizing open source code may require 
codebases. A customizable codebase requires substantial resources in the initial phases of the project. 
a software developer to install, configure, and Dimagi’s open source code is available on Github.
maintain each project. Other alternatives to a cloud 
product include a desktop product (e.g., Excel) 
or a Server-installed Product (e.g., Sharepoint). 
  Criteria                     Value                       Alternatives
COMPLEX WORKFLOWS 
mServices technologies can be split into ones that Essential for low-cost, 
support relatively simple workflows,  such as mobile Cloud continued operation, and Desktop 
and Server 
data collection (e.g., Open Data Kit) and simple SMS Product scale. Enables ‘do it yourself’ Products
systems (e.g., FrontlineSMS), and ones that sup- projects without software 
development  capacity
port more Complex workflows (e.g., CommCare, 
D-tree, eMocha). Complex workflows have the Simple 
ability to track people and other entities over Complex Enables tracking of entities Tasks (e.g. 
time and can include complex branching logic Workflows over time and includes basic data 
and rules for parsing and responding to mes- complex logic collection and 
sages.  FLW activities and stock tracking require simple SMS)
more Complex workflows (e.g., tracking clients or 
logistics over time with a mobile app). Organizations Open Necessary for local ownership Proprietary 
rarely, if ever, try to support FLWs or stock tracking Source and national scale Software
with the technologies designed for simpler workflows.
Stages of mServices Projects
Most mServices projects go through distinct phases on a maturity spectrum. Even when starting in the 
Demonstration (Proof of Concept) stage, it is important for implementing organizations to look ahead to the 
later stages where cloud products and open source features will be critical.  Dimagi’s new maturity model 
helps our partners grow a program’s stage of maturity from initial demonstration to implementation at scale.
STAGE 1: DEMONSTRATION (PROOF OF CONCEPT)
During the early stages of an mServices project, Demonstration (Proof of Concept)
an organization is just starting to equip their 
FLWs. Cloud products allow any organization Cloud Product Advantages• Fast start-up
to do this without software development, and • Low cost
generally reduce costs. However many mServices • Ability to do it yourself
organizations can help launch organizations at this 
stage (hence the proliferation of mHealth pilots). 
STAGES 2 & 3: ITERATION AND VALUE CREATION
During these stages, an implementing organization will 
add users, adapt content, and take advantage of their Iteration and Value Creation
deployed mServices system by adding more Complex 
features, such as improving FLW supervision. Cloud Open Source Advantages
products offer substantial advantages, such as cost- • Avoids lock-in or commitment to one 
effectiveness, to an implementing organization in the early partner
stages of scaling. Cloud products are already designed 
to scale, and new users can be easily added. Local staff Cloud Product Advantages
can make their own changes to the application using • Advanced features available
the tools provided by the cloud product. In contrast, a • Lower cost for scaling and iterations
custom approach will be substantially more expensive 
during this phase since the entire cost must be incurred 
by a single organization, and knowledge transfer 
between software developers is costly and complex. 
STAGES 4 & 5: SCALE-UP, SUSTAIN AND IMPROVE
Scale-Up, Sustain and Improve
During these stages, projects may reach national 
scale and are often taken over by governments or 
local programs. This is only possible if the technology Open Source Advantages
is open source, allowing governments to hire local • Makes local ownership possible
technical experts and software developers to maintain 
the code base in the long-term. Even in this case, the Cloud Product Advantages• Non-programmers can maintain 
application building tools offered by cloud products applications
reduce the time it takes staff to build and maintain • Proven Technology
apps because they can be used by non-software 
developers, reducing the money governments 
need to invest in hiring highly technical staff. 
Copyright 2014 Dimagi Inc.  All rights reserved. 585 Massachusetts Ave Suite 3, Cambridge, MA 02139. www.dimagi.com
