Over the next three years, 
the Action Meningitis 
project will optimize the 
triage system so that it is 
fully appropriate for the 
primary level cadre staff, 
systems, and resources.
ETAT
IMPLEMENTATION DATE:  2012 to 2018 
Emergency triage assessment and treatment for primary care
Forty-one thousand children died before reaching their fifth birthday in Malawi in 2013. Over half of 
these deaths were caused by illnesses (i.e. meningitis, sepsis, pneumonia, and diarrhea) that are both 
preventable and treatable with earlier recognition and intervention.1 In the absence of systematic 
triage at the primary health care level in Malawi, a common challenge is the lack of early and accurate 
recognition of serious illness requiring urgent referral to a higher-level facility. Patients are seen on a first-
come, first-served basis and severe illnesses are often missed as hundreds of children queue for hours.
About ETAT
The Action Meningitis project helps tackle Malawi’s high (ETAT) protocol, health care workers (HCWs) are enabled infant mortality rate by introducing triage into primary to detect vital signs of severe illness. ETAT complements 
health clinics. Underpinned by 10 years of clinical research and existing protocols and strengthens the overall health care 
working closely with the Ministry of Health (MOH), partners system through improved prioritization of care and resources. 
Meningitis Research Foundation and D-tree International Children are given the attention and treatment they would 
have successfully integrated an mHealth point-of-care triage otherwise miss due to overcrowding of clinics and lack of 
system at the primary care level. Using the World Health trained health care workers. A movie of the triage tool in use 
Organization Emergency Triage Assessment and Treatment can be viewed online: www.meningitis.org/action-meningitis.
Evaluation and Results 
In eight clinics, 192 HCWs have been trained in the use of children or referral to a hospital. Qualitative and quantitative 
ETAT using the mHealth tool. The HCWs delivered triage methods of data collection were used in both the baseline 
to 215,000 children within two years. Patient flows in clinics and endline studies to examine changes in clinical practice 
are radically improved, enabling swift treatment of sick and knowledge among HCWs. 
84  n  SERVICE DELIVERY 
Action Meningitis
Quality of triage in all primary centers remained high 
(average 92.2 ± 7.08 percent agreement with ETAT clinicians 
who re-examined the children). Frequent monitoring visits 
show there is good patient flow within clinics and that 
patients are being seen in order of priority.
Mobile phones are an important tool, ensuring that HCWs 
stick to protocol, acting as a prompt to identify severely 
ill children. Triage is quick on the phones, taking less than 
a minute to assess each child. On the few occasions when 
phones were unavailable (e.g. during use in training ses- Conclusion 
sions), the HCWs still continued to apply the skills they had 
learned and triage children in the queue. Better recognition, treatment, and referral of severely ill 
Clinic waiting times remain encouraging for introduction of children at primary level is a key priority for reducing child 
a system that prioritizes according to severity of illness. Time mortality. The next step is to develop a scalable solution 
taken to be seen by the clinician was on average significantly that can be adopted across the primary setting, and current 
shorter for emergencies (nine minutes) than priorities (28 partners are working closely with local, regional, and national-
minutes) and longest for queue cases (31minutes). level health officials to develop, refine, embed, and extend the 
reach of the triage system. 
Lessons Learned Over the next three years, the Action Meningitis project 
will optimize the triage system so that it is fully appropriate 
n Support from MOH has been achieved through con- for primary level staff, systems, and resources (ETAT was 
tinued close collaboration on the ground at district and originally designed and developed in Malawi for the tertiary 
local level, as well as engaging at national level. setting). Developments will be monitored and evaluated in 
the existing eight clinics while benchmarking in three new 
n Local ownership is important for sustainable impact, clinics before further implementation. Across the 11 health 
and project development is improved by regular clinics 440 HCWs will be trained and the reach of triage will 
consultation with a wide range of local stakeholders be extended to an additional 384,000 children. n
(including MH officials and frontline staff).
n The project has been designed with existing 
resource constraints in mind. Lower-cadre HCWs Geographic Coverage:  Blantyre and Chikhwawa District, southern 
with no previous triage training are now empowered and Malawi 
responsible for prioritizing the sickest children, relieving Implementation Partners: Meningitis Research Foundation; 
overburdened clinicians.   Malawi Liverpool Wellcome Trust; Things Prime; D-tree 
n High turnover of HCWs is endemic in Malawi. International; Malawi Ministry of Health 
A stakeholder meeting enabled discussion of staffing Donors: The Scottish Government Malawi Development  
concerns. Recognition/appreciation came out as a highly Programme and others 
motivational factor for all staff cadres. Community Contact Information: Thomasena O’Byrne, Action Meningitis 
Country Manager, Meningitis Research Foundation  
awareness activities (radio and theatre) are being used to thomasenao@meningitis.org
give recognition to those staff carrying out triage. 
mHEALTH COMPENDIUM  VOLUME 5  n  85
