 
NIGHTWATCH: MOBILE 
Creating a Malaria Mobile Community in Tanzania  
In Tanzania, over 30 million people, or 73% of 
the population, live in areas of high malaria 
transmission. Nine of mainland Tanzania’s 23 
regions have more than 100 confirmed malaria 
cases per 1,000 people annually, and 
approximately 8.7 million probable and 
confirmed cases were reported in 2010 alone.  
Mass campaigns and a national voucher system 
have contributed to the distribution of 27 million 
long-lasting insecticide-treated nets (LLINs). A 
Zambian study suggested that behavior change 
communications “are necessary to improve use” 
and could “contribute towards closing the gap 
between ownership and use” of bed nets. 
Research conducted by Malaria No More also 
indicates there is a general understanding from 
Tanzanians that sleeping under a net is necessary 
year-round. To preserve malaria as a health priority and recorded a public service announcement for the 
provide continual education on malaria diagnosis and campaign that aired on national TV in 2012. Through the 
treatment, Malaria No More, in partnership with expansion of NightWatch via a ‘malaria-mobile 
Tanzania House of Talent (THT), has launched community’, the program is able to reach diverse 
NightWatch: Mobile. The program uses celebrity- population segments via several mobile features, 
branded mobile communities and features personalized including tools designed to reach the illiterate. These 
communication by mobile phone to address gaps in include a new mZinduka! malaria anthem that is available 
malaria knowledge.  as a downloadable ringtone and ringback tone; a 
Implementation date: April 2012 celebrity phone tree with on-demand recorded 
messages from THT goodwill ambassadors; and 
informational messages, quizzes and surveys.  
About NightWatch: Mobile The malaria-mobile community (called mZinduka!) also 
NightWatch: Mobile builds on the successful national links to malaria-themed, regionally broadcasted radio 
mass-media campaign, branded as Zinduka! Malaria shows that feature the goodwill ambassadors. Listeners 
Haikubaliki! (“Wake up! Malaria is unacceptable!”), are able to call in and shows feature on-air contests to 
which is endorsed by the National Malaria Control promote the community and share more complex 
Program (NMCP) and the Tanzanian government. The information on malaria. The SMS-based elements of the 
NMCP approves the content of the malaria messages campaign are designed to grow in a user-driven way, 
and provides overall guidance on national malaria relying on networks of people to spread malaria 
control priorities. The Zinduka! campaign is the knowledge and awareness to their family and friends.  
Tanzanian adaptation of the same NightWatch platform 
(celebrity-driven mass media campaigns for behavior 
change, social mobilization, and advocacy) that Malaria Evaluation and Results 
No More supports in Cameroon, Chad and Senegal. While an evaluation of the additional impact of more 
THT celebrities form part of a team of goodwill interactive messaging through the “malaria-mobile 
ambassadors who deliver malaria messaging via radio, community” will not be completed until late 2014, initial 
TV and billboards. President Jakaya Kikwete also evidence of the underlying Zinduka! Malaria Haikubaliki! 
16 mHEALTH COMPENDIUM   |   VOLUME 3 
 
NIGHTWATCH: MOBILE 
Creating a Malaria Mobile Community in Tanzania   BEHAVIOR CHANGE COMMUNICATION 
campaign suggested a strong role for mobile phones. For Mobile mZinduka! program is able to build a sustainable 
example, 3 million Zinduka!-branded malaria messages mobile community for the promotion of malaria 
were sent via SMS to viewers of the 2011 Tanzania prevention and works actively towards the goal of near-
Gospel Music Awards, with 192,000 viewers responding zero malaria deaths in Africa by 2015. Final results from 
by SMS to the message to vote for their favorite artists the NightWatch mobile expansion will be shared within 
and receiving additional malaria messages in return (an the malaria control community to encourage adoption 
approximately 6% response rate). of interactive and engaging communication strategies by 
national malaria control programs.  
Zinduka! NightWatch community radio programs in 
Tanzania’s Lake Zone in early 2013 also demonstrated -------------------------------------------------------- 
an opportunity for more interactive and personalized 
programming. Over 8 weeks of malaria-themed mini- Geographic Coverage: Tanzania 
programs, the community radio stations reported an Implementation Partners: Malaria No More, 
average of 7 listeners calling the station during each 15- Tanzania House of Talent, Vodacom Tanzania, Clouds 
minute segment to participate in quizzes and ask Entertainment 
questions; these callers used their own mobile phones 
without any subsidy, highlighting the value they saw. Funder: mHealth Alliance, Vodacom Tanzania 
Contact Information:  
Lessons Learned Malaria No More: Hannah Bowen, Director of 
 Research & Strategy  Using trusted and popular spokespeople has been 
(Hannah.Bowen@MalariaNoMore.org ) 
critical to building a successful behavior change 
Tanzania House of Talent: Ruge Mutahaba, Founder 
communication platform. By using Tanzanian 
and President (ruge.mutahaba@gmail.com); Lillian 
celebrities and politicians as the faces and voices of 
Madeje, mZinduka! Program consultant 
the campaign, we avoid a common problem: being 
(lillian.madeje@gmail.com) 
viewed as “spam.” 
mHealth Alliance: Innovation Working Group 
 The power of music to engage the audience and Catalytic Grant program, c/o Francis Gonzales, Program 
deliver key messages is challenging – but worthwhile Associate (fgonzales@mhealthalliance.org) 
– to translate from traditional mass media to 
References: 
mobile. The mZinduka! platform is using 
 Data from a tracking survey in three regions (Dar es Salaam, 
downloadable ringtone/ring-back tones to put our 
Pwani, and Mwanza) conducted in January 2010, March/April 
malaria anthems in the hands (and ears) of 
2010, July/August 2010, March 2011, and August 2011. 
Tanzanians. 
 Kyagonza P. Workshop Report. Long Lasting Insecticidal Nets 
 The additional mobile phone-based elements of the Procurement and Supply Management Workshop, held 13–15 
Zinduka! campaign are making it possible to harness October 2009 in Geneva, Switzerland. World Health 
social networks in a new way. Not only can users Organization, 2009 (http://s3.amazonaws.com/zanran_storage/
forward messages to their friends, but we are also rbm.who.int/ContentPages/135194378.pdf). 
looking at ways to use the social media tools that  Macintyre K, Littrell M, Keating J, Hamainza B, Miller J, Eisele TP: 
are currently growing in popularity in Tanzania to Determinants of hanging and use of ITNs in the context of near 
spread malaria messages in a new way.  universal coverage in Zambia. Health Policy Plan 2012, 27:316–
325. 
 World Health Organization. World Malaria Report. Geneva, 
Conclusion Switzerland, WHO, 2011.   
Through developing public-private partnerships and a  World Health Organization. World Malaria Report. Geneva, 
targeted communications campaign, the NightWatch: Switzerland, WHO, 2012.   
  mHEALTH COMPENDIUM   |   VOLUME 3 17 
