OpenSRP meets the 
workflow and information 
needs of health providers, 
decision-makers, and the 
populations they serve. 
OPENSRP: Open Smart Register Platform
IMPLEMENTATION DATE:  2013 to Present 
Connecting frontline health workers to national health systems 
Frontline health workers (FHWs) form the backbone of the health system in low- and middle-income 
countries (LMICs). They are the first contact for primary health care for millions of underserved people, 
yet are often burdened by archaic paper systems. Paper registers present strategic challenges for 
tabulation and access to real-time data for decision-making, monitoring FHW performance at district or 
national level, and providing a reasonable level of accountability for authentic and complete individual 
data records. Paper-based data also do not facilitate continuity of care between visits or across providers. 
Consequently, clients who have missed services or appointments are not identified in a timely fashion, 
leading to a missed window of opportunity for intervention. Lastly, governments struggle to supervise 
this large workforce, ensure data quality and timeliness of reporting, and facilitate appropriate and 
equitable care under low-resource conditions. 
About OpenSRP
Open Smart Register Platform (OpenSRP) offers a Health providers interact with the OpenSRP application government-owned and -operated enterprise-grade using mobile handsets while providing health services to their 
solution to improve primary health care service delivery, clients. All data entry is done using the platform, which can 
strengthen accountability, and generate real-time data run on any Android device. The platform integrates previously 
for improved monitoring and evaluation. OpenSRP was discrete, proven innovations, including: a client registry for 
purposefully designed with end-users to complement other enumeration and continuity of care; birth and death registra-
robust and widely-deployed information technology solutions, tion; electronic forms with embedded logic and decision-sup-
including DHIS2 and OpenMRS. OpenSRP is now being port, including checklists and algorithms for risk assessment; 
maintained and enhanced in functionality by a governance work-planning, scheduling and service reminder tools; 
mechanism and multi-vendor community of software multimedia and interactive voice response (IVR) content for 
developers committed to open-source software.   client counseling and reminders; and automated reporting 
into subdistrict and national reporting systems. This mix of 
42  n  DATA COLLECTION
WHO
mobile technology, information system, and support materials n Establish technical steering committees to guide 
is designed to facilitate and support various aspects of FHWs’ national scale-up. In-country stakeholder engagement is 
work, and enable a flow of communication between commu- crucial in ensuring other key players, including the Minis-
nity members, health workers, and health facilities. The system try of Health, are involved in further adapting or prioritiz-
also aims to facilitate more effective workflows for skilled ing necessary changes to the systems preceding scale-up.
health workers focused on RMNCH, ensuring that they have 
n Balance preservice training with continuous field 
more time to deliver needed services to their clients. Open- support and shadowing. Allow for sufficient in-service 
SRP focuses on family planning, maternal and child health, learning that is directly linked to the routine workflow of 
nutrition and early childhood, with plans to include additional the health worker
health domains, including tuberculosis.  
Evaluation and Results Conclusion
The deployment of OpenSRP is currently being led by the 
Although OpenSRP is currently being piloted across four Technologies for Health Registries, Information, and Vital 
sites, the platform builds on previous work and best practices, Events (THRIVE) consortium. Its mission is to develop, 
including findings from the United Nations International test, and mainstream an enterprise solution for FHWs in 
Working Group mHealth Catalytic grant mechanism-funded low-resource settings focused on universal health coverage 
project Zindagi Mehfooz, that used financial incentives to of essential interventions. The OpenSRP deployment 
drive vaccination coverage and is led by Interactive Research fits into a broader multisite research study coordinated 
and Development (IRD) Pakistan. The strategies from the by WHO- RHR/HRP in order to facilitate common 
program, now incorporated into OpenSRP, observed a 20 objectives, methods, and indicators, as well as joint learning 
percent increase for pentavalent vaccine coverage in the and metaanalysis with investigators in each deployment. 
Pakistan deployment. Furthermore, OpenSRP also includes Additionally, in-country working groups/steering committees, 
strategies reflected in the mCare deployment in Bangladesh, constituting both local and international THRIVE project 
which demonstrated near tripling of antenatal care coverage.  members and in-country key stakeholders will be held to 
In each of the new project sites, OpenSRP implementers are ensure local ownership and governance of the project.
currently researching site-specific adaptation requirements, To date, five countries have been identified where government 
implementation components per cadre of health worker, engagement and readiness would allow for OpenSRP to be 
fidelity of use among health workers, and the time-motion refined, tested, and scaled as exemplars for other LMICs. Over 
effect on the performance of health workers delivering the next four years, the THRIVE consortium will consolidate 
RMNCH interventions. Furthermore, the multi-site study several best-of-breed solutions guided by the  
is focused on development of systematic and replicable principles of user-centered design, incorporating both end-
methods that can be used by other countries for adaptation user needs and workflows and the enterprise architecture nec-
of the OpenSRP platform into other health topics, cadres, essary for national health information system integration. n
and context. Lastly, the findings of this study will be used to 
inform a second phase of research, also to be coordinated by 
World Health Organization’s Department of Reproductive Geographic Coverage: Gaibanda District (Rangpur Division), 
Health and Research (WHO-RHR/HRP), which aims Bangladesh; Lombok District (West Nusa Tenggara Province), 
to measure coverage, quality of implementation, cost- Indonesia; Sindh Province, Pakistan; Koppal District (Karnatka 
effectiveness of health system gains, and resulting impact State), India; Nagpur, Wardha, Yavatmal districts (Maharashtra 
State), India
of OpenSRP across different cadres focused on delivering 
Implementation Partners: WHO-RHR/HRP; Ona Systems; 
RMNCH interventions. ThoughtWorks; mPower Social Enterprises; Summit Institute 
of Development; Interactive Health Solutions; Johns Hopkins 
Lessons Learned University Global mHealth Initiative; Harvard University School of Public Health; Summit Institute of Health; 
Interactive Research and Development (IRD); Foundation for 
n Conduct thorough formative research. A critical part Research in Health Systems (FRHS)
of the OpenSRP development has been an emphasis on Donors: WHO RHR-HRP, NORAD, Grameen Foundation, Wel-
thorough formative research with the primary end-users come Trust 
and the network of secondary users that will be interacting Contact Information: Garrett Mehl, Scientist, World Health 
with the platform. Organization-RHR/HRP, mehlg@who.int 
mHEALTH COMPENDIUM  VOLUME 5  n  43
