COMMUNITY-LED TOTAL SANITATION 
MOBILE SURVEILLANCE  
Tracking water and sanitation data with the DHIS2 Java-based mobile client in 
Zambia 
DATA COLLECTION 
Implementation date: 2013 
In a country where 80 percent of all disease cases are related to water and sanitation, 50 percent  of Zambians are without 
access to adequate sanitation. By 2015, the Zambian Government plans to halve reduce the proportion of the population without 
access to an improved sanitation facility by 50 percent (MDG 7). However, since the majority of the population lacks access to 
sanitation and lives in rural, hard to reach areas, understanding challenges on the ground is difficult. The Ministry of Local 
Government and Housing needed a clear picture of sanitation and its management in each village in Zambia.  
Based on DHIS2 (District Health Information System), Akros partnered with the Government of Zambia to design a 
comprehensive WASH surveillance system that enables the rapid flow of village-based water and sanitation data. Almost 1,000 
community-based volunteers in 28 rural districts across Zambia submit monthly data using simple Nokia feature phones. The 
data are submitted to a central server and immediately available to decision makers at district, provincial and national levels, 
allowing them to monitor and respond more quickly to sanitation concerns in each village, engage traditional leaders, and better 
target interventions.   
About Community Led Total Sanitation Mobile Surveillance  
Using basic Nokia feature phones running the DHIS2 Java- CCs are the only point of data entry; their work is therefore 
b ased mobile client, Community Champions (CCs) submit crucial in understanding challenges on the ground. They are 
village-level water and sanitation data. As community-level rewarded for timely reporting with airtime, though the 
volunteers demonstrating strong community mobilization phones also allow for feedback from the district level 
s kills, the CCs receive basic sanitation training to “trigger” at directly to the CC. For example, district personnel may 
least ten villages and illustrate the crucial link between observe in DHIS2 that CCs are not hosting required 
sanitation and health status. Triggered villages form Sanitary meetings with sanitation action groups (SAG); in response, 
 
Action Groups (SAGs), who monitor and support latrine district personnel may create a message directly in the 
construction in their villages.  DHIS2 interface, which DHIS2 will automatically convert to 
 an SMS and post-sent to CC phones. Many CCs live in  
Each month, the CC meets with each of the ten SAGs to 
remote areas, but the phones have allowed for more 
monitor monthly improvements in access to sanitation at the 
interaction and feedback down to the village level. 
v illage-level and collect data that includes the number of 
improved latrines and adequate latrines, including the four The CC also provides ongoing education on the data 
parameters that constitute an adequate latrine.  collection framework, troubleshoots latrine construction 
 techniques, and supports behavior change interventions.  
26  |  mHealth Compendium Volume 4 
Evaluation and Results 
In a six-month period, Akros rapidly scaled up the CLTS mobile 
surveillance to 28 districts across 6 provinces in Zambia, training 
almost 1,000 CCs and 400 Environmental Health Technicians 
(EHTs) on phone usage, navigation, and reporting structures.  
Decision makers are able to review monthly sanitation data from 
10,270 villages throughout Zambia and can pinpoint specific villages 
with poor access to improved sanitation as well as the limiting 
factors for ODF attainment. As a result, targeted interventions can 
be identified to support challenges on the ground. The system gives 
all decision-makers simultaneous access to real-time data, opening 
communication channels between various levels from village up to 
national level. With a strong, decentralized surveillance system in 
place, the Government can overlay critical water and sanitation data 
to provide a full picture of WASH practice in Zambia. 
Lessons Learned 
 Feedback mechanisms are crucial: community volunteers feel 
supported and motivated through continuous follow-up and 
supervision. Feedback downwards is equally as important as 
submission of data upwards.  
 Simple mobile devices are easier for CCs to navigate, and have 
better access to the cellular network than smartphones 
 Rewarding CCs for reporting encourages timely reporting 
 Empowering sub-district decision-makers such as EHTs and 
Chiefs with timely data improves accountability on CCs  
Geographic Coverage: 28 districts in six 
Conclusion provinces across Zambia  
Mobile surveillance of provides central level decision makers with Implementation Partners: Akros 
access to accurate, real-time data and thus allows for targeted, 
timely interventions throughout the country, even in more remote Funder: DFID, UNICEF 
areas where data was previously hard to obtain.  Contact Information: 
Akros | Amy Tiwari, WASH Program Manager
(+260971398231, atiwari@akros.com); Benjamin 
Winters, Country Director (+260977221335 
bwinters@akros.com) 
See References on page 89. 
 
mHealth Compendium Volume 4  |  27 
