 
HEARTFILE HEALTH FINANCING – AN 
mHEALTH ENABLED INNOVATION IN 
HEALTH SOCIAL PROTECTION 
for the specific needs of Pakistan and could help 
broaden the base of pooling for health.  
The program’s proof of concept on potential within 
innovative web and mobile phone technologies has 
already been published in the World Health Report 
2010 - Health systems financing: the path to universal 
coverage. 
ABOUT HEARTFILE HEALTH 
FINANCING 
The HHF system is designed to make cash transfers for 
health services in an expedient and transparent manner. 
Backend logarithms enable multisource ascertainment of 
eligibility with reliance on a combination of indicators 
and solicitation of data from the National Database 
Registration Authority’s poverty database through an 
BRIEF OVERVIEW online channel. The system is able to categorize patients 
More than 73% of Pakistan’s population pays out-of- by urgency level of treatment required and financial 
pocket to access healthcare. Catastrophic expenditures need by evaluating health expenditures vis-à-vis 
on health, medical indebtedness and medical disposable income. Hierarchy of controls with respect 
impoverishment are, therefore, a common occurrence. to program's governance structure, restricted access to 
In fact, more than 40 million individuals run the risk of information based on system user rights, responsibility 
spending catastrophically on healthcare. A number of and authority and automated supply chain management 
factors compel action as social divides widen in Pakistan. controls have enabled transparent tracking of services 
Social protection is a government priority but existing delivery and payments processing. There is an integrated 
mechanisms have limitations. The state’s health related payment system for multiparty service delivery billing 
social protection system has narrow coverage and is along with built-in budget ceiling and funds allocation 
plagued by a number of challenges.  compliance process.  
An NGO think-tank has created a mechanism to fill this With respect to donation management, advanced 
gap through its recently established program: Heartfile donation pooling and allocation algorithms for 
Health Financing (HHF).  HHF is a health-equity fund maximizing funding impact and spread, the capability to 
based demand side system, which enables registered instruct age, gender, disease and region specific 
doctors/hospitals to seek financial help for patients who donations and the capability to be responsive to 
run the risk of spending catastrophically on healthcare in demands, on a real time basis is bringing unprecedented 
an expedient and transparent manner. The system benefits to the donors in determining the use of 
comprises three components—an mHealth enabled allocated funds. In addition, the systems’ ability to 
technology platform, a system of validating poverty and update donors on utilization of their funds on a micro-
prioritizing patients, and a health equity fund. HHF’s transaction basis is an additional innovative feature, 
objectives at inception were twofold: 1) to develop a which is contributing to both transparency as well as 
system, which at the humanitarian level could protect efficiency. Through tracking and time stamping as 
people against medical impoverishment and meet an inherent features, it additionally assesses workers` 
urgent need of the poor, and; 2) at the development performance and hence helps to institutionalize 
level, to develop a health social protection system suited accountability.  Moreover, the program has been 
40 mHEALTH COMPENDIUM   │    VOLUME 2 
 
 FINANCE 
capitalizing on mMoney (a branchless mobile banking to shift to low-cost internet access devices.  
interface) to disburse assistance for travel and food  Scalability and outreach relies on national and 
related needs of patients. international partnerships.  
 The systems’ innovative capacity to stratify patients 
based on preconfigured rules as opposed to 
EVALUATION AND RESULTS subjective decisions and innovations in workflows, 
In the pilot phase, the average turnaround time for request processing and ingraining transparency are 
request processing was 2.5 days (from initiation of the considered valuable. 
request to approval of funding). However, the mean  Donors are more inclined to donate because of the 
time from grant of approval to procedure donor-empowerment feature and the micro-
accomplishment was 7.6 days for orthopedics and 39.5 transactional tracking system of HHF  
days for cardiology—the two units initially enrolled—
indicating the latter’s greater workload. During the 
entire request seeking process, patients did not have to CONCLUSION 
physically visit a third party (Heartfile, the clearing Technology innovations in Heartfile Health Financing 
house), and were able to manage their case from within (HHF) constitute an end-to-end solution for patient 
the hospital or by phone. Therefore, there were no centric demands related to catastrophic health 
ancillary costs (traveling and food expenditures) borne expenditures. Request processing, financing of services 
by the patient and/or the family.  and donation management workflows reflect novelty in 
the way technology of international standard has been 
In the last two years, HHF has provided financial used to map the local needs.  
assistance to more than 1900 patients requiring high 
cost interventions. With 18 service points in six tertiary 
care facilities, more than 150 health care personnel are GEOGRAPHIC COVERAGE 
engaged through the communication loop. More than Pakistan 
8000 outbound and 3000 inbound SMS have been 
exchanged with patients, health care staff, volunteers, IMPLEMENTATION PARTNERS 
and donors so far. Text messaging is done in local Heartfile 
dialect with patients. Process and outcome related 
evaluation of mHealth features of the program are 
FUNDER 
planned this year with the support of Canada’s 
International Development Research Centre (IDRC). World Economic Forum’s International Partnership for 
Innovative Healthcare Delivery (IPIHD), Clinton Global 
Initiative, mHealth Alliance of the UN Foundation, 
LESSONS LEARNED Rockefeller Foundation, Canada’s International 
 The telemedicine-for-assessments (online validation Development Research Centre (IDRC), Pakistan Poverty 
of poverty status) and mHealth component of HHF Alleviation Fund  
allows it to be established as a scalable and 
replicable model for other developing countries.  CONTACT INFORMATION 
 Reliance on technology also cuts administration fees Heartfile 
with lean operational costs that overcome need for  Dr. Sania Nishtar, Founder 
extensive field operations.  Tel: +92-51-8358968, Email: sania@heartfile.org 
 To increase speed and convenience, it is important 
Information was excerpted from:  
Sania Nishtar, et al. Protecting the Poor Against Health Impoverishment in Pakistan: Proof of Concept of the Potential within Innovative Web and Mobile Phone Technologies. 
World Health Report. Background Paper, No 55. 2010. Web. 
  MHEALTH COMPENDIUM  |  VOLUME 2 41 
