 
COMMCARE FOR ANTENATAL CARE  
SERVICES IN NIGERIA 
Pathfinder launched the project in November 2013, 
coupled with a rigorous evaluation of the effect of 
CommCare on the quality of ANC services. CHEWs 
use CommCare to record client data and track ANC 
clients over time. CHEWs also use multimedia audio 
counseling clips during group health talks that prompt 
them to have continued conversations about health 
behaviors.  
ABOUT COMMCARE 
With over 5,000 registered mobile users across 30 
countries in its cloud environment and over 1 million 
forms submitted to date, CommCare is one of the most 
widely adopted, technically advanced, and evidence-
based mobile platforms for FLWs in developing 
countries.  
CommCare is an easily customizable mHealth platform 
for health workers that tracks and supports their 
BRIEF OVERVIEW interactions with patients. CommCare replaces the 
conventional practice of a community health worker 
Maternal mortality is very high in Nigeria with maternal 
(CHW) manually tracking their work via paper registers 
mortality rate (MMR) ranging from approximately 545 
and carrying large patient education flipcharts. Instead, 
to 840 deaths per 100,000 live births in Nigeria. In 
each CHW is equipped with a midrange phone running 
Nigeria, 62% of births occur at home and only 39% are 
open-source and low-literate-friendly software. The 
attended by skilled health personnel. Only 58% of 
CHW registers clients using customized electronic 
women receive some form of antenatal care (ANC) 
forms. CommCare automatically submits visit data in 
from a skilled provider, and this varies greatly by 
‘real-time’ to a central cloud server, CommCareHQ. 
geographic area. While 45% of women had the four or 
Data on this server is privacy-protected, backed up, and 
more recommended ANC visits, only 16% has had an 
accessible to supervisors and program managers around 
ANC visit before their fourth month of pregnancy 
the world.  
(Nigeria DHS, 2008).  
In Nigeria, CommCare applications are being used by 
As a result of high maternal mortality and the need to 
Community health extension workers (CHEWs) to 
improve the quality of ANC services to increase 
record client data and track ante natal care (ANC) 
demand for services, Pathfinder decided to integrate the 
clients over time.  
use of mobile technology to support health workers. 
Community health extension workers (CHEWs) in 
addition to nurses and midwives provide antenatal care 
EVALUATION AND RESULTS 
services in primary health centers in Nigeria. CHEWs 
are lower level of education and job aids to support In Nigeria, there are currently over 150 CHEWs in 20 
effective clinical decision making are lacking at sites.  In primary health centers are using the CommCare 
order to improve the quality of ANC services provided application to track ANC clients (10 primary health 
by CHEWs, Pathfinder International, in collaboration centers in Abuja and 10 primary health centers in 
with Dimagi, Inc is implementing CommCare in 20 Nasarawa state). Since December 2012, over 2,400 
primary health facilities in Abuja and Nasarawa state. pregnant women are now registered and are tracked 
10 mHEALTH COMPENDIUM   │    VOLUME 2 
 
 BEHAVIOR CHANGE COMMUNICATION 
through CommCare.  A rigorous research study is being service delivery based on evidence.  
conducted to assess the effect of implementing 
CommCare on the quality of ANC care. Baseline data 
was collected in January 2013, and the endline will be CONCLUSION 
completed by September 2013. The analysis and write Mounting evidence indicates that properly using 
up will be ready by December 2013. CommCare to support CHW programs can improve 
access, quality, experience, and accountability of the 
Globally, collective findings from 14 published papers 
care provided by community health workers. After a 
about CommCare, six important grey literature studies, 
successful pilot phase, Pathfinder is planning to scale up 
and four papers on closely related systems are 
the use of CommCare in Nigeria to support the 
encouraging. They demonstrate the potential for 
reduction of maternal mortality and improve the quality 
organizations to use CommCare to improve a wide 
of ANC care. Dimagi, Inc. is also gathering evidence and 
range of aspects within their community health program
refining its approach in order to provide sufficient 
(s). The findings also support the hypothesis that 
evidence this tool can support maternal and child health 
CommCare can be used to increase the timeliness, 
services in Nigeria.  
accuracy, and relevance of essential information 
delivered to clients. It is, however, important to note 
that CommCare by itself will not improve the behavior 
of CHWs, but can only amplify an organization’s efforts GEOGRAPHIC COVERAGE 
to improve their community health program. Nigeria (Abuja and Nasarawa state). CommCare is also 
Organizations must continually support their CHWs and implemented in 13 other African countries: Benin, 
utilize the information delivered by CommCare in order Sudan, Ethiopia, Ghana, Kenya, Malawi, Mozambique, 
to realize the potential benefits of introducing an Senegal, Sierra Leone, South Africa, Tanzania, Togo, and 
mHealth system for their CHWs.  Zambia  
IMPLEMENTATION PARTNERS 
LESSONS LEARNED The Nigerian National Primary Healthcare and 
 Active engagement of the NPHCDA in the Ministry Development Agency (NPHCDA); Pathfinder 
of health from the start of the project is critical in International; Dimagi, Inc. 
order to foster ownership. This project 
complements the Nigerian government’s FUNDER 
commitment to using mHealth solutions for Pathfinder International  
addressing maternal health, as seen through their 
partnership with the mHealth Alliance.  
CONTACT INFORMATION 
 Primary health centers with varying client loads use Pathfinder 
CommCare very differently (for decision support,  Dr. Farouk Jega, Country Representative, 
client tracking and data reporting). The Nigeria 
implementation approach thus has to be adjusted to Email: fjega@pathfinder.org 
fit the needs of smaller and bigger implementation  Marion McNabb, Senior Project Manager, 
sites.  mHealth, US 
Email: mmcnabb@pathfinder.org 
 The need to create a single solution for both high-
performing and low-performing frontline Dimagi, Inc. 
workforces is complex.  Jonathan Jackson, CEO 
Email: jjackson@dimagi.com 
 Design processes to support and improve CHW 
  MHEALTH COMPENDIUM  |  VOLUME 2 11 
