TCO Worksheet
Budgeting category	Year 0	Year 1	Year 2	Year 3		
click here for category definitions	(initial launch)					
Governance						
Meetings and administrative support						
Management 						
Overall project management						
Research, monitoring, and evaluation						
Design/ Development						
Defining program and solution requirements						
Vendor evaluation and selection						
Platform deployment and customizations						
Content development, scheduling and localization						
Deployment						
Training 						
Enrollment of subscribers						
Marketing and outreach						
Operations						
Messaging costs						
Staffing						
Solution/ platform management and hosting						
Administration and call center support						
Overhead 						
Total	0	0	0	0		

Messaging Cost Tool
Messaging Cost Tool
Pilot	 @ Scale
A	Transmission costs/year	$   -	$   -	Legend			
B	Total Messaging costs/ year	$   -	$   -	Green	Input Required		
C	Cost per subscriber	#DIV/0!	#DIV/0!	Blue	Select from list						
		Yellow	Output - do not edit						
Pilot	 @ Scale	Grey	Final output - do not edit							Yes
D	Targeted # of subscribers								No
E	% literate in target area	0%	0%					
F	SMS subscribers		0	0							
G	Is this enough subscribers?		No	Yes								
H	if no, % of subscribers reached via IVR	0%	0%							
I	IVR subscribers	0	0					
				
J	Messages per week SMS		0	0					
K	Messages per week IVR		0	0					
If transmitting across multiple MNOs with different rates, create a separate worksheet for each MNO with proper coverage estimates and rates including volume discounts if applicable										
L	Cost per SMS	$   - 0	$   - 0						
M	Cost per IVR	$   - 0	$   - 0					
Assumption is that each IVR messages is 1 minute or less, use airtime rates provided by MNO, Vendor or Aggregator										
	
Additional Costs:
Using a Short Code?	No
N	Annual cost	$   5,000
Vendors estimate ~$5000 USD for a dedicated short code
Cost Tool Instructions
Messaging Cost Calculator instructions											
To begin, complete the Green shaded boxes with the appropriate data for your project.  											
There are two columns one for a Pilot and another for running the project @ Scale (regional or national level) calculations can be done in parallel for each column if desired.											
After you have filled in the green boxes, perform the following calculations											
Line F:	Multiply D x E										
This will provide the number of subscribers in the targeted population that SMS is appropriate.  If this number is sufficient, enter a Yes in the blue box.  If more subscribers are needed for the study, enter No											
Line I:	If “No” was entered in Line G, multiply H x D to calculate the number of IVR subscribers										
Line F + I will be your total # of subscribers											
Line J:	SMS Messages per week.  Multiply the value in the green box by F to get the number of SMS messages to be sent per week										
Line K: IVR Messages per week.  Multiply the value in the green box by I to get the number of IVR messages to be sent per week											
Line L & M are the per message rate provided by the vendor, aggregator or MNO.  For the model we assume the IVR rate is the charge for a one minute message, adjust according to the projects average voice message length.											
											
Now we are ready to calculate the costs/ year.   For Pilot study years, use the values in the Pilot column.  To calculate costs at scale, use the values in the @ Scale column.  If the project is projecting growth year over year, adjust the variables in the green boxes to calculate each year as appropriate.											
Line A:	Transmission costs (the cost to send messages to subscribers):										
	Multiply J x L for the SMS weekly cost, then multiply by 52 for the # of weeks in the year										
	Multiply K x M for the IVR weekly cost, then multiply by 52 for the # of weeks in the year										
Add the SMS and IVR costs together for the annual transmission costs											
Line B: If a Short Code is being used for the program, add N + A for the total messaging costs											
Line C:	Cost per subscriber divide B by the sum of F + I for the total cost per subscriber										
											
Finally, Input the calculated values from Line B for each year in the TCO Worksheet.											
										
Other category descriptions for the TCO worksheet can be found in the "Budget Categories" tab											
											
											
											
									
									
									
									
									
									
Budget Categories
Governance	
Meetings and administrative support	Budget for meetings and administrative support of the project
Management 	
Overall project management	Project Manager, Staff and Stakeholders involved in day to day operations (# of resources x rates and travel)
Research, monitoring, and evaluation	Hours (and associated rates) for M&E activities around the project.  Collating data from health centers and messaging platform, surveys, etc.
Design/ Development	
Defining program and solution requirements	Days budgeted for X number of staff to define requirements for the program design and platform needs
Vendor evaluation and selection	Days budgeted and trips for evaluating and observing messaging platforms from "short list" of vendors, meetings to define project
Platform deployment and customizations	Costs for the development of the messaging platform, customization needs, connecting with telcos
Content development, scheduling and localization	Customization of messages - localizing content for SMS, professional voice recordings for IVR, making sure context is appropriate for culture and language
Deployment	
Training 	Days training X number of staff on the messaging platform and program itself, outreach training to Health Centers or CHWs to register subscribers.   This should be budgeted annually to account for attrition and program growth
Enrollment of subscribers	Registration - use of CHWs or "on the ground' staff to help register subscribers.  # of staff, salary, incentives
Marketing and outreach	Budget for how to create awareness and register mothers, posters, radio, partnerships with MoH, etc.  This should be an annual line item to grow the program and raise awareness
Operations	
Messaging costs	Messaging costs - see Messaging Cost Tool
Staffing	Day to day operations - manage subscribers, schedule messages,  ensuring messages are being sent, enrollments are successful, etc.   
Solution/ platform management and hosting	Technical staff to ensure system availability, troubleshoot technical issues
Administration and call center support	Customer support, ability to respond to inbound messages, flashes, requests for information or assistance
Overhead 	General fixed expenses associated with the project - power, internet connectivity, hardware, etc.
