Advancing	mHealth	by	connecting	global	health
professionals	to	people,	products,	and	ideas.
Select	a	page
 Search
 
mHealth Alliance
Applications & Platforms
Communities of Practice
Capacity Building & Learning
Multimedia Content
Multimedia Content
Project Repositories
Tools & Guides
Blogs & News
mHealth	Knowledge	connects	you	—	global
health	professionals	—	to	the	people,
products,	and	ideas	that	you	need	to	do	your
mHealth	work	effectively.	This	curated	portal
of	records	hyperlink	to	the	original	source.
To	find	evidence-based	digital	health
research,	go	to	mHealth	Evidence,	part	of
the	suite	of	resources	available	via	mHealth
Knowledge.	
Quick	Links:
Vous	recherchez	des	ressources	en
français?	Cliquez ici pour	notre	guide	de
planification	de	mHealth.
mHealthKnowledge.org	is	the	new	home
for	the	African	Strategies	for	Health	(ASH)
Project's	mHealth	Compendium	Database!
More	on	the	transition	here.
Find	all	presentations	from	the	2016
Global	Digital	Health	Forum	here.	The
mHealth	Compendiums	also	remain
available	as	full	downloads	in	English,
French,	and	Portuguese.
New	resource:	WHO	Monitoring	and
Evaluating	Digital	Health	Intervention:
A	Practical	Guide	to	Conducting
Research	and	Assessment.
The	Broadband	Commission	for
Sustainable	Development's	Working	Group
on	Digital	Health,	co-chaired	by	the	Novartis
Foundation	and	Nokia,	has	launched	the
report	"Digital	Health:	A	call	for	Government
Leadership	and	Cooperation	between	ICT
and	Health.".
New	Resource:	Making	Content
Meaningful:	A	Guide	to	Adapting	Existing
Global	Health	Content	for	Different
Audiences
New	Article:	Reflections	on	Digital	Health
and	Knowledge	Management:	The
Importance	of	Assessing	Information	in
Planning	Digital	Health	Interventions
The	Knowledge	for	Health	(K4Health)	Project
has	published	Senegal's	Journey	Toward
an	eHealth	Strategy:	Highlights	from	the
Development	Process	on	our	work	with
	the	Senegal	Ministry	of	Health	and	Social
Action	(MOHSA)	in	the	development	of	a
national	eHealth	strategy.
K4Health	is	happy	to	announce	a	new	home
for	the	archive	of	resources	from	the	Mobile
Alliance	for	Maternal	Action	(MAMA)
Global	Project.	Click	here	to	read	the	final
blog	from	Kirsten	L.	Gagnaire.	All	tools,
resources	and	reports	produced	by	the
project	may	be	found	here	or	via	search.
New	resource:	Family	Planning	High
Impact	Practices	Brief:	Digital	Health
for	Social	and	Behavior	Change
Call	for	content!
We	are	looking	to	build	upon	our	mFinance
resources.	Please	contact	us	to	add	your
resources	to	our	review	process.	If	you	would
like	to	ask	a	question,	offer	feedback,	or	suggest
a	resource	not	found	here,	please	contact	us!
 
 
↑
Powered by
This website is made possible by the support of the
American People through the United States Agency
for International Development (USAID). The
Knowledge for Health (K4Health) Project is
supported by USAID's Office of Population and
Reproductive Health, Bureau for Global Health,
under Cooperative Agreement #AID-OAA-A-13-
00068 with the Johns Hopkins University. K4Health
is implemented by the Johns Hopkins Bloomberg
School of Public Health's Center for Communication
Programs (JHU∙CCP) in collaboration with FHI 360,
Management Sciences for Health, and IntraHealth
International. The contents of this website are the
sole responsibility of JHU∙CCP. The information
provided on this website is not official U.S.
Government information and does not necessarily
represent the views or positions of USAID, the
United States Government, or the Johns Hopkins
University. Read our full Security, Privacy, and
Copyright Policies.
© 2019
