TC112:	Technology	for	Knowledge	Management
Share	this:
 Tweet  Share 0  Share 0
All	courses > TC112:	Technology	for	Knowledge	Management
 	$495.00
 	4	weeks
This	course	will	provide	an	overview	of	the	knowledge	cycle	by	focusing	on	skills	and	strategies	to	better	generate,
capture,	share,	and	apply	knowledge	to	development	programs.
Course	Description
Our	digitally	connected	lives	have	made	information	increasingly	available	to	all.	How	do	you	navigate	this	world	of
overabundant	information,	while	making	sure	that	the	right	knowledge	is	being	incorporated	into	and	captured	by
your	project?	How	do	you	ensure	that	experiential	knowledge	from	the	field	feeds	back	into	program	design,	or
that	best	practices	from	one	project	are	shared	with	a	similar	project	in	another	part	of	the	world?	The	growing
field	of	knowledge	management	provides	a	framework	and	introduces	tools	to	help	practitioners	improve
knowledge	flow	and	ultimately	development	outcomes.
This	course	will	provides	an	overview	of	the	knowledge	cycle	by	focusing	on	skills	and	strategies	to	better
generate,	capture,	share,	and	apply	knowledge	to	development	programs.	It	will	feature	live	interactive	guest
expert	presentations	with	leading	KM	specialists,	community	of	practice	leaders,	and	online	learning	experts.	It	will
also	include	a	unique	hands-on	learning	environment	with	technology	demos,	practical	activities,	networking
events,	immersive	simulations	and	more.	Ultimately,	participants	will	leave	the	course	with	an	understanding	of
the	tools	and	techniques	to	effectively	design,	deliver	and	evaluate	knowledge	management	activities.
Course	Topics	and	Featured	Tech
Week	1:	Introduction	to	Knowledge	Management	(People,	Process,	&	Tech)
Week	2:	Tech	for	Collaboration	and	Capture	(Conducting	a	Knowledge	Audit)
Week	3:	Tech	for	Internalizing	and	Organizing	(Developing	a	KM	Strategy	and	Implementation)
Week	4:	The	Future	of	Knowledge	Management	(M&E	for	your	Project,	Social	Network	Analysis,	Technologies
on	the	Horizon)
Course	Methodology
The	entire	course	is	delivered	online.	The	total	time	commitment	is	a	minimum	of	2-5	hours	a	week	with	suggested
7-9	hours	per	week.	The	course	is	designed	to	be	highly	interactive	and	social,	but	we	also	work	hard	to	ensure
that	the	majority	of	the	content	can	be	experienced	in	a	self-paced	manner.	It	will	feature	one	or	two	real-time
interactions	each	week,	such	as	live	discussions,	live	expert	interviews,	and	live	simulations.	In	order	to
accommodate	busy	schedules	of	mission	staff	from	around	the	world,	we’ve	set	up	a	learning	environment	where
participants	have	plenty	of	options	to	explore	content	that	is	most	relevant	to	them	through	live	content	and
interactions,	readings,	and	videos.
Facilitators	will	produce	weekly	audio	podcast	recaps	for	participants	to	catch	up	on	key	conversations	and	topics.
Participants	can	also	access	all	course	content	six	months	after	course	completion	so	the	material	can	be	revisited
later.
Read	the	a	working	draft	of	the	syllabus	here.
Price
$395	if	application	and	payment	is	submitted	by	May	7th,	2017
$445	if	application	and	payment	is	submitted	by	June	4th,	2017
$495	if	application	and	payment	is	submitted	by	course	start	date
Group	discount	rates	available.	For	more	details,	please	contact	us	at	social	[at]	techchange.org.	If	you	are	not
happy	with	your	course	experience	for	any	reason,	TechChange	is	happy	to	discuss	refunds.
Interested	in	learning	about	more	courses?	Browse	through	our	catalog	or	check	out	our	FAQ	section!
Next	Session
None	upcoming...
Change
Contact:	techsupport	[at]	techchange.org
Terms	of	Use
Privacy	Policy
Policies
©	2012-2019	TechChange
