Policy
Briefing
IMAGESBAZAAR
P O L I C Y  B R I E F I N G  # 7  F E B R U A R Y  2 0 1 3
H ealth on the move
C an mobile phones save lives?
Yvonne MacPherson and Sara Chamberlain
Sign up for our newsletter: www.bbcmediaaction.org
HEALTH ON THE MOVE: CAN MOBILE PHONES SAVE LIVES?
Above Although only Introduction devices. This briefi ng identifi es three aspects of mHealth 32% of adult women that render it such a potentially robust healthcare tool: 
in the rural state of We are currently witnessing an unprecedented global 
Bihar, India own their effort to improve the health of the world’s poor. Financial • Reach. The fi rst is its capacity to leverage existing 
own phone, 83% of resources are being poured into scientifi c advances, – and quite basic – phones to provide life-saving 
women have access offering fresh hope for preventing and managing information to people in diffi cult-to-reach, rural areas.
to one.
life-threatening diseases. Political will has coalesced Design. The second is its capacity to tailor both 
around the Millennium Development Goals (MDGs). • the delivery and content of that information to 
And rapid economic growth in even some of the poorest 
countries is lifting people out of poverty and improving the needs of poor, illiterate and marginalised 
health outcomes. populations.
Despite all of this, the prospects for meeting the key • Scale. The third is its capacity to operate at scale in 
MDGs of reducing maternal mortality by three quarters a cost-effective, fi nancially sustainable way. 
and reducing the deaths of children under fi ve from Mobile telephony is not a panacea for all health 
preventable causes by two thirds remain extremely challenges in the developing world. But there is enough 
diffi cult in much of the developing world. Greater effort experience – and the beginnings of an evidence base 
and further innovation are required. – to argue that mHealth deserves serious attention 
This policy briefi ng focuses on how one of the greatest from any development actor seeking to improve
engines of innovation in the 21st century – the mobile global health. 
phone – offers important opportunities for saving lives. 
The explosive growth of mobile telephony over the past This paper is organised as follows:
decade has generated exciting new thinking around its Part 1 examines the data on maternal and child health 
potential to improve the uptake of health services and globally and in India.
healthy behaviours. That potential is increasingly being Part 2 explores the role of mobile phones within the 
transformed into practice, with encouraging results. sphere of health communication, highlighting mHealth 
This policy briefi ng draws on BBC Media Action’s direct as an educational tool.
experience in using mobile phones to improve health Part 3 provides a brief overview of BBC Media Action’s 
education in one of the poorest states of India. Bihar has mHealth work in Bihar, India.
among the highest rates of maternal and child mortality in 
the country, but also one of the most rapidly expanding Part 4 lays out the conceptual insights that work has 
mobile markets. The briefi ng shows how, in a region yielded for reaching poor and marginalised populations.
where mobile phones outnumber basic goods such as Part 5 illustrates the integral role of scale in making such 
water taps and toilets, the former have emerged as a mHealth initiatives sustainable fi nancially.
simple, high-impact solution for improving the survival 
chances of mothers and babies. Part 6 reviews the state of the evidence on mHealth.
mHealth can be defi ned as the delivery of healthcare Part 7 draws conclusions arising from the analysis in 
information and services via mobile communication parts 1–6. 
2  BBC MEDIA ACTION POLICY BRIEFING #7 FEBRUARY 2013 SIGN UP FOR OUR NEWSLETTER: WWW.BBCMEDIAACTION.ORG
BBC MEDIA ACTION
PART 1
M aternal and child health: the scale of the problem
The 2015 deadline for achieving the Millennium world, more than half in sub-Saharan Africa, and one 
Development Goals (MDGs) is fast approaching.1 For third in Southern Asia.6 Indeed, the lifetime chance of 
the health sector – where reducing child mortality and an African woman dying because of pregnancy-related 
improving maternal health fi gure prominently on the causes is 100 times higher than that of a woman in a 
agenda – the scale of that challenge is still considerable. developed country.7
Over the past decade, the twin public health goals of India, one of the fastest growing economies of the world, 
reducing child mortality and improving maternal health refl ects the global challenge of securing maternal and young 
have emerged as a real priority within the international child health. On the one hand, the Indian government has 
development community. The HIV epidemic that swept made large health investments that have in turn saved lives. 
sub-Saharan Africa and parts of Asia highlighted deadly The maternal mortality ratio has fallen from around 600 
consequences for women and children. In 2003, the per 100,000 live births in 1990 to just over 200 in 2010.8 
pre-eminent health journal, The Lancet, drew attention Furthermore, some 53% of women now deliver with a 
to the 11 million children under the age of fi ve who skilled birth attendant, and vaccination coverage in children 
were dying from almost entirely preventable causes each between 12 and 23 months is between 70% and 90%.9
year. Alongside these realities, new funding mechanisms 
On the other hand, the prevalence of stunted and 
emerged, such as the Partnership for Maternal, Newborn 
underweight children as a result of malnutrition is still 
and Child Health and the Roll Back Malaria campaign. 
considerable in India. Around 48% of all children under the 
Efforts to improve global health also gained a number 
age of fi ve are stunted, while 44% are underweight.10 With 
of high-profi le advocates and philanthropists. 
an average annual reduction in the child mortality rate of 
These investments have paid some dividends. Child only 3% since 1990, India is not likely to meet this MDG.
mortality has been cut by more than a third since 1990, 
In short, despite considerable effort within the 
when there were 12 million deaths a year.2 At the same 
international development community and developing 
time there has been a 47% drop in the number of women 
3 country governments alike, the MDG objectives around dying as a direct consequence of pregnancy and childbirth.
improving maternal and child health still remain out of 
And yet, there’s still a long way to go. Some 7.6 million reach. Only nine out of the 75 countries that account 
children still die annually from largely preventable causes.4 for 95% of maternal and child deaths are on track to 
Every fi ve minutes, three women die from complications achieve the maternal health goal, while only 23 are on 
related to pregnancy or childbirth, while 60 others will be target to meet the child health goal.11 The world is in 
left with debilitating injuries.5 The overwhelming majority need of bold new solutions in the health sphere if these 
of these deaths – some 99% – occur in the developing ambitious targets are to be met.
Figure 1 Lifetime risk of maternal death
More than 1 in 20
1 in 20 to 1 to 49
1 in 50 to 1 in 499
1 in 500 to 1 in 1,999
1 in 2,000 to 1 in 4,999
1 in 5,000 or less
No Data
Source: Neal et al. (2010) 
White Ribbon Alliance Atlas 
of Birth. London, UK: White 
Ribbon Alliance, Centre for 
Global Health Population 
Poverty and Policy, University 
of Southampton and Impact, 
University of Aberdeen
 BBC MEDIA ACTION POLICY BRIEFING #7 FEBRUARY 2013 SIGN UP FOR OUR NEWSLETTER: WWW.BBCMEDIAACTION.ORG 3
HEALTH ON THE MOVE: CAN MOBILE PHONES SAVE LIVES?
PART 2
What a difference a phone makes
The role of communication in among these myriad factors. Nevertheless, decades 
of research and practice have established a strong 
saving lives evidence base that communication has a major role 
to play in improving health.13 As Caroline Anstey, 
There are numerous, complex reasons why the vast Managing Director of the World Bank Group, put it:
majority of all global deaths of pregnant women, infants “I fi rmly believe in the power of information to
“ I fi rmly believe and children under fi ve occur in the developing change lives.”14world.12 Of course, poverty underlies many of in the power of these reasons, such as the insuffi cient number Media and communication can help to achieve health 
information to of skilled health workers, the lack of access to outcomes by improving knowledge, shifting attitudes 
essential medicines and equipment, substandard and social norms and increasing people’s confi dence change lives ” living conditions and poor nutrition, to name but a and motivation to act in the interests of their own few. Health-related behaviours and social norms – such as health. They can also facilitate and stimulate public 
local customs around delivering babies at home without and interpersonal (one to one) discussion, which in 
Below A young man access to skilled birth attendants – also play a part. turn can support the adoption of healthier behaviours 
and his mobile in the and greater accountability around health service 
fishing port of Cox’s The extent to which communication can help save provision and policy making. (See box: Information, 
Bazar, Bangladesh. lives depends inevitably on the complex interplay communication and health.)
4  BBC MEDIA ACTION POLICY BRIEFING #7 FEBRUARY 2013 SIGN UP FOR OUR NEWSLETTER: WWW.BBCMEDIAACTION.ORG
COLIN SPURWAY/BBC MEDIA ACTION
Information, communication and health
It is widely recognised that the 
availability of timely, accessible, 
accurate and relevant information 
plays a key role in shaping knowledge, 
which in turn is a driver of health-
related change. Information also 
infl uences social norms and culture 
by increasing awareness about 
what other people are doing. And 
information can create demand for 
health products and services. The 
more trusted and credible a source of 
information is, and the more relevant 
and resonant it is made to its target 
audience, the greater its potential to 
infl uence behaviour.
In the context of maternal and child 
health, communication interventions 
can encourage people to adopt 
healthier behaviours, while reducing 
those that put health at risk. 
For example, they can encourage 
people to seek ante-natal care 
from a skilled health worker, delay 
pregnancy to a healthy age and ensure 
a healthy interval between births. 
Basic, cost-effective, post-natal care 
practices such as immediate and 
exclusive breastfeeding and ensuring 
thermal care through wiping (not 
washing) a baby clean, wrapping it 
and encouraging skin-to-skin contact 
between baby and mother after birth 
can have a signifi cant impact on saving 
newborn lives.15
Just one example is BBC Media 
Action’s Ghar Aagan (House And 
Yard) weekly radio show in Nepal, 
which broadcast a real birth to 
infl uence health behaviours and 
social norms. Research showed that 
77% of regular Ghar Aagan listeners which individuals discuss a behaviour with others is Above BBC Media 
knew the recommended number of ante-natal care often closely correlated with the adoption of that Action’s radio show 
visits (four), compared with 58% of non-listeners. behaviour.18 Ghar Aagan (House 
Among regular listeners, the percent of women And Yard) broadcast a 
who actually had the recommended number of Most health communication initiatives deploy a live birth on air from a Nepali maternity ward 
visits in 2012 was 74% in 2012 and only 52% range of different approaches to meet the health 
among non-listeners.16 needs of people in a particular context. This 
to influence health 
behaviour and social 
may be through mass media such as radio and norms. 
Communication can also help address television, print media (pamphlets, 
social factors that are harmful to “ Information can posters, billboards), social media, health. Informing and engaging create demand for community outreach (for instance, 
women in the decisions they take 
health products and street theatre or events) and about their health can help redress interpersonal communication 
gender inequalities that affect services ” (for example, between a health health risks. Creating opportunities worker and a patient). A number 
for people to engage in dialogue and debate also of studies have suggested that combining mass 
enables them to participate in decisions about health media with interpersonal communication or other 
services within their community and hold leaders communication activities has a greater impact than 
and service providers to account.17 The extent to any one intervention alone.19
 BBC MEDIA ACTION POLICY BRIEFING #7 FEBRUARY 2013 SIGN UP FOR OUR NEWSLETTER: WWW.BBCMEDIAACTION.ORG 5
BBC MEDIA ACTION
HEALTH ON THE MOVE: CAN MOBILE PHONES SAVE LIVES?
Above As part of the Mobile telephony has provided a fresh set of opportunities of mobiles is now being seen by most of the large and 
Ananya programme in for those working to improve health outcomes in the respected development organisations.”24
Bihar, India, BBC Media developing world.20 It is one of the fastest growing 
Action has developed 
mHealth services to technologies in history; with around 6 billion mobile Educating populations and health 
equip and train phone subscriptions (and counting), global mobile 
community health penetration stands at 86%.21 In the developing world, workers
workers to communicate mobile penetration is only slightly lower, at 79% (ie, 
life-saving health The scope of mHealth is almost as vast as the health there are 79 active mobile subscriptions – or SIM cards 
information. sector itself. In the clinical realm, mobile phones are used – per 100 people). Africa has the world’s lowest mobile 
to do everything from registering and managing patient 
penetration, but this is still 53.1%, compared with 1.4% 
for fi xed line phones. data (such as pregnancies, vaccinations, ante-natal care 
visits and causes of deaths), to integrating medical records 
The simple fact that mobiles are increasingly ubiquitous with payments, to remotely diagnosing health conditions 
in the poorest parts of the world has obvious health and managing the supply of medicines.25
benefi ts. For instance, people can seek 
“ help in emergencies. Mobiles can also This briefi ng will focus on the educational use of mobile  What’s exciting in the mHealth sector is that the enable family members or others to phones, sometimes referred to as mHealth education or 26keep in touch with those who are sick mHealthEd.  The main purpose of mHealth education 
untapped potential of or vulnerable. targeting the general population is to increase access to information, raise people’s awareness, stimulate 
mobiles is now being seen But mobiles have the potential for discussion and infl uence social norms, so that individuals 
by most of the large and much more. As Ariel Pablos-Méndez, and families can take more control of their own health. 
Assistant Administrator for Global 
respected development Examples include public health campaigns promoting Health at USAID, affi rmed at a recent condom use, timely and actionable measures for 
organisations ” mHealth summit: “We believe cell confronting disease outbreaks (such as avian fl u) and phones and mobile health is more than demand creation for services such as vaccinations.27
just information. It’s really changing behaviour, changing 
the way health systems operate.”23 There are a number of mHealth initiatives that focus 
on maternal and child health education for families 
This potentially transformative role for mHealth is in developing countries. Many build on learning from 
really taking hold within the international development BabyCenter, a service that reaches 14 million mothers 
community. Tim Wood, Director of Mobile Innovation in the United States every month with ‘stage-based’ 
at the Grameen Foundation, noted: “What’s exciting information. The Mobile Midwife project in Ghana – 
in the mHealth sector is that the untapped potential developed by the Grameen Foundation in partnership 
6  BBC MEDIA ACTION POLICY BRIEFING #7 FEBRUARY 2013 SIGN UP FOR OUR NEWSLETTER: WWW.BBCMEDIAACTION.ORG
BBC MEDIA ACTION
When I now walk 
with BabyCenter – sends registered i“nto  a village, people call In light of the dearth of adequately 
pregnant women messages linked me ‘doctor didi’ (sister) trained health workers in the 
to their stage of pregnancy. The developing world, it’s hard to 
Mobile Alliance for Maternal Action and ask me to give them underestimate the value of mHealth 
(MAMA) is scaling similar services information ” education projects, especially of in Bangladesh and South Africa.29 In the training and support variety. As 
India, BBC Media Action is developing Kilkari, a service Jeffrey D Sachs, Director of The Earth Institute, put 
to provide subscribers with staged, weekly calls linked to it: “Empowering community health workers can be a 
pregnancy, birth and infant health. (See box: The Ananya profound step change.”35
programme.)
In order to build capacity for the delivery of information How ‘low tech’ can you go?
and services in rural areas, mHealth education content Mobile health is often described as a ‘game-changing’ 
is increasingly being developed for community health technological platform. Unlike other mass communication 
workers. There is a real scale benefi t to supporting platforms such as television and radio, mobiles can not 
front-line health workers, who can potentially serve only be used to provide information and enable people to 
numerous families over time. Save the Children estimates interact with that information, but also to deliver services 
that 1 million additional community health workers are and strengthen health systems. In other words, mobile 
needed to help address a shortfall of 3.5 million health telephony can unite both the educational and clinical 
workers in 49 of the poorest countries.30 In addition functions of mHealth in one device.
to plugging this gap, it’s vital that the effectiveness of 
existing health professionals is increased. Examples of In so doing, mobiles have the revolutionary potential 
mHealth services designed to bolster this supply side to integrate the ‘supply’ side of health systems (for 
of the equation include job-related aids that support example HIV diagnostics, vaccination registration and 
community health workers’ interactions with families, tuberculosis medication reminders) with the ‘demand’ 
peer-to-peer networks that enable the rapid exchange side (such as promoting healthy behaviours and the 
of data and learning and mobile courses and quizzes that uptake of health services among the population). Many 
can be taken anytime, anywhere. donors and governments are therefore justifi ably keen to 
invest in the provision of higher-tech handsets to health 
Like most mobile health innovations, offering health 
workers, such as feature phones or smartphones capable 
workers training opportunities via their mobiles phones 
of hosting applications that can deliver clinical services 
is intended to be both cost-effective and effi cient. 
It replaces the need to travel – sometimes great and track patient data.
distances – and to take time out of work in order to This sort of integrative mHealth model has the ability 
participate in classroom-based learning. A community to transform health service delivery in the long term. 
health worker who received training from BBC Media But such projects are challenging to scale because they 
Action’s mobile service in Patna, India noted: “Before, require considerable external resources to fi nance, and 
if I had questions, I had to go on foot to the primary are complex to support and maintain. (See Part 5.)
health centre. Now I can learn on mobile.”31 Many 
mobile training courses also allow participants to get In the rush to embrace the latest technological innovation, 
certifi ed exam results immediately.32 Furthermore, job it’s easy to overlook the fact that there is tremendous value 
aids delivered via mobiles, such as audio recordings that and cost-effectiveness to be found in services that can make 
community health workers can play to their clients, the most of the phones that families and 
offer the benefi t of controlling for the variability of community health workers already have, 
health workers’ skills by giving families the same quality no matter how basic. This is particularly m“ There is a gold rush entality. We need to 
of message every time. relevant for resource-poor contexts, 
among populations who may even lack the balance social and 
But mobile job aids and training programmes have other technical and language literacy needed for 
professional benefi ts as well. Early evidence shows that reading and sending text messages. human needs with this 
such tools motivate health workers by increasing their rapid technological 
job satisfaction, reducing staff attrition rates and elevating When it comes to developing new juggernaut 
their status in the community.33 As a community health mHealth interventions, “there is a gold ”
worker in Begusari, India explained: “Ever since I started rush mentality,” noted Dennis Gilhooley, 
using [the job aid] Mobile Kunji during my visits with Executive Director of the Digital Health Initiative. “We 
women and their families, the community’s respect for need to balance social and human needs with this rapid 36
me and what I do has grown. What’s more, when I now technological juggernaut.”
walk into a village, people call me ‘doctor didi’ (sister) The remainder of this policy briefi ng attempts to do 
and ask me to give them information.”34 precisely that. 
 BBC MEDIA ACTION POLICY BRIEFING #7 FEBRUARY 2013 SIGN UP FOR OUR NEWSLETTER: WWW.BBCMEDIAACTION.ORG 7
HEALTH ON THE MOVE: CAN MOBILE PHONES SAVE LIVES?
PART 3
B ihar on the move: a case study
Right A basic handset The state of Bihar in northern India – poor, rural 
held together with an and populous – has some of the worst maternal and 
elastic band and with child mortality rates in the world.37 With a population 
numbers scraped off 
the keypad from larger than that of Western Europe and limited 
repeated use.  infrastructure, reaching the state’s 27 million women 
of child-bearing age is a daunting task. (See box: The 
Ananya programme.)
Eighty eight per cent of Bihar’s 103 million people live 
in rural areas.38 Many parts of the state are regularly 
fl ooded and much of rural Bihar has only two or three 
hours of electricity a day. 
Pregnant women, in particular, have very limited mobility: 
they rarely leave the house and often have little or no 
role in making decisions related to their own health or 
bodies. Less than half of women in this state deliver their 
babies at a health facility.39
Mass media provides only a limited opportunity to reach 
and engage priority populations in Bihar. Only 18% of 
women aged 15–45 watch TV and 11% listen to the 
radio.40 It is therefore essential to reach the state’s 
inhabitants not just through mass media, but also through 
face-to-face communication and community-level 
activities such as street theatre.
Figure 2 Bihar, India An existing network of some 200,000 community 
health workers helps provide access to people who 
AFGHANISTAN might otherwise be diffi cult to reach.41 These health 
C H I N A workers – about half of whom are tasked with making 
household visits – are often the only source of health 
PA K I S TA N information for families in rural locations with little media 
N E P A coverage.L
But here, too, there are challenges. The average 
B I H A R community health worker is a middle-aged woman 
with a basic education, a heavy caseload and inadequate 
training and materials. Her catchment area comprises 
MYANMAR
(BURMA) approximately 1000 people, with an average of 56 
women who are pregnant or have children under the 
I N D I A age of two.
Enter mobile phones. Some 63% of adult men
in rural Bihar own a mobile phone. Although only 
32% of adult women in rural Bihar own their own
phone, 83% of women have access to one. BBC Media 
Action research shows that all community health
B I H A R workers either own, or have access to, a mobilephone.
Patna
The majority of these phones are very basic, often 
42
SRI second-hand, handsets.  Some are even held together 
LANKA by string. But even these phones can be used to empower 
people with life-saving information.
8  BBC MEDIA ACTION POLICY BRIEFING #7 FEBRUARY 2013 SIGN UP FOR OUR NEWSLETTER: WWW.BBCMEDIAACTION.ORG
BBC MEDIA ACTION
The Ananya programme
Ananya (meaning ‘unique’ The community health worker 
or ‘boundless’ in Sanskrit) dials the short code and puts 
is a programme funded by her phone on speaker mode 
the Bill & Melinda Gates so that both she and the family 
Foundation. The programme can hear the audio content, or 
is in partnership with the simply hands the phone to the 
state government of Bihar pregnant woman or mother to 
and 10 other implementing listen. The content, which is 
organisations, with funding delivered in the authoritative yet 
totalling approximately sympathetic voice of a woman 
$122 million over fi ve doctor character, is deliberately 
years (2010-2015). The designed to be both engaging 
programme aims to and conversational and to 
accelerate health outcomes reinforce the health message 
linked to Millennium illustrated on the card.
Development Goals 4, 5 and For example, one of the leading 
6 (reducing child mortality, 
Above A community health worker uses Mobile Kunji’s deck of cards while causes of maternal death is improving maternal health 
on a visit to a mother and her mother-in-law in Bihar, India. severe bleeding. One card 
and reducing infectious encourages women to involve 
diseases including HIV, malaria and tuberculosis). their husbands in decisions around planning for birth so that 
BBC Media Action’s role in this programme is to communicate families will identify their nearest hospital, make arrangements 
life-saving information and shape healthy behaviours that for emergency transportation, ensure that they have their 
tackle the main causes of maternal, newborn and child deaths, health worker’s phone number handy and save money to cover 
such as safe delivery of babies, preventive post-natal care costs in case of complications during labour and delivery.
and nutrition. To do this, BBC Media Action has developed Mobile Kunji is a toll-free service which can be accessed by any 
a comprehensive range of communication interventions, health worker in Bihar from any mobile handset, across fi ve of 
including mHealth services to equip and train community the largest mobile networks in India. These operators account 
health workers who in turn communicate health information for approximately 80% of all mobile subscribers in Bihar. 
to nearly 7 million pregnant women and women with children 
under the age of two.43 In early 2013, BBC Media Action will The training course – Mobile Academy
also launch a service that will provide timely health information Alongside Mobile Kunji, Mobile Academy works to expand and 
directly to families via their mobile phones. All of these mobile refresh community health workers’ knowledge of nine maternal 
services run on a mobile technology platform owned and and child health behaviours and to enhance their interpersonal 
supported by OnMobile and use an open-source software communication skills. In light of the low wages community 
called ‘Motech,’ which has been customised for the Bihar health workers earn, Mobile Academy is designed to be very 
programme in collaboration with the Grameen Foundation inexpensive. 
and Thoughtworks.44 The GSMA Development Fund provided 
guidance and support during the initial design phase of the project. Once registered, community health workers can access the 
190-minute course via a mobile short code. They can then 
The job aid – Mobile Kunji complete the standardised course at their convenience, 
Mobile Kunji – Kunji means a ‘guide’ or ‘key’ in Hindi – is an at a fraction of the cost of face-to-face training. Digital 
audio-visual job aid that community health workers can use bookmarking technology enables users to return to where 
during counselling sessions with rural families. It seeks to they left off and to complete the course as quickly or slowly as 
build support for healthy practices within families and they like, spreading the total cost over 12 months if necessary. 
communities. The job aid’s content aims to redress After completing the course, health workers with a pass 
long-standing misconceptions and negative social norms score receive a printed certifi cate of completion from the 
around health-related maternal and child behaviours. For government of Bihar. 
example, when mothers were asked why they didn’t follow The service for pregnant families – Kilkari
advice to breastfeed exclusively for the fi rst six months, 
many said: “People in my community will think I am keeping Kilkari, meaning ‘a child’s gurgle’ in Hindi, is an mHealth 
my child hungry if I only breastfeed.” education service currently being developed for families
with pregnant women and mothers of children under the 
This job aid includes both an interactive voice response age of one. The service will focus on prompting healthy 
(IVR)-based mobile service and a printed deck of 40 illustrated behaviours and generating demand for health services.
cards on a ring, which communicate essential information on Once a family subscribes to the service, they will receive 
pregnancy and newborn health. The deck of cards is designed weekly phone calls about maternal and child health, linked 
to be portable and durable. to the stage of the woman’s pregnancy or their child’s age. 
Each card carries a unique, seven-digit number (‘short code’) Kilkari costs 1 rupee per message. If the family subscribers 
that can be dialled on the community health worker’s for 16 months, they will receive 64 messages at a total of
mobile phone. 64 rupees or US$1.18.
 BBC MEDIA ACTION POLICY BRIEFING #7 FEBRUARY 2013 SIGN UP FOR OUR NEWSLETTER: WWW.BBCMEDIAACTION.ORG 9
BBC MEDIA ACTION
HEALTH ON THE MOVE: CAN MOBILE PHONES SAVE LIVES?
PART 4
Touching lives, not screens: Reach, design and scale
BBC Media Action’s experience in Bihar offers unique health workers have black and white screens, no internet 
insights into the potential of mobile telephony to provide access and limited storage capacity. Health workers’ 
life-saving information to those hardest to access – handsets are often copycat brands (such as Nokla, 
whether because of social class, gender, caste or location. Nokai and Simsung), which typically do not support 
Three elements of mHealth warrant particular scrutiny: local languages and are not known for their durability.
reach, design and scale. 
At fi rst glance, the primitive nature of these phones 
Reach: out with the new, might seem like a limitation. This is certainly true if the objective is to deliver comparatively sophisticated, 
in with the old mHealth clinical services, such as recording and tracking 
the provision of care to pregnant women and mothers 
One of the main reasons the development community has or performing diagnostics remotely. Those kinds of 
focused on mobile phones as a tool for health innovation services typically require pre-loaded software on a 
“ All I have to do is is their ubiquity. As noted earlier, mobile more advanced – and standardised – mobile handset. phones are now surfacing in places where The procurement and distribution of new mobiles, with explain the information mass media and even health facilities software already loaded on them, would therefore be 
on the card and dial the cannot be found. essential to getting this sort of initiative off the ground 
number provided. I can But just because mobile phones are in resource-poor settings.
answer all the questions abundant in developing countries does In contrast, mHealth education services like Mobile Kunji not automatically render them useful. and Mobile Academy (See box: The Ananya programme, 
the women have with Their potential to promote healthy above) have the luxury of being handset independent. 
ease and confi dence ” behaviour across large swathes of people In other words, because they don’t require complex hinges on the extent to which mHealth data capture of confi dential medical information, these 
programmes can leverage existing technology within services can be obtained via phones without special 
target communities. software or internet access. 
Below A copycat 
Nokai phone owned Most mobile phones found within low-income, rural Making good use of simple, existing mobiles has four 
by a community health populations tend to be extremely basic and old. In Bihar, advantages for mHealth educational initiatives. First, 
worker in Bihar, India. even many of the mobiles owned by most community these phones are user-friendly. Because the target group 
doesn’t need to invest time in learning how to use a 
new device and/or software, they are instead freed up 
to focus on the actual content. Reba Rani, a community 
health worker in Bihar noted: “Now that I have Mobile 
Kunji, every time a woman asks me for information, 
I look at the index card of the Mobile Kunji deck of 
cards and choose an appropriate message. All I have to 
do is explain the information on the card and dial the 
number provided. I can answer all the questions the 
women have with ease and confi dence.”45 (See box: 
The gender divide).
Second, the health benefi ts of being handset-neutral 
are also immediate. By designing mHealth education 
services that use phones that are already in the hands 
of the landless labourer, the mother-in-law, the pregnant 
woman, the health worker, these individuals can start 
getting information they can act on instantly. No time-
consuming phone distribution scheme. Just life-saving 
information, now.
Third, employing existing handsets also requires less 
up-front capital investment. The Bihar programme is again 
instructive in this regard. When BBC Media Action was 
10  BBC MEDIA ACTION POLICY BRIEFING #7 FEBRUARY 2013 SIGN UP FOR OUR NEWSLETTER: WWW.BBCMEDIAACTION.ORG
BBC MEDIA ACTION
The gender divide
“Within the digital move – sometimes 
divide, there is also it was in the hands 
a gender divide.”46 of the wife, other 
times with the 
In many parts of the 
nephew, sister-
developing world, 
in-law or uncle. 
access to mobile 
Unlike the primary 
phones is still the 
‘male’ phone, this 
preserve of men. 
household phone 
Women are 21% 
did not usually have 
less likely to own 
a cash balance on it 
a mobile phone 
with which to make 
than men: 37% of 
phone calls. Instead, 
women in low- and 
its main purpose was 
middle-income 
to receive calls from 
countries own 
the primary phone.
mobile phones, 
compared to 48% The Kilkari service 
of men.47 And Above A slum dweller in Dhaka, Bangladesh talks on her mobile phone. (see box: The 
ownership is not Ananya programme), 
the only impediment. Women often have to ask for is designed for families that include pregnant women 
permission from male members of the household and mothers. The content is ostensibly aimed at 
to use mobile phones and may be monitored when women. However, it is only the man’s phone that 
they do so. has the necessary credit to receive a message from 
An ethnographic research study by BBC Media the subscription-based service. So the content 
Action in Bihar, India illustrates how understanding has to be targeted at the whole family, in a way 
the gender divide in mobile ownership and use that prompts men to share information with their 
guides programme design decisions.The study wives. This is why, for example, calls reach the 
found that among those families who owned man in the evening when he is more likely to be at 
mobile phones – even those living in extended home, increasing the chances that he will share the 
family, mud-hut dwellings with only three hours message’s content with his wife.
of electricity per day – the majority of households Mobile telephony also has huge potential to 
had two phones. One of these phones – typically empower female community health workers. 
the newer one – accompanied the males, many of Services like Mobile Kunji and Mobile Academy 
whom were landless labourers, when they went out enable these workers to acquire both knowledge 
to work. The second and older handset was usually and skills. This results in elevating their status in 
left at home. the community, as they are increasingly seen as 
All women interviewed had access to this household respected and knowledgeable professionals, whose 
phone, even though it was constantly on the advice is backed by the ‘doctor in their pocket’.49
fi rst considering its technological options for community testing it, and distributing, maintaining and replacing lost, 
health workers, the design team anticipated creating stolen or broken phones. In contrast, making content 
audio-visual content for community health workers to that was accessible to phones that community health 
be stored on their mobile phones. The idea was to use workers already possessed circumvented the need to 
inexpensive, yet sophisticated, Indian brand phones to invest in new handsets, let alone replace them.
project content on to the walls of huts, shops and clinics Fourth, by creating services that can be used by anyone 
so as to facilitate learning. who has access to a phone and can dial a number, an 
But the team soon realised that the retail cost of mHealth education project can be launched at scale 
procuring phones with this sort of technology for all from the get-go. In contrast, services that hinge on 
200,000 community health workers involved could be up standardised telephones cannot easily support a large-
to an additional US$8million – more than four times the scale roll-out precisely because the software only works 
entire mHealth budget for the project.50 And that didn’t on a limited number of handsets. (See discussion of 
include the cost of installing the content on the phones, scale in Part 5.)
 BBC MEDIA ACTION POLICY BRIEFING #7 FEBRUARY 2013 SIGN UP FOR OUR NEWSLETTER: WWW.BBCMEDIAACTION.ORG 11
GMB AKASH/PANOS
HEALTH ON THE MOVE: CAN MOBILE PHONES SAVE LIVES?
In sum, basic phones may not be capable of supporting users in resource-poor settings – even those who may 
fancy software applications and delivering video content, be literate – mHealth planners can’t assume that these 
but they are certainly better than nothing. As Joanna users will be able to read or type in their language on
Rubinstein, Assistant Director of the Earth Institute their phone.
for International Programs, put it: “It’s like 
“ It’s like saying, if Technical literacy is also relevant here. In developing saying, if you can transport someone to Mobile Kunji and Mobile Academy, BBC Media Action you can transport a hospital on a bicycle where there is no conducted user-testing research in the villages of Bihar. ambulance, it’s better than not getting there 
someone to a hospital 51 The goal was to assess the most appropriate way to at all.”
communicate with the rural families living there, as 
on a bicycle where None of this is meant to downplay the vital well as with the community health workers who serve 
there is no ambulance, role that handset-dependent services play in them.
it’s better than not the clinical mHealth space. Electronic medical records, remote diagnostics and supply chain Research showed that because most households had only 
getting there at all ” management all entail effi ciencies, increased possessed their mobile phones for a very short time, coverage and life-saving services. It is only to 91% were only able to use the phone for making and 53
note that delivering such supply-side services requires receiving calls.  Even a basic skill like dialling a phone 
– at a minimum – a standardised feature phone. But the number on a keypad was something that rural women in 
additional time and resources required to bring clinical Bihar were only just learning to do. Although the ability 
services to scale will also have a huge pay-off in the to press numbers is increasing, low literacy levels and 
longer run. the fact that handsets don’t usually have the Hindi script 
enabled (ie switched on) meant that SMS usage remained 
Hitting home: of users and nearly non-existent.
usability mHealth projects often target community health workers with the expectation that these individuals 
mHealth education can thus maximise reach when the have an ability to learn new skills easily. But the skills 
phone in the hands of health workers and families is associated with using mobile phones aren’t necessarily 
abundant, affordable and easy-to-use. intuitive. In many countries, community health workers 
are mature adults in their 30s and 40s, who may not be 
But to have maximum impact – to get life-saving natural early adopters of new technologies. Even literate 
information where it needs to be – mHealth programmes community health workers in Bihar did not know how 
also need to communicate in a way that can be readily to open a text message and only 9% of those who took 
grasped by the very poorest segments of the population. part in the user testing had ever sent an SMS. 
To borrow from the jargon in vogue within some Given the lack of literacy and technical capacity of the 
development circles, how does one reach the ‘base of general population and community health workers in 
the pyramid’? Bihar, BBC Media Action identifi ed IVR as the most 
BBC Media Action’s work in Bihar suggests that the appropriate technology for the target population. IVR 
answer lies in carefully grounding both the programme’s is a relatively well-established technology that is used 
delivery mechanism and its content in local realities. And around the world to provide automated voice services 
that, in turn, hinges on carefully executed demographic, to telephone callers.
54
social and cultural research. IVR is well-suited to a population with the demographic 
features of Bihar. First, because it can be accessed by 
Speakeasy: interactive voice response (IVR) making a phone call, IVR audio content can be heard 
Many of us assume that the word ‘simple’ in the context from any phone. Second, IVR does not require literacy 
of mobile technology means texting. Short message and only entails very limited technical skills (the ability 
system (SMS) or texting has been used effectively to to dial a number and to press numbers on the phone 
reach people with essential health information, largely in response to audio instructions). In many cases, poor, 
in Africa and Latin America.52 But what if the population rural mobile phone users are already being exposed to 
you wish to target can’t read? IVR through their mobile network operators, whether 
Literacy isn’t the only obstacle facing those most at risk via automated customer care lines or when ‘topping up’ 
of ill health due to poverty and marginalisation. Many their mobile phones with pre-paid credit.
languages in the developing world, particularly in Asia, That said, complex IVR menus with multiple options 
are not in Roman script, whereas most mobile phones can confuse users. For Mobile Kunji, this challenge was 
in circulation in those countries only support Roman avoided by doing away with IVR menus altogether. 
(English), Arabic or Chinese scripts. When targeting Instead, community health workers simply dialled 
12  BBC MEDIA ACTION POLICY BRIEFING #7 FEBRUARY 2013 SIGN UP FOR OUR NEWSLETTER: WWW.BBCMEDIAACTION.ORG
short codes to listen directly to the appropriate audio 
content. 
So, for example, the Mobile Kunji card on family planning 
indicates the number 5771154. The health worker dials 
this number and immediately hears a recorded message 
on family planning. No menus, no choices. Just straight to 
the message on the subject of that particular card. The 
card reinforces the subject with an illustration and a list 
of the key messages in the audio recording.
IVR can thus serve as a simple, widespread solution to the 
needs of illiterate, poor populations in many developing 
countries by providing access to audio content via a 
simple phone call from any mobile phone. As Anne 
Nelson of the Columbia School of International and 
Public Affairs put it: “In development work, it’s critical 
to apply technology to local needs and infrastructure 
as they exist now, not just as they may evolve in the 
distant future. BBC Media Action’s killer app 
is the phone call.” “ BBC Media general public and health workers. BBC Above Mobile Kunji Media Action’s research about its Kilkari comprises a deck ofAction’s killer 
Going local service illustrates this challenge vividly. 
40 cards and audio 
Considerable effort went into designing content accessed via
Even if content is delivered via the most app is the a mobile phone.content that could be understood by the 
appropriate technology, if that content phone call target group in rural Bihar. But as noted 
doesn’t resonate, it’s likely to remain on the ” above, pre-testing research found that the 
virtual shelf. “It’s not about the technology. The key to comprehension levels of even the most basic concepts 
success is content,” says Cherie Blair, Founder of the were often well below what experts anticipated.
Cherie Blair Foundation for Women.55
A huge challenge was fi nding mHealth message 
To make a difference, mHealth interventions need to be vocabulary that could be understood by the majority 
carefully grounded in the social, cultural and demographic of the target audience, some of whom speak dialects 
realities of target populations. “Researching what the and languages other than Hindi. This was the case for 
barriers to behaviour change are and understanding both basic health terms like ‘safe delivery’ and ‘tablet’, as 
which of these barriers are most critical… is a major well as the language used in subscription prompts such 
pay-off,” noted Usha Kiran Tarigopula of the Bill & as ‘mobile service’, ‘choose’ and ‘confi rm’. Surprisingly, 
Melinda Gates Foundation.56 the poorest segment of the population did not even 
It’s common in public health circles to assume that health understand the word swasth, which means ‘health’ 
training manuals or messages from health campaigns in Hindi and is used in most government-run health 
automatically resonate across different regions. From campaigns.
this perspective, translation and adaptation to a mobile BBC Media Action’s research further found that the central 
format is all that’s needed for mHealth education to bottleneck was not just one of translation, but 
succeed. But this view dramatically underestimates of conceptualisation. In communities where 
the importance of localising content to address unique ambulances had never existed, for example, “ Researching barriers and facilitators to behaviour change.57 For the concept of emergency transportation was 
example, the generations-old practice of delivering a what the barriers to not easily grasped.
baby at home may not be adequately addressed merely behaviour change are 
by promoting the generic benefi ts of delivering in a The amount of information provided also 
health facility. The facilitating factors – and obstacles affects comprehension. Illiterate women, and understanding 
– are likely to vary from community to community. in particular, complained that there was too which of these barriers 
much information provided in phone calls 
Furthermore, many community health workers hail from are most critical… is a conveying health advice, obscuring the main 
the very communities they serve. As a result, they may points. Comprehension was much better major pay-off 
have the same socio-cultural biases concerning health among men, perhaps because of their wider ”
behaviours that the general public have. exposure to standardised Hindi outside the home, 
A nuanced, culturally rich understanding is thus vital for through movies, soap operas and locally televised sport 
behaviour change communication that targets both the matches. In general, this study found that the more 
 BBC MEDIA ACTION POLICY BRIEFING #7 FEBRUARY 2013 SIGN UP FOR OUR NEWSLETTER: WWW.BBCMEDIAACTION.ORG 13
HEALTH ON THE MOVE: CAN MOBILE PHONES SAVE LIVES?
Reaching those at the base of the pyramid
Figure 3 Media access in rural Bihar 
TV: 25%
R1 Radio: 19%
2.6m Mobile: 89%
TV: 35%
R2 Radio: 15%
8m Mobile: 90%
TV: 24%
R3 Radio: 17%
15.8m Mobile: 86%
TV: 9%
Radio: 11%
Mobile: 76%
R4
Base of the pyramid
Population: 22.8million
Figure 4 The media mix in rural Bihar
Mobile Kunji
TV advertising Kilkari
Radio
Mass media
Community
mobilisation Mobile Academy
Interpersonal
communication:
Radio listening clubs community
health workers
Training
Families/
pregnant women
mothers of children
under 2 years
Community theatre of age
Home visits
14  BBC MEDIA ACTION POLICY BRIEFING #7 FEBRUARY 2013 SIGN UP FOR OUR NEWSLETTER: WWW.BBCMEDIAACTION.ORG
Socio-economic groups as measured by type of home and education
Mass media and mobile access
Reaching those at the base of the pyramid
Figure 3 shows a pyramid representing rural 
Bihar. Each section of the pyramid symbolises a 
level of socio-economic class, from the highest 
at the top to lowest at the bottom.58 The lower 
the socio-economic class, the lower the levels of 
income and literacy and the higher the maternal media exposure a person had, the better they 
and child mortality. were at comprehending pre-recorded health 
Many of those at the base of the pyramid live information on a telephone. (See box: Reaching 
in ‘media dark’ areas. For example, fewer than those at the base of the pyramid.)
10% watch television and 11% listen to the Making content sticky: meet Dr Anita
radio on a regular basis, and individual mobile 
ownership stands at 41%.59 This fi gure rises In addition to localising content to align it 
to 76% if access to a shared household mobile with factors infl uencing behaviour change,
is considered. Although diffi cult to reach, this well-designed mobile content is often 
demographic group is critical to the programme’s informed by local tastes as well, so that 
objectives given their isolation from essential people can identify with the content. To 
information and their increased risk of ill health use a term that’s popular in the information 
due to poverty. technology sector, the content needs to be 
‘sticky’: ie, to compel users to want to return 
To reach those further down the pyramid, then, to the service again and again.
it is all the more important to support the work 
of health workers who visit these households on In India, as in many other mobile markets, 
a daily basis. BBC Media Action is training the users have a legal right to opt out of receiving 
community health workers in these communities subscription-based messages at any time if they 
via Mobile Academy and equipping them with an choose to do so. Therefore, the importance 
effective job aid via Mobile Kunji. of relevant, quality content is paramount for 
retaining users.
As argued throughout this policy briefi ng, mobile 
phones are an excellent tool for reaching areas Creative techniques are used to make 
where other means of mass communication educational content engaging and entertaining. 
aren’t available. But this does not mean that Popular mHealth content includes games and 
61
mobiles are the only way to reach otherwise quizzes.  Mobile Kunji, for example, features 
remote and marginalised populations. “New an empathetic yet authoritative female doctor 
technology doesn’t remove the need to employ character, Dr Anita, who ‘speaks’ to rural 
a systematic approach to communication for families. She is designed to be both trusted 
development,” noted Raphael Obregon, Chief and respected by community health workers 
and families alike.62of the Communication for Development Unit at Above Dr Anita features on the Mobile 
Unicef.60 A nurse midwife in Samastipur, Bihar was surprised to Kunji cards and the 
In order to further reinforce its key health hear someone in her local language giving such expert accompanying audio content.
messages to those who are otherwise diffi cult to advice: “Even though she is a doctor and educated, 
reach, BBC Media Action thus deploys a range she was speaking in Bhojpuri!” Another community 
of core, community-level activities alongside its health worker from Champaran, Bihar summed it up:
mHealth services. Such activities include street “I have learned how to explain things in simple 
theatre, roaming vans playing advertisements and and easy language. Now I can explain 
radio listeners’ clubs, all of which extend mass the content to the benefi ciaries in the Keep three phone 
media campaigns into the community. These same way.”
63
n“um bers in mind. Hospital, 
so-called ‘community mobilisation activities’ The audio message from the doctor 
encourage further discussion around social transportation and is followed by rhyming couplets, 
norms and help facilitate behaviour change. punctuated by drum beats and the community health worker. 
Figure 4 shows how BBC Media Action is using a sound of a stringed instrument, To keep tension at bay. 
mix of communication approaches to reach the which function as a mnemonic for key 
different target groups within rural Bihar. health messages. This rhyme is about Plan as we say! ”
“ preparing for delivery: “Keep three New technology phone numbers in mind. Hospital, transportation doesn’t remove the and community health worker. To keep tension at 
need to employ a bay. Plan as we say!”
systematic approach Localised content is thus crucial for achieving 
resonance with users. One downside, however, 
to communication is that it’s much harder to take context-specifi c 
for development ” content to scale across disparate geographical regions.
 BBC MEDIA ACTION POLICY BRIEFING #7 FEBRUARY 2013 SIGN UP FOR OUR NEWSLETTER: WWW.BBCMEDIAACTION.ORG 15
HEALTH ON THE MOVE: CAN MOBILE PHONES SAVE LIVES?
PART 5
S ustainability and scale: escaping ‘pilot-itis’
The end game of any mHealth solution should be the mHealth services that benefi t government employees or 
achievement of sustainability. In order for an mHealth those who lack the purchasing power to pay for mHealth 
service to be sustainable, the ongoing costs involved in services themselves. Government involvement is also 
delivering the service need to be met.64 crucial for providing a regulatory environment in which 
The critical variable here is scale. If a service is only designed mHealth can function and thrive.
69
to be used by a small cadre of nurses in a district, for Government leadership is also important, insofar as 
example, then covering costs can be fairly straightforward. it allows mHealth initiatives to be fully integrated into 
But when a service needs to be used by hundreds of wider public policy objectives. In Africa, for example, the 
thousands of health workers or millions of families, making Ugandan government is taking a lead gate-keeping role in 
it self-fi nancing is a much more daunting task. ensuring that any and all mHealth projects complement 
Very few not-for-profi t mHealth projects targeting poor the overall, national public health strategy and go to 
70
people in the developing world currently operate at scale. scale.  Many governments, including those in India and 
This is, in part, deliberate. “The mHealth sector is fi lled Bangladesh for example, have national information, 
with many projects [that] aren’t even intended to scale, communication and technology policies, which include a 
since organisations have been competing on innovation provision for the delivery of mHealth services to citizens.
71
and not scale,” said Jonathan Jackson, Founder and Chief BBC Media Action’s Mobile Kunji is an example of a 
Executive of Dimagi, a leading health software developer service that has been developed with a public sector 
for developing countries.65 Instead, many donors prefer business model in mind. When surveyed in the course 
to be cautious in this still nascent fi eld, opting for pilots of the project’s formative research, community health 
to demonstrate proof of concept before embarking on workers said they couldn’t afford to pay for the ongoing 
full-scale investments.66 use of mobile phones required for daily family health 
The lack of scaleable mHealth programmes for poor, visits. They felt the government should be required to 
rural populations may also be a function of project design. cover the costs because it is the families who benefi t 
Many mHealth services remain at the pilot phase because from the service.
the projects themselves rely on the target audiences using As a result, the donor agreed to cover the cost of calls 
standardised phones or having a certain level of literacy. to Mobile Kunji for the fi rst year of the programme’s 
The cost of the service is also critical. If it’s too expensive 72
for low-income communities to use, then the service life-cycle.  The idea was to demonstrate the effi cacy of 
may still be scaleable. But it might not reach the target the service to the government, particularly within poor, 
group, which may be defi ned as those most in need. marginalised communities that might not otherwise be 
Scale is thus directly related to the central able to afford mHealth services themselves.
“ Organisations issues of abundant handsets and appropriate And it worked. Thanks to health workers’ enthusiastic have been competing technology – as highlighted earlier – as well response to the service, and up-take rates that far 
as to cost.
on innovation and exceeded projections (see Part 6), the government of 
Ultimately, however, the ability to move Bihar agreed to cover health workers’ call costs to Mobile 
not scale ” beyond ‘pilot-itis’ relies on bringing a range Kunji on an on-going basis. As the Executive Director of public and private stakeholders together in of the State Health Society in Bihar, Sanjay Kumar, said 
mutually benefi cial, strategic partnerships.67 BBC Media in reference to mobiles: “Using this technology, we 
Action’s work in Bihar offers insights into a variety of ways can build the capacity of frontline workers and also 
such partnerships can be formed that foster sustainable take health and nutrition facilities to the masses at the 
business models – and do so at scale. grassroots level.”73
Governments have long been in the business of providing 
The public sector: looking out for health services to the poor. mHealth represents a 
the poor potentially effi cient, affordable way for them to do so, 
particularly when it enables them to tackle enduring 
Governments are key stakeholders for the mobile health basic health challenges in remote, rural areas via the 
sector in the developing world, as they are the biggest multiplier effects rendered through health workers. Less 
customers for health products and services.68 National immediately obvious, however, is why private sector 
and state governments may be the only players with actors in developing countries would come on board 
suffi cient resources to fi nance large-scale, long-running to service those communities.
16  BBC MEDIA ACTION POLICY BRIEFING #7 FEBRUARY 2013 SIGN UP FOR OUR NEWSLETTER: WWW.BBCMEDIAACTION.ORG
The private sector: what’s in it That is why the entire course only costs the health worker Above Even the most 
approximately US$1.50 to complete. This was the price basic shop in rural 
for them? that the workers themselves deemed affordable. India is in the mobile 
business.
There are two broad categories of private sector mHealth After much negotiation, mobile network operators 
business models. In the fi rst, services are provided agreed to subsidise Mobile Academy to a signifi cant 
free – or at a greatly reduced rate – with costs being degree, offering some of the lowest IVR call charges 
partially or wholly funded by advertising or corporate in the world. Crucially, all six of India’s major mobile 
sponsorship. In the second, premium rates are charged to network operators came on board. The rate obtained 
access health information, whether via IVR, SMS, mobile was up to a 70% reduction in the standard IVR rates, 
internet, handset apps or call centres. lower than 1 US cent per minute.77
At fi rst glance, both advertising-supported and premium Mobile telephony is often a low profi t margin, high-
rate business models would not seem to be of much use volume business. The low margin for profi t per user 
for poor, rural communities with little purchasing power means that the overall profi t from Mobile Academy is 
like Bihar. In Bihar, for example, 53% of the population small. The mobile operators’ costs are covered, but 
lives below the poverty line.74 other technology costs related to running the service 
78
But this landscape is changing, and changing fast. A are not.  Additional revenue streams, such as advertising 
growing number of mobile operators and consumer and corporate sponsorship, will be required if the service 
goods companies are now looking to expand their is to become fully sustainable.
presence in rural markets. This is because urban markets Mobile Academy is thus making progress towards 
are rapidly reaching saturation for mobile subscriptions. demonstrating how project design and scale can interact to 
Due to their large numbers, even poor consumers in the yield a potentially sustainable, commercial business model 
countryside have the potential to generate signifi cant rooted in providing mobile health services to rural, low-
revenue for consumer goods companies.75 income health workers. Technology that is appropriate 
Mobile operators and technology providers are also to the target population, coupled with a revenue share 
beginning to suspect that a segment of people with that covers providers’ costs and returns a small profi t, 
even limited purchasing power may choose to invest allowed the project to bypass the pilot phase. Mobile 
money – over a longer time period – in mobile services Academy is now on track to reach the project’s target 
that offer real value. They are banking on the relatively of 200,000 community health workers, who in turn aim 
poor being willing to spend more on mobile services to reach almost 7 million families by December 2015.
focused on health, education and fi nance than those that 
merely provide entertainment.76 Many mHealth services increasingly involve a hybrid business 
model that encompasses both public and private sector 
Mobile Academy is an example of a business model that stakeholders. A common hybrid funding model involves 
aims to achieve 100% commercialisation. Through its donor funding during an initial research and development 
research, BBC Media Action learned that community phase to test new ideas and technologies. Subsequently, 
health workers were willing to pay for services that they the actual project is carried out in partnership with local 
believed furthered their own skills, career prospects and government, mobile network operators and technology 
job security. In light of their limited incomes, however, it partners, with advertising increasingly being seen as an 
was essential to set this price point at an affordable level. additional revenue stream that is critical to sustainability.
 BBC MEDIA ACTION POLICY BRIEFING #7 FEBRUARY 2013 SIGN UP FOR OUR NEWSLETTER: WWW.BBCMEDIAACTION.ORG 17
BBC MEDIA ACTION
HEALTH ON THE MOVE: CAN MOBILE PHONES SAVE LIVES?
PART 6
Evidence: does any of this actually work?
The goal of mHealth initiatives is to improve health. been played (each message is just over a minute long). 
Because the mHealth fi eld is still in its adolescence, Mobile Academy has had similar success. Considering 
there’s a paucity of evidence demonstrating the impact that community health workers have to pay for Mobile 
of mHealth projects on health.79 Academy from their own pockets, it is impressive that 
There are some exceptions, however. In Kenya, for 21,500 have called the service. Twenty two per cent 
example, SMS for anti-retroviral treatment medication of users have already completed the course. Just over 
reminders improved adherence by approximately 25% 4,700 health workers are eligible for certifi cates for 
and SMSs on HIV/AIDS awareness contributed to an passing the course and trainees have accessed more 84
increase in those seeking HIV testing by nearly 40% in than 1.7 million minutes of content.
Uganda.80 But the bulk of the results that are available In addition to these interim indicators, anecdotal evidence 
tend to report intermediary benefi ts such as reach, is also emerging on the health impact of these services. 
uptake, cost savings and the improved reliability of For example, one senior supervisor of community 
data that comes with going from paper-based to digital health workers in the district of Gopalganj reported 
formats.81 The mHealth fi eld is in agreement on the need a spike in women coming to the health facility.85 The 
to provide robust impact assessments and cost-benefi t supervisor, who is also a doctor at the facility, attributed 
analyses to help guide new investments as well as better this increase in health-seeking behaviour to the more 
enable scale-up and replication. effective performance of health workers, nearly all of 
The same holds true for BBC Media Action’s mHealth whom have completed the Mobile Academy course.
services in Bihar, as it is too early to report on health The team has also seen anecdotal evidence in the fi eld 
impact.82 Intermediary results are encouraging, however. that women are heeding the advice found in Mobile 
In the short time that Mobile Kunji and Mobile Academy Kunji. One pregnant woman spoke, for example, of how 
have been available (seven months at the time of writing), she was convinced by her health worker – and Mobile 
community health workers have taken to these services Kunji – to register for free government health products 
with great enthusiasm. During this period, use of these and services, such as iron folic acid tablets and tetanus 
services has been eight times higher than expected. toxoid injections.86
Almost 75,000 unique users have already called It is clear from stories such as these and the high levels 
Below Community 
health workers at a Mobile Kunji, suggesting that use is going far beyond of uptake that Mobile Kunji has grabbed the attention 
Mobile Kunji training the 38,800 that have been trained directly.83 Already, of community health workers and families in rural India. 
session in Bihar, India. more than 1.4 million minutes of Mobile Kunji have And the novelty does not seem to be waning.
18  BBC MEDIA ACTION POLICY BRIEFING #7 FEBRUARY 2013 SIGN UP FOR OUR NEWSLETTER: WWW.BBCMEDIAACTION.ORG
BBC MEDIA ACTION
PART 7
Conclusion – mHealth as game changer
With much work still to go towards achieving the But when mHealth is embedded in a programme design 
Millennium Development Goals, it’s easy to embrace that is equitable, highly-targeted and at scale, it has the 
the lure of mobile phones as a quick fi x for improving potential to enable cost-effective solutions for reaching 
maternal health and reducing child mortality. marginalised populations, many of whom lack access to 
essential health information and services.
After all, we’ve long known that communication is critical 
to saving lives. Better access to information can stimulate This policy briefi ng has demonstrated 
demand for basic health services and help tackle negative how this is possible by examining one “ It is increasingly… social norms around health. particular set of mHealth services in 
the Indian state of Bihar. The briefi ng’s clear that mobiles are an 
With its rapidly expanding penetration within the 
purpose is to crystallise some of the important platform and 
developing world, mobile telephony offers major new 
key lessons for those interested in 
opportunities to build upon and augment existing health can be a game changer 
applying mHealth services to similarly 
communication efforts. As Usha Kiran Tarigopula of ”
under-served populations elsewhere in the world.
the Bill & Melinda Gates Foundation India Programmes 
put it: “It is increasingly… clear that mobiles are an Here are some of the main conclusions arising from
important platform and can be a game changer.”87 BBC Media Action’s analysis:
This does not mean that mobile phones are a panacea. • Do your homework. All mHealth projects need to 
There isn’t – nor should there be – a one-size-fi ts-all respond to the needs of the target group, whether 
approach to health communication. Indeed, a growing that is the general public, health care workers or 
body of research indicates the value of a more integrated health system administrators. Detailed research 
strategy, one that employs mobile platforms alongside is central to the planning and delivery of mHealth 
interpersonal communication, community-based solutions. This research is critical to the selection 
activities and mass media. of appropriate technology, content format (for 
 BBC MEDIA ACTION POLICY BRIEFING #7 FEBRUARY 2013 SIGN UP FOR OUR NEWSLETTER: WWW.BBCMEDIAACTION.ORG 19
BBC MEDIA ACTION
HEALTH ON THE MOVE: CAN MOBILE PHONES SAVE LIVES?
example audio versus text), and the development of • Integration. As noted earlier, the wave of the 
sustainable business models. future would seem to be health’s potential to 
offer integrated healthcare delivery systems 
• Explore ways of delivering information to which combine elements of both demand and 
existing handsets. One of the key fi ndings of 
supply. In some ways, the benchmark for just how 
this report is that it is possible to deliver health 
transformational mobiles will be is whether – and 
education to existing mobile phones effectively, 
to what extent – they can be seamlessly integrated 
using technologies such as IVR. Indeed, basic 
into health management information systems that 
handsets that are already abundant within the 
track health behaviours, even while also creating a 
developing world can be leveraged readily, 
demand for such services.
inexpensively and at scale.
Extension. The potential to extend the sort of 
• Content is king, but it must be localised and • technological innovation foregrounded in this paper 
engaging. In order to endure, content needs to be 
– ie, mobile content and delivery mechanisms that 
culturally resonant.
can reach the poor – exists in other development 
• Size matters. Commercial players are beginning to sectors as well, such as agriculture, education 
recognise that even at low charges, a large – albeit and fi nance. The emerging fi eld of mGovernance 
poor – rural market may eventually generate offers a particularly compelling example in this 
considerable revenue due to scale. And even if regard. On the supply side, mobiles are being used 
these markets don’t directly generate huge profi ts, to provide people with basic information about 
mobile services could still serve as valuable channels local and national politics via SMS and voice-based 
for data capture and future advertising revenue. communication software. On the demand side, 
• Public and private sector partnerships underlie quite basic mobile phones are being used for 
sustainability. Successful mHealth initiatives will accountability ends as diverse as monitoring 
leverage both private and public sector resources elections, improving service delivery and tackling 
88
and will engage constructively with all relevant corruption at the local level.  Here, too, however, 
stakeholders to ensure synergies, resource sharing issues of scale need further consideration.
and the creation of sustainable solutions. As Pratap Vijay Sai, Account Director at OnMobile Global 
• We need to understand how and why change Ltd, summarised the future of mHealth: “There will be 
happens. It is clear that mHealth is a potential mistakes with the introduction of any new technology. 
game changer, but not everywhere and not in all The nature of innovation is that it is uncharted and, as 
contexts. Developing a theory of such, there are risks. But the potential and excitement 
is there.”89
“ There will be mistakes change of why mHealth has value in different settings and contexts with the introduction of is key. Like any other tool for 
any new technology. The development, mHealth services 
also need to be rigorously assessed 
nature of innovation is for reach, impact, sustainability and 
that it is uncharted and, as replicability. As the fi eld progresses, 
such, there are risks. But more effort must be made to do impact assessments and cost-benefi t 
the potential and analyses.
excitement is there ” Looking towards the future, there are three exciting arenas for further 
innovation within the fi eld of mHealth, all of which also 
present challenges:
• Replication. As more and more mHealth projects 
begin to demonstrate effi cacy at scale, there will 
be a desire to replicate these models in other 
areas of the world. This is to be encouraged, but 
only if content is carefully targeted to factor in 
local contexts. There are, however, challenges 
scaling up and replicating good programmes in new 
geographies. Critically, these include a limited supply 
of a skilled mHealth workforce.
20  BBC MEDIA ACTION POLICY BRIEFING #7 FEBRUARY 2013 SIGN UP FOR OUR NEWSLETTER: WWW.BBCMEDIAACTION.ORG
Endnotes
1 Eight international development goals along with measurable targets 16 BBC Media Action. Improving Maternal and Child Health in Nepal 
were established at the Millennium Summit of the United Nations in Ghar Aagan radio programme Endline Report: 2012 August. 
2000. The goals are: (1) eradicating extreme poverty and hunger, (2) Kathmandu and London. BBC Media Action conducted baseline 
achieving universal primary education, (3) promoting gender equality (2009) and endline (2012) surveys of knowledge, attitudes, and 
and empowering women, (4) reducing child mortality rates, (5) practices related to maternal and child health in 26 districts; sample 
improving maternal health, (6) combating HIV/AIDS, malaria, and size n=2,300 at both baseline and endline; respondents 15-49 
other diseases, (7) ensuring environmental sustainability, and (8) years of age, 50% male and 50% female; survey samples selected 
developing a global partnership for development. independently of each other and proportionate to population size 
See http://www.un.org/millenniumgoals/. in rural and urban clusters. Among the survey respondents, the 
2 World Health Organization. Child Health Epidemiology. Ghar Aagan listeners were younger, married, and more likely to 
http://www.who.int/maternal_child_adolescent/epidemiology/child/en/ have had a secondary or higher level of education than were 
index.html [Accessed January 2013]. non-listeners. .
3 MDG Fact Sheet (2010) Available from 17 Brinkerhoff, DW and Bossert, TJ. (2008) Health Governance: 
http://www.un.org/millenniumgoals/pdf/MDG_FS_5_EN_new.pdf Concepts, Experience, and Programming Options. Washington, DC: 
[Accessed January 2013]. US Agency for International Development, Health Systems 20/20 
4 Requejo, J, Bryce, J and Victoria, C. (2012) Countdown to 2015: Policy Brief. 
Maternal, newborn and child survival. Building a Future for Women and 18 Rogers, EM. (1995) Diffusion of innovations. 4th ed., London: The 
Children: the 2012 report. Washington DC: World Health Free Press; Wejnert, B. (2002) Integrating Models of Diffusion of 
Organization and UNICEF, p1. Innovations: A Conceptual Framework, Annual Review of Sociology, 
5 Requejo, J, Bryce, J and Victoria, C. (2012) Countdown to 2015: Maternal, 28, pp 297–326.
newborn and child survival. Building a Future for Women and Children: the 19 Bertrand, J, Babalola, S and Skinner, J. (2012) The Impact of Health 
2012 report. Washington DC: World Health Organization and UNICEF, piii. Communication Programs. In: Obregon, R and Waisbord, S. (eds.). 
6 MDG Fact Sheet 2010. The Handbook of Global Health Communication. Oxford, UK: 
Wiley-Blackwell; McVey, D and Stapleton, J. (2000) Can anti-
7 Requejo, J, Bryce, J and Victoria, C. (2012) Countdown to 2015: smoking television advertising affect smoking behaviour? Controlled 
Maternal, newborn and child survival. Building a Future for Women and trial of the Health Education Authority for England’s anti-smoking 
Children: the 2012 report. Washington DC: World Health TV campaign. Tobacco Control, 9, pp 273–282. 
Organization and UNICEF, p1.
20 This policy briefi ng does not survey global mHealth projects or 
8 Requejo, J, Bryce, J and Victoria, C. (2012) Countdown to 2015: assess the impact of such projects, as there are many publications 
Maternal, newborn and child survival. Building a Future for Women and available on this subject. See: Vital Wave Consulting. (2009) 
Children: the 2012 report. Washington DC: World Health mHealth for Development: The Opportunity of Mobile Technology
Organization and UNICEF, p13. for Healthcare in the Developing World. Washington, DC and 
9 The four main vaccinations are DPT (diphtheria, pertussis and Berkshire, UK: UN Foundation-Vodafone Foundation Partnership; 
tetanus), polio, measles and BCG (against tuberculosis). The Center for Innovation & Technology in Public Health Public 
See Unicef (2011). India Statistics 2010, available from: Health Institute. (2012) Leveraging mobile technologies to promote 
http://www.unicef.org/infobycountry/india_statistics.html maternal & newborn health: The Current Landscape & Opportunities 
[Accessed January 2013]. for Advancement in Low-Resource Settings. Oakland, California: 
10 Requejo, J, Bryce, J and Victoria, C. (2012) Countdown to 2015: mHealth Alliance. World Health Organization. (2011) mHealth: 
Maternal, newborn and child survival. Building a Future for Women and New horizons for health through mobile technologies: second global 
Children: the 2012 report. Washington DC: World Health survey on eHealth, Global Observatory for eHealth series.
Organization and UNICEF, pp114–115. Geneva: World Health Organization; Qiang, CZ, Yamamichi,
11 Requejo, J, Bryce, J and Victoria, C. (2012) Countdown to 2015: Maternal, M, Hausman, V et al. (2012) Mobile applications for the health 
newborn and child survival. Building a Future for Women and Children: sector. Washington, DC: ICT Sector Unit, World Bank; Earth 
the 2012 report. Washington DC: World Health Organization and Institute. (2010) Barriers and Gaps Affecting mHealth in Low and 
UNICEF, p1. Middle Income Countries: A Policy White Paper. Washington, DC: 
12 MDG Fact Sheet (2010). mHealth Alliance.
21
13 Wakefi eld, M, Loken, B and Hornik, R. (2010) Use of mass media  International Telecommunication Union. The World in 2011, ICT 
campaigns to change health behaviour. The Lancet, 376 (9748), Facts and Figures, available from:
1261–1271; Bertrand, J, Babalola, S and Skinner, J. (2012) The http://www.itu.int/ITU-D/ict/facts/2011/material/ICTFactsFigures2011.pdf
Impact of Health Communication Programs. In: Obregon, R and [Accessed January 2013].
Waisbord, S. (eds). The Handbook of Global Health Communication. 22 Between 2001 and 2011, mobile phone ownership grew from 10% 
Oxford, UK: Wiley-Blackwell, pp 95–120. to 85%. All statistics come from International Telecommunication 
14 Anstey, C. (2012) Women Leaders Forum: Connecting Women and Union (2010) World Telecommunication Development Report (WTDR). 
Youth for Digital Development. Address. September 24. New York, Available from:
USA: Yale Club of New York. http://www.itu.int/dms_pub/itu-d/opb/ind/D-IND-WTDR-2010-PDF-E.pdf
23
15 The Partnership for Maternal, Newborn and Child Health. (2011)  Pablos-Méndez, P. (2012) mHealth Summit. Morning keynote address. 
Essential Interventions, Commodities and Guidelines for Reproductive, 5 December. Washington, USA: The Gaylord National Resort and 
Maternal, Newborn and Child Health (RMNCH). Geneva, Switzerland: Convention Center.
The Partnership for Maternal, Newborn and Child Health, p17. 24 Interview with the lead author, Washington, DC, USA, 3 December 2012.
 BBC MEDIA ACTION POLICY BRIEFING #7 FEBRUARY 2013 SIGN UP FOR OUR NEWSLETTER: WWW.BBCMEDIAACTION.ORG 21
HEALTH ON THE MOVE: CAN MOBILE PHONES SAVE LIVES?
25 Examples include Child Count+ by the Millennium Villages Project, nurse midwives (ANMs), Anganwadi Workers (AWWs) and 
which registers births and tracks care in fi ve African countries. Accredited Social Health Activists (ASHAs). The ANM operate out 
Supply chain management examples include SMS for Life in Uganda. of a health centre serving a population between 3000-5000 people. 
See The Center for Innovation & Technology in Public Health Public The ASHA and AWW operate at the village level and serve a 
Health Institute. (2012) Leveraging mobile technologies to promote population of 1000 households. 
maternal & newborn health: The Current Landscape & Opportunities for 42 This is true of both the phones held by community health workers 
Advancement in Low-Resource Settings. Oakland, California: mHealth as well as the families themselves. BBC Media Action (2012). Shaping 
Alliance, pp 19, 23. Changamka is a micro-health insurance mobile Demand and Practices Mobile User-testing Reports (2011, 2012).
service in Kenya – see Qiang, CZ, Yamamichi, M, Hausman, V et al. 
43
(2012) Mobile applications for the health sector. Washington, DC: ICT  6.9 million women in Bihar will be pregnant or have a child under 
Sector Unit, World Bank, p10. the age of 2 between 2013 and 2014, as per the Government of 
India’s 2011 Census. BBC Media Action Shaping Demands and 
26 Irish Global Health Education Innovation Institute (iheed). (2011) Practices Benchmarking Survey 2012. Estimation derived from India 
mHealth Education: Harnessing the Mobile Revolution to Bridge the Census 2011, Indian Readership Survey 2012 Q-1 Data.
Health Education and Training Gap in Developing Countries.
44 OnMobile is the ‘aggregator’ – i.e. a technology company that acts 
27 Examples include: BBC Media Action’s condom ringtone in India (see as an intermediary between content providers and the mobile 
Frank, LB, Chatterjee, JS, Chaudhuri, ST et al (2012): Conversation operators. It enables mobile services to be made available across 
and Compliance: Role of Interpersonal Discussion and Social Norms multiple operators. In India, OnMobile aggregates content and 
in Public Communication Campaigns. Journal of Health services across all the major operators in the country and provides 
Communication: International Perspectives, DOI:10.1080/10810730.20 the IVR platform that powers Mobile Kunji, Academy and Kilkari to 
12.665426); For frontline SMS reporting and monitoring avian fl u BBC Media Action (see part 4).
outbreaks, see: Vital Wave Consulting. (2009) mHealth for 
45
Development: The Opportunity of Mobile Technology for Healthcare in  BBC Media Action District Coordinator’s Monthly Report: September 
the Developing World. Washington, DC and Berkshire, UK: UN 2012. Khagaria, India.
Foundation-Vodafone Foundation Partnership, p59. 46 Alethea Clark-Lodge. Programme Manager, Public Private 
28 BabyCenter also reaches over 32 million moms monthly in 22 Partnerships, Microsoft. (2012) Special joint meeting of the Second 
markets from Australia to India to China: See and Third Committees of the UN General Assembly on 
http://www.babycenter.com/help-about-company. “Communication for development: Using ICT and broadband to 
29 See http://www.grameenfoundation.org/press-releases/grameen- accelerate social and economic development”. Address. 12 November. 
foundation-and-babycenter-join-forces-support-mobile-healthcare- New York, USA: Economic and Social Council Chamber, UN.
initiatives-d 47 This number increases to 23% for women in Africa, 24% in the 
and http://healthunbound.org/mama/. Middle East and 37% in South Asia. GSMA Development Fund, The 
30 Save the Children. (2011) No Child out of Reach: Time to end the Cherie Blair Foundation for Women and Vital Wave Consulting. 
health worker crisis. London: Save the Children UK, p13. (2010) Women and Mobile: A Global Opportunity. London: GSM 
Association, p6.
31 BBC Media Action. District Coordinator’s Monthly Report: September 48
2012. Patna, India.  BBC Media Action. Kilkari User-testing Report, November–December 
2012.
32 Irish Global Health Education Innovation Institute (iheed). (2011) 49
mHealth Education: Harnessing the Mobile Revolution to Bridge the  It’s also possible that by disrupting existing gender dynamics, mobile 
Health Education and Training Gap in Developing Countries, p23. phones might aggravate social tensions. In some villages, for 
example, it might not be acceptable for a female health worker to 
33 Irish Global Health Education Innovation Institute (iheed). (2011) have a more advanced phone than her husband, let alone a 
mHealth Education: Harnessing the Mobile Revolution to Bridge the community leader. This socio-political dimension of mHealth 
Health Education and Training Gap in Developing Countries, p11; Vital – particularly with respect to the question noted here of choosing 
Wave Consulting. (2009) mHealth for Development: The Opportunity basic vs. smart phones – is an interesting avenue for future research. 
of Mobile Technology for Healthcare in the Developing World. 
50
Washington, DC and Berkshire, UK: UN Foundation-Vodafone  This price could perhaps have been reduced by negotiating discounts 
Foundation Partnership, p13. with the handset manufacturer. But that wouldn’t have solved the 
34 cost problem stemming from the additional inputs noted above. Rita Devi, ASHA Health Worker. BBC Media Action (2012) District 
51
Coordinator’s Monthly Report: September 2012. Begusarai, India.  Interview with the lead author, New York, USA, 7 January 2013. 
35 Rubinstein is also Special Advisor to Jeffrey D. Sachs. Sachs, JD. (2012) mHealth Summit. Address. 5 December. Washington, 
52
USA: The Gaylord National Resort and Convention Center.  For examples, see Lemaire, J. (2011) Scaling up mobile health: 
36 elements necessary for the successful scale up of mHealth in developing  Interview with the lead author, New York, USA, 15 December 2012. countries. Geneva: Advanced Development for Africa, pp15–24 and 
37 The maternal mortality ratio is 305 per 100,000 births, while the Vital Wave Consulting. (2009) mHealth for Development: The 
neonatal mortality rate is 35 per 1000 live births and infant mortality Opportunity of Mobile Technology for Healthcare in the Developing 
rate 55 per 1000 live births. See http://censusindia.gov.in/vital_ World. Washington, DC and Berkshire, UK: UN Foundation-
statistics/AHSBulletins/fi les/07-Bihar_AHS_Bulletin__23x36_.pdf. Vodafone Foundation Partnership.
Bihar’s total fertility rate is the highest in the country. 53 Specifi cally, while the majority of men had owned a phone for a little 
See Sample Registration System Statistical Report 2010, more than a year, the majority of women had been using a phone 
http://www.censusindia.gov.in/vital_statistics/srs/Chap_3_-_2010.pdf for less than four months.
p48.
54
38  Anyone who has called a customer care line or used telephone banking  Census of India, Annual Health Survey of 2010-11.
will have used IVR. It enables people to listen to recorded audio content 
39 The Annual Health Survey 2011 fi gures report that 47.7% women by dialing a number from any type of phone (including a landline) and 
delivered in a health facility. Census of India. Annual Health Survey of interact with this content by pressing numbers on their phone. IVR has 
2010-11. its roots in tone dialing technology that was fi rst launched in 1961, and 
40 BBC Media Action Shaping Demands and Practices Benchmarking became a ubiquitous call centre technology in the 1990s. 
Survey 2012. Estimation derived from India Census 2011, Indian 55 Cherie Blair. (2012) Women Leaders Forum: Connecting Women 
Readership Survey 2012 Q-1 Data. and Youth for Digital Development. Address. September 24. New 
41 There are three cadres of community health workers: Auxiliary York, USA: Yale Club of New York.
22  BBC MEDIA ACTION POLICY BRIEFING #7 FEBRUARY 2013 SIGN UP FOR OUR NEWSLETTER: WWW.BBCMEDIAACTION.ORG
56 Interview with the lead author, New Delhi, India, 19 December 2012. 74 Report of the Expert Group to Review the Methodology for 
57 mHealth projects such as the Millennium Villages Project in Estimation of Poverty. 2009. Government of India: Planning 
sub-Saharan Africa and FrontLine SMS in Uganda illustrate the Commission.
challenge of designing and delivering content even when working 75 Private sector players also recognise that in countries where very 
from pre-existing community health manuals. See Irish Global Health little consumer profi le data exists, even heavily-subsidised or free 
Education Innovation Institute (iheed). (2011) mHealth Education: mobile services which capture accurate consumer data have huge 
Harnessing the Mobile Revolution to Bridge the Health Education and value. Due to the relatively high cost and low reach of television 
Training Gap in Developing Countries, p30. advertising in rural areas, mobile services can act as a targeted, 
58 This SEC classifi cation of Indian consumers is based on type of home effective advertising channel.
(temporary versus permanent), occupation and education. (The 76 Based on confi dential interviews with the authors.
calculations are slightly different for urban and for rural areas: the 
77
urban SEC grid uses education and occupational level of the chief  This tariff covers the operators’ cost of delivering the services 
wage earner; the rural SEC grid uses education and type of house as (including taxes) and generates revenue. Revenue is shared between 
measures of socio-economic class and segments rural India into four the mobile operators, the technology platform provider and BBC 
groups: R1, R2, R3, R4.) Source: BBC Media Action. (2012) Shaping Media Action. (As a registered non-profi t, BBC Media Action puts all 
Demands and Practices Benchmarking Survey 2012. New Delhi, ‘profi t’ towards covering operating and set up costs.) BBC Media 
India. Estimation derived from India Census 2011, IRS 2012 Q-1 Data. Action has also invested in a technical infrastructure that enables 
59 Access to television and radio is defi ned as having watched either advertising to be played around the audio content. It is now in the 
medium in the last week at the time of the survey. BBC Media process of exploring how much — or little — advertising would be 
Action. Shaping Demands and Practices Benchmarking Survey 2012. acceptable to the users of Mobile Academy, and whether revenue 
Estimate derived from India Census 2011, Indian Readership Survey from this advertising might enable BBC Media Action to reduce the 
2012 Q-1 Data. cost of the course even further.
60 Interview with the lead author, New York, USA, 30 November 2012. 78 At this point in time, the cost of the IVR platform, which is owned 
61 Examples of mHealth solutions that use games and quizzes include and supported by OnMobile, is not covered by the revenue 
ZMQ India, Young Africa Live Kenya and Text to Change Uganda. generated by Mobile Academy.
62 79 Dr Anita also features on a local radio show. Re-versioning of  Tatalović, M. (2013) ‘Mobile phones may not solve health challenges 
content through a variety of communication channels helps to in poor countries’, The Guardian, 16 January, [Accessed January 
reinforce key health messages. It also helps extend reach among 2013], http://www.guardian.co.uk/global-development/2013/jan/16/
those lacking access to one or more communication channels. mobile-phones-health-challenges-poor-countries.
63 BBC Media Action. Mobile Academy User Test Survey, September- 80 The Kenya example can be found in Ernst & Young. (2012) mHealth 
October 2011. Mobile technology poised to enable a new era in health care, p6. Uganda 
64 These costs may include the mobile operators’ network costs, example in Vital Wave Consulting. (2009) mHealth for Development: 
technical infrastructure and support, IVR, SMS and data charges, The Opportunity of Mobile Technology for Healthcare in the Developing 
replacement of handsets, updating content, promotion, etc. World. Washington, DC and Berkshire, UK: UN Foundation-Vodafone 
65 Interview with the lead author, Washington, DC, USA, 3 December Foundation Partnership, pp11, 15. For other examples, see Earth 
2012. Institute. (2010) Barriers and Gaps Affecting mHealth in Low and Middle 
Income Countries: A Policy White Paper. Washington, DC: mHealth 
66 Qiang, CZ, Yamamichi, M, Hausman, V et al. (2012) Mobile Alliance, p20; Qiang, CZ, Yamamichi, M, Hausman, V et al. (2012) 
applications for the health sector. Washington, DC: ICT Sector Unit, Mobile applications for the health sector. Washington, DC: ICT Sector 
World Bank, p12.
Unit, World Bank, p47; Lemaire. (2011), p24.
67 Chamberlain, C. (2012) Pilot-itis: What’s The Cure? BBC Media 81
Action blog, 20 June. Available from: http://www.bbc.co.uk/blogs/  Earth Institute. (2010) Barriers and Gaps Affecting mHealth in Low and 
bbcmediaaction/posts/Pilot-itis-Whats-the-cure- [Accessed January Middle Income Countries: A Policy White Paper. Washington, DC: 
2013]. See also: ExpandNet. World Health Organization. (2010) mHealth Alliance, p12.
Nine Steps for Developing a Scaling-Up Strategy. Geneva: World 82 The fi rst round of impact results will be available in mid 2013.
Health Organization, ICT Sector Unit. (2012), pp12–13, 52–54; Vital 83 Early research fi ndings suggest that health workers are sharing the short 
Wave Consulting. (2009) mHealth for Development: The Opportunity codes with families, who are then calling the numbers themselves.
of Mobile Technology for Healthcare in the Developing World. 
84
Washington, DC and Berkshire, UK: UN Foundation-Vodafone  BBC Media Action Online Reporting Interface for May–November 2012.
Foundation Partnership, pp37–38. 85 This is in reference to the cadre of female community health 
68 Qiang, CZ, Yamamichi, M, Hausman, V et al. (2012) Mobile workers called ‘ASHAs’ (Accredited Social Health Activists). ASHAs 
applications for the health sector. Washington, DC: ICT Sector Unit, are selected from the villages themselves and are accountable to 
World Bank, p13. them. They are trained to work as an interface between the 
69 For example, governments are needed to develop legal guidelines community and the public health system. Gopalganj, for example, 
around privacy and confi dentiality in mHealth specifi cally, and has 120 community health workers, 110 of whom have completed 
around the availability of broadband more broadly. the Mobile Academy course.
86
70 See ICTworks. A Ugandan mHealth Moratorium Is a Good Thing.  Dutt, P. (2013) ‘A mother’s wisdom’, BBC Media Action blog, 4 
http://www.ictworks.org/news/2012/02/22/ugandan-mhealth- January, [Accessed January 2013], http://www.bbc.co.uk/blogs/
moratorium-good-thing. [Accessed January 2013]. bbcmediaaction/posts/india_blog_priyanka_dutt_mobile_kunji
71 87 See Singh, PV. (2011) ‘Sibal holds consultation on draft national ICT  Interview with the lead author, New Delhi, 19 December 2012.
policy 2011’, Governance Now, June 15, [Accessed January 2013], 88 See for example United Nations Development Programme. (2012) 
http://www.governancenow.com/gov-next/egov/ Mobile Technologies and Empowerment: Enhancing Human 
sibal-holds-consultation-draft-national-ict-policy-2011. Development through Participation and Innovation. New York, NY: 
72 The donor is the Bill & Melinda Gates Foundation. UNDP Bureau for Development Policy.
73 Dubey, B. (2012) ‘Mobile phones for 2 lakh health workers’, 89 Interview with the lead author, New Delhi/Bangalore, India, 19 
Hindustan Times, 13 October, p3. December 2012.
 BBC MEDIA ACTION POLICY BRIEFING #7 FEBRUARY 2013 SIGN UP FOR OUR NEWSLETTER: WWW.BBCMEDIAACTION.ORG 23
HEALTH ON THE MOVE: CAN MOBILE PHONES SAVE LIVES?
Acknowledgments
The authors would like to thank all those who agreed to BBC Media Action is the BBC’s development charity. The content 
be interviewed and those who made valuable comments of this briefing is the responsibility of BBC Media Action. Any views 
on a number of drafts of this report. In addition to those expressed in this paper should not be taken to represent those of 
acknowledged in the footnotes, particular thanks go to the BBC itself, or of any donors supporting the work of the charity.
Aoife Allen, Ashutosh Awasthi, Rachael Borlase, Liberty Bunce, This policy briefing was prepared thanks to funding from the
Kirsty Cockburn, Priyanka Dutt, Sujata Ganguly, Anna Godfrey, UK Department for International Development which supports 
Catherine Harbour, Caroline Howie, Nishant Kumar, the policy and research work of BBC Media Action. 
Malika Malhotra, Jai Mendiratta, Sam Miller, Radharani Mitra, 
Tanmay Guha Roy, Aseem Sharma, Vishal Shastri, Authors: Yvonne MacPherson and Sara Chamberlain
Prakhar Srivastava, Caroline Sugg, Siddhartha Swarup, Commissioning editors: Delia Lloyd and James Deane
Marissa Taylor, Kathryn Tomlinson and Sophia Wilkinson.    Copy editor: Lorna Fray 
Communications co-ordinator: Rachel Simpson
Designer: Lance Bellers
BBC Media Action (the new name for BBC World Service Trust) is registered in England & Wales
under Charity Commission number 1076235 and Company number 3521587.
Registered office: Broadcasting House, Portland Place, London W1A 1AA.
Tel +44 (0) 20 8008 0001
Fax +44 (0) 20 8008 5970
Email media.action@bbc.co.uk
Web bbcmediaaction.org
©BBC Media Action
           Printed on paper from recycled and sustainable sources
