MOBILE INFORMATION FOR  
MATERNAL HEALTH 
Providing voice-based educational messages to improve maternal and child 
health in Ghana  
BEHAVIOR CHANGE COMMUNICATION 
Implementation date: 2013 to 2015 
Maternal and infant health is an ongoing challenge in Ghana. The lifetime risk of a mother dying during pregnancy or childbirth is 
one in 35, while one in 24 children die in their first year of life. The outcomes are worse in rural areas with limited access to 
health services. Fortunately, many of these deaths can be prevented by educating mothers on topics such as when to seek 
medical help during a difficult birth, proper nutrition, and simple measures to protect against malaria.  
To address this challenge, VOTO Mobile partnered with Savannah Signatures to roll out mobile messaging to women in Northern 
Ghana during and after their pregnancies. During a pilot study of SMS messages, Savannah Signatures found that 80 percent of 
women subscribing to the original service were non-literate; they were either unable to understand the messages or were 
dependent on relatives or friends to translate the messages. As a result of this finding, a voice-based solution was developed to 
engage women across all literacy levels. The original messages, designed by Mobile Alliance for Maternal Action (MAMA), were 
also adapted and translated into four local languages spoken by the majority of women in the area.  
About Mobile Information for Maternal Health 
Women usually hear of the program through a local health information via SMS. Through redialing the toll-free number 
 
clinic, or by their peers. They are able to register through from which they receive the messages, mothers can re-listen 
the clinic, or text/“flash” a number and receive a call back to previous messages, contact a live midwife with urgent 
w ith an automated prompt to obtain details such as age, questions, or unregister from the service. This also allows 
location, language and stage of pregnancy . Each mother listeners who were too busy to hear the message the first 
automatically receives two calls a week in her own language time around, outside of mobile coverage, or out of battery 
 
with information on the stage of her pregnancy and the chance to catch up on their own time.  
suggestions to keep her and her baby healthy. The 
 Interactive voice response (IVR) survey questions are information is also intended to counteract those traditional 
embedded into the message to measure if mothers are 
beliefs that often prevent women from accessing medical 
making healthy decisions and if the content is being retained. 
h elp, even in life-threatening situations. Open-ended questions are also asked to receive feedback 
Every voice subscriber can also opt-in to receive the for improving the quality of the content.  
 
 
20  |  mHealth Compendium Volume 4 
Evaluation and Results 
Savannah Signatures and VOTO have been monitoring usage and perceived usefulness of the system. Thus far, the program 
has placed over 65,000 phone calls and served 5,400 women in Northern Ghana. About 3,500 women have completed the 
program while the remaining 1,900 are currently enrolled. Approximately 73 percent of women find the calls useful while 15 
percent state they are not helpful.  
Through active system monitoring and tracking, drop-off rates over time were assessed. It was found that messages lasting 
90 seconds or less retain over 70 percent of recipients, resulting in modification of all the program’s message lengths into 
this timeframe. The majority of women also listen to at least 80 percent of the message, indicating mothers appreciate the 
messages and find them valuable. Those who choose not to listen will end the call at the start of the message, possibly 
because the time of the call was inconvenient or mothers did not want to hear the messages. Very few women hang up in 
the middle of the message. 
Do They Appreciate It? How useful are the messages you’ve been 
receiving each week in helping you with your pregnancy?  
Very useful 
Somewhat helpful 
Not helpful 
Lessons Learned 
 Voice enables many opportunities to iterate content throughout the program through the advanced analytics captured, 
including the exact seconds of content listened to and responses to questions embedding questions within the voice call  
 Utilizing an easy registration process and engaging women during 
the on-boarding process increases program involvement; This can 
Geographic Coverage: Northern Ghana 
include sending the voice messages while the woman is at the 
clinic and encouraging her to save the phone number in her Implementation Partners: Savannah Signatures, 
VOTO Mobile  
phone for future reference 
Funder: STAR-Ghana (association of four donors: 
 Translating messages into the local language and incorporating 
USAID, DFID, DANIDA, and EU Aid)  
voice messages are crucial to maintaining mother’s engagement 
and comprehension of the material Contact Information: 
VOTO Mobile | Kevin Schuster, Partnerships (+1-
 It is important to obtain feedback from users to determine and 
339-223-7293, kevin@votomobile.org) 
analyze message effectiveness; 
STAR-Ghana | Wendy Otu, Thematic-Lead at 
 Place key information at the beginning of each mobile message, as STAR-Ghana (wendy.otu@star-ghana.org)  
not all recipients listen to the entire voice message  
See References on page 89. 
Conclusion 
Using VOTO's platform, Savannah Signatures is able to provide valuable maternal health information through both SMS and 
voice-based messaging, ensuring that women of all literacy levels may participate. When making improvements to the system, 
it will be important to investigate why some women do not find the messages helpful and what can be done to increase 
permeability, such as utilizing a different communications channel or providing tailored content for different users.  
 
mHealth Compendium Volume 4  |  21 
