Reported SMS literacy was 
low, but women reported 
household members could 
read the messages to 
them. Pregnant women in 
intervention groups were 
three times more likely to 
access ANC as compared 
to the control group. 
mCARE  
Enhancing Neonatal Survival in Rural South Asia
IMPLEMENTATION DATE:  October 2011 to January 2015
Connecting people, compressing time, and creating opportunities
Over the past decade, despite marked progress in reducing under-five mortality, neonatal mortality 
continues to contribute to more than 55 percent of under-five child deaths in Bangladesh.1 In the 
rural northwest of the country, around 26 percent of pregnant women receive the World Health 
Organization (WHO)-recommended four complete antenatal care (ANC) visits, and 27 percent of 
all women receive a postnatal care (PNC) check-up by a trained medical practitioner within two days 
of childbirth, a practice considered essential to the health of the mother and the vulnerable neonate.2 
More than 20 percent of infants are born preterm, and nearly half are low birth weight—unprepared 
to encounter the many challenges home-based deliveries present.3 
Our community-based research studies, over a span of nearly two decades, of maternal and neonatal 
mortality within the rural populations of northwest Bangladesh identified information gaps between 
the rural community and community health workers (CHWs) beginning with low rates of early 
identified incident pregnancies, no formal mechanisms to remind pregnant women of when an ANC 
visit is due, the importance of these visits, and a lack of birth reporting timeliness.4 These all contribute 
to reaching the mother or newborn in time, compounding referral inefficiencies that interrupt the 
provision of life-saving strategies which increase the risk of preventable neonatal death. The mCARE 
study involved extensive formative research, stakeholder engagement activities, and preliminary testing 
of the mCARE technical system to digitally optimize the workflow of CHWs and create opportunities 
for them to better connect and engage with their clients (pregnant women and their newborns) via 
the mCARE system.
78  n  SERVICE DELIVERY 
Neelu Singh
About mCARE Lessons Learned 
The study involved developing a comprehensive mHealth n mCARE promoted use of reliable supervisory data system called mCARE, which is an integrated mobile- to monitor performance in real-time and identify gaps in 
phone and server-based software system for CHWs that helps service delivery.
them to digitally manage their daily workflow, beginning 
n Labor notification rates are low as there are concerns 
with systematic pregnancy surveillance, identify and register around the costs of facility-based delivery, forced cesaer-
pregnant women, provide scheduled ANC and postnatal care ean, and distrust of institutional competence.
reminders, receive labor and birth notifications from clients, 
and offer referral and emergency support and timely and n Adding a layer of quality to ANC and PNC is recom-
comprehensive essential newborn care (ENC). mended.
mCARE project was implemented at the Johns Hopkins 
JiVitA research site in Gaibandha district of rural northwest Conclusion 
Bangladesh. JiVitA community health research workers 
(CHRWs) used mCARE to enroll 800 pregnant women The integrated mCARE system did improve timeliness, 
and determined gestational age based on reported last coverage, and utilization of ANC in the intervention group. 
menstrual period (LMP). Based on LMP date, mCARE CHRWs received automated daily work schedules on their 
server automatically scheduled up to four ANC visits for phones, enlisting women due for ANC, PNC, ENC, and also 
each enrolled pregnant woman, divided into intervention received labor and birth notifications. The system provided 
and control groups. SMS reminders to access timely ANC opportunities to eliminate critical delays due to delayed 
were sent to women in the intervention group, as well as scheduling, lack of timely decision-making, unidentified 
to CHRWs responsible for their well-being, creating both “missed“ contacts in the ANC or PNC periods. The mCARE 
demand and supply-side reminders. Pregnant women in system enhances frontline health worker performance by 
the control group received no targeted reminders by health eliminating complex manual processes, tabulation, and paper-
workers or mobile message. Research data collectors conducted based record-keeping.
verification visits to assess care utilization in both groups. Based on the success and results of mCARE I, the mCARE 
II study will be implemented in the summer of 2015 where 
Evaluation and Results the primary focus will be to train over 100 Government 
of Bangladesh CHWs in one entire district of Bangladesh 
Digital census enumeration was conducted for 11,836 and transfer ground implementation of mCARE II 
women in the study area to determine eligible women for technical system to them. The data collected during this 
pregnancy surveillance. It found that 6,628 married women implementation phase will be linked to the national Ministry 
of reproductive age were eligible for pregnancy surveillance. of Health health management information system in 
Eighty-nine percent of women eligible for pregnancy Bangladesh. n
surveillance had access to mobile phones. Self-reported short 
message service (SMS) literacy was low, with 73.6 percent 
women unable to read and 88.1 percent unable to send an 
SMS. Reported SMS iteracy was low, but women reported 
household members could read the messages to them. 
Pregnant women in intervention groups were three times 
more likely to access ANC as compared to the control group. 
Preferred ANC providers were local nongovernmental 
organizations (NGOs) such as BRAC and Smiling Sun (63 
percent), public facilities (25 percent) and private clinics 
(11.8 percent). Of the women in the control group who did 
not access ANC, 81.8 percent reported interest in future Geographic Coverage:  Gaibandha District, Bangladesh, South Asia 
ANC. Lack of knowledge regarding ANC (35 percent), 
distance (31.3 percent), and objection from family (8.6 Implementation Partners: UNICEF 
percent) were reported as some of the primary reasons for Donor: UBS Optimus Foundation, Switzerland 
not accessing ANC by the control group. Contact Information: Dr. Alain B. Labrique, Director, Johns Hop-
kins University Global mHealth Initiative alabriqu@gmail.com 
mHEALTH COMPENDIUM  VOLUME 5  n  79
