INNOVATIONS AT SCALE FOR 
COMMUNITY ACCESS AND LASTING 
EFFECTS (inSCALE) 
A community health worker decision support system in Mozambique 
SERVICE DELIVERY 
Implementation date: June 2013 
Since 2010, approximately 1,950 community health workers (CHWs) in Mozambique have been deployed to improve access to 
basic health care in remote areas of the country, focusing primarily on maternal, newborn and child health (MNCH). Locally 
known as Agentes Polivalentes Elementares (APEs), these trained community members conduct extensive health promotion and 
education activities. They work in the case management of malaria for patients of all ages, and pneumonia and diarrhea in 
children under five. APEs also refer pregnant women, newborns and children with danger signs to the nearest health facility. 
In order to improve the quality of care provided by APEs and scale-up the program nation-wide, Malaria Consortium, Dimagi, 
Inhambane provincial health directorate, the Mozambique Ministry of Health (MOH) and other partners have worked to address 
key challenges through the five-year inSCALE implementation research project. A randomized control trial conducted by the 
project studied the effects of mHealth applications on CHW motivation, supervision and performance, and ultimately coverage of 
appropriate treatment for children with diarrhea, pneumonia and malaria. 
About inSCALE 
Malaria Consortium’s Innovations at Scale for Community stock levels. Each APE also receives a monthly automated 
A ccess and Lasting Effects (inSCALE) project is responsible credit allowance to call peers and supervisors for additional 
for Mozambique’s largest mHealth deployment to date and support.  
provides an opportunity to explore the potential impact of 
t echnology solutions on child care services delivered CommCare HQ incorporates Active Data Management 
through a national health system. The two main features capabilities which allow facility and district-based supervisors 
include the APE CommCare support tool and the to receive weekly and monthly summary reports on  
CommCare HQ web-based, real-time dashboard for diagnosis, treatment and follow-up of patients, along with 
program planners. recommendations on needed actions. They can assess each 
APE’s performance using custom competency checklists and 
T hrough the use of images and audio, the inSCALE APE provide constructive feedback over the phone or during 
CommCare application walks APEs through the consultation monthly supervision meetings. APEs and health facility-level 
steps to assess, classify, treat and refer patients. The decision supervisors also receive monthly motivational SMS messages. 
s upport tool includes a checklist of mild and severe signs and 
provides treatment guidance. In addition, APEs can use a All data is stored on a web-based server that provides real-
built-in and simplified respiratory timer to detect pneumonia time information on each individual case, epidemiological 
s ymptoms. Individual patient data is stored on the phone data, and drug stock indicators. Stakeholders at the 
and, once a network connection has been established, is sent provincial and district-level statistics bureau use the 
to a server, along with weekly aggregated case data and drug CommCare HQ reporting dashboard to access and analyze 
the data.  
66  |  mHealth Compendium Volume 4 
Eleni Capsaskis, Malaria Consortium 
 Evaluation and Results 
While the process evaluation is currently ongoing, preliminary 
results have been collected. Since implementation, 132 APEs 
(out of almost 300 deployed in the whole province), 47 
facility-based supervisors, and six district APE coordinators in 
the six selected districts have been using the inSCALE 
CommCare application. Quantitative results reveal that 60 
percent of APEs have received one or more calls from their 
supervisor in the last 30 days, while 80 percent have called 
their supervisor for help or support in the last 30 days. About 
70 percent of APEs state they always use CommCare in their 
work and that it helps them to remember what symptoms to 
look for. The three most preferred aspects of the tool are 
the job aid for newborns, children and pregnant women, the 
improved respiratory rate timer, and treatment and dosing 
Figure 1: Conceptual framework for the inSCALE APE CommCare instructions.  
intervention package 
Initial qualitative findings show the application contributes to 
enhancing the community recognition of the APEs, leading to increased legitimacy and motivation of APEs. Health facility 
supervisors find weekly reports of drug stock data useful for providing access to continuous and accurate medicine use and 
for addressing commodity gaps. Real-time data also allows for quick identification of active and non-active APEs, the number 
of diagnosed and treated cases, and the number of referred cases, disaggregated by cause. 
Lessons Learned 
 The APE consultation and decision support system was developed based on already existing and well-tested paper-based 
job aids and is fully aligned with MOH diagnostic and treatment protocols for community-based care, thus allowing a 
smooth transition from paper-based manuals to a phone-based tool 
 System-generated reports follow the MOH standard reporting templates and utilize the national rubric for 
comprehensive case management to ensure that supervisors can 
link them back to their paper-based system 
 A user-centered design was critical to development and involved 
MOH staff and APEs in every step; User feedback was obtained Geographic Coverage: Six districts in 
through interviews and APE observation during patient visits and Inhambane province, Southern Mozambique  
throughout the iteration process 
Implementation Partners: Malaria Consortium, 
 The “training of trainers” approach was key to generating project 
Dimagi, Inhambane provincial health directorate, 
ownership and sustainability; Malaria Consortium trained health 
Mozambique Ministry of Health, London School of 
cadres at various levels of the provincial health system who then 
Hygiene & Tropical Medicine, University College of 
trained APEs and supervisors in their respective catchment areas 
London  
 Additional Android phone introductory sessions and an 
AppLocker application helped APEs learn the necessary technical Funder: Bill & Melinda Gates Foundation  
literacy levels for efficient phone usage while avoiding overuse of 
other data-heavy applications  Contact Information: 
Malaria Consortium | Karin Källander, Program 
Conclusion Coordinator (tel: +44-(0)20-7549-0270, 
mobile: +44-747-3600-010, 
The inSCALE APE CommCare App is already addressing some of the k.kallander@malariaconsortium.org) 
key challenges faced by the APEs and their supervisors through 
strengthening their relationship, enabling APEs to conduct high quality Dimagi, Inc. | Ryan Hartford, Country Director, 
work, and connecting them with the communities they serve. The Mozambique (+1-617-649-2214, 
application has the potential to incorporate additional job aids and rhartford@dimagi.com) 
tools for the management of a wider range of diseases. It can also 
Bill & Melinda Gates Foundation | Paulin Basinga, 
become a valuable tool to strengthen health systems and improve 
Senior Program Officer (+1 206 770 2144, 
quality of care through community-based delivery systems by utilizing 
Paulin.Basinga@gatesfoundation.org) 
epidemiological data for improved forecasting and supply distribution, 
and for providing information to the MOH and Provinces to support See References on page 89. 
their decisions about targeted interventions and approaches.  
 
mHealth Compendium Volume 4  |  67 
