The HELP platform is 
scalable, replicable, and 
adaptable to evolving needs 
and technology in order 
to drive positive health 
outcomes and provide  
core skills and tools to  
critical cadres of health 
workers in Africa.
HELP: Health Enablement and Learning Platform
IMPLEMENTATION DATE:  June 2013 to May 2014 
Training and empowering community health workers on basic mobile phones 
Africa has a drastic shortage of community health workers (CHWs). Although many ministries 
of health have made a community health strategy an integral part of their approach to universal 
health coverage, the training and empowerment of CHWs remains a challenge. Many ministries face 
common challenges, such as expensive classroom training with unpredictable attendance, lack of 
reliable reporting from CHWs in the field, declining CHW engagement, and a high dropout rate in the 
absence of paid incentives.  
The HELP mobile learning (mLearning) solution is a learning platform, aligned to the Kenya Ministry 
of Health CHW curriculum, for health worker training and empowerment. It provides initial training, 
complementary to face-to-face training, and continuous professional development to CHWs to help 
reinforce critical teachings. HELP employs a structured learning mPedagogy which applies advanced 
learning principles and approaches to basic mobile channels in a combination of “patterns” that 
simulate the learning experience and outcomes of traditional face-to-face training methods.
About HELP
Ap artnership comprising Amref Health Africa, Accenture, amongst CHWs; 70 percent of these devices, however, were Safaricom, and Mezzanine collaborated to design, basic or feature phones and smartphones were uncommon. 
develop, and implement HELP. The initial pilot phase Accordingly, an innovative solution that makes CHW training 
of HELP aimed to determine the potential of mobile material available via short message service (SMS) and 
technology to increase the number of well-trained health unstructured supplementary service data (USSD) text, and 
workers in Africa. An integrated mLearning and community prerecorded audio (IVR) was designed. 
health services platform was developed to empower, train, In June 2013, Accenture Foundation and mPesa Foundation 
and motivate CHWs in Kenya. Field research in Kenya jointly funded the 10-month Phase 1 project to build, test, 
indicated that penetration of mobile devices was 98 percent and pilot an initial version of HELP, focusing on providing 
82  n  SERVICE DELIVERY 
HELP Project
multichannel training to 318 CHWs and their supervisors, or n CHWs enjoy mLearning and benefit from this 
community health extension workers (CHEWs) from rural, continuous, flexible training approach.
urban, and nomadic community health units across Kenya. A 
n A toll-free help desk enables end-users to access 
Ministry of Health (MOH)-approved pedagogical model was support when they need it.
employed and nine modules from the MOH’s national CHW 
curriculum were converted into mobile content. n Group chat function empowers CHWs to seek support 
and make decisions.
Individualized, contextual, and sequential modules include 
role plays, decision-tree support, mini-lectures, quizzes, and n Account for the specific context in which the solution 
games in English and Swahili. HELP also includes a group will be used, including language preference and basic versus 
chat feature which allows CHWs to share knowledge and smartphone prevalence, and tailor the solution to that. 
communicate directly with supervisors. CHEWs receive n Collaboration amongst partners is crucial for 
weekly reports on CHW performance and are able to target achieving scale and ensuring the solution meets 
those in need of additional support. Finally, users have access the needs of health workers and implementing 
to a dedicated, toll-free help desk organizations.
Evaluation and Results Conclusion 
An evaluative descriptive design using both qualitative Amref Health Africa and partners established the potential 
and quantitative methods was applied to assess project impact of an mLearning platform to improve the effectiveness 
performance during the pilot phase and document the of CHW training programs in Kenya. The HELP platform is 
experience of CHWs and other stakeholders. A control scalable, replicable, and adaptable to evolving needs and tech-
group received only traditional face-to-face 10-day training. nology in order to drive positive health outcomes and provide 
A complementary training group covered the curriculum core skills and tools to health workers in Africa. Building on 
face-to-face and then again for select mLearning topics. The these results, the partners have launched the second phase 
third and last group received the mLearning topics only via of the project aimed at training 3,000 CHWs and CHEWs 
mobile phone. All groups received a pretest, a posttest, and a across Kenya, incorporating smartphone features, and lever-
final assessment four months after training was completed. aging other enhanced functionalities. A major aim of Phase 
By the end of the training deployment, over 215,000 content 2 is to test the business model with other organizations and 
SMSs had been sent to CHWs, 140,000 minutes of IVR implementers in order to refine the solution and value prop-
audio had been listened to, and 8,500 group chat messages osition, and test the viability for scale through collaboration. 
had been sent between CHWs and CHEWs. The results The long-term vision is to build HELP into an “mLearning 
revealed that the CHWs unanimously adopted mLearning Academy” that will deliver accredited training across multi-
irrespective of their location, socioeconomic status, ple mobile channels to various cadres of health workers and 
educational level, and previous work experience. Seventy- managers. The mLearning Academy would provide access to 
eight percent of the CHWs completed all the material, with real-time, on-demand learning and tools, complementing the 
a 95 percent completion rate within any individual topic. curriculum and learning opportunities delivered in classrooms, 
The average quiz score was 80 percent (an improvement resulting in improved knowledge and practice, and allowing 
of up to 20 percent in some areas). Satisfaction rating health workers to advance professionally. The ultimate result is 
amongst users was over 90 percent; 55 percent cited that a improved service delivery and health outcomes. n  
major benefit of HELP was the ability to access information 
quickly in an emergency. The remote areas in Samburu and Geographic Coverage:  Three different geographical sites in Kenya 
Mwingi showed up to 25 percent higher engagement rates that represented a varied cross-section of livelihoods in 
than urban groups, implying that the solution might be the country: Kibera (urban slum neighborhood of Nairobi);  
needed more where CHWs are geographically dispersed. Mwingi (rural district);  Samburu (nomadic pastoralist region 
in Northern Arid Lands)
Lessons Learned Implementation Partners: Amref Health Africa; Accenture; Kenya Ministry of Health; Mezzanine; Safaricom
Donors: Accenture Foundation, m-Pesa Foundation
n mLearning using basic phones is an effective Contact Information: Caroline Mbindyo, eHealth Program  
replacement for classroom training, and leads to Manager, Amref Health Africa, caroline.mbindyo@amref.org 
better results than face-to-face training exclusively. 
mHEALTH COMPENDIUM  VOLUME 5  n  83
