Tracking the first 1000 days of life, preventing 
unnecessary mother and newborn deaths
Photo by Todd Shapera
62  n  RAPID SMS RWANDA 
RapidSMS Rwanda
The overarching goal in instituting RapidSMS was to make each 
pregnancy “everyone’s business.” RapidSMS aims to ensure that 
no woman dies due to pregnancy or delivery and to have all 30 
districts record zero preventable maternal deaths. 
Between 2000 and 2015, Rwanda achieved some of the world’s highest average annual reductions in both the 
maternal mortality ratio and under-five mortality rate. Rwanda Demographic and Health Survey data show that the 
maternal mortality ratio fell from one of the world’s highest in 2005 at 750 deaths per 100,000 live births down to 
210 in 2014, and the under-five mortality rate declined by two-thirds during the same period. 1,2  
Rwanda’s 45,000 volunteer community health workers (CHWs) have been major contributors to this success. Each 
of the country’s 15,000 villages has three CHWs who provide a broad range of preventive, promotional, and curative 
services. Starting in 2009, the Rwanda Ministry of Health (MOH), together with UNICEF, Management Sciences for 
Health (MSH), and other partners, initiated an mHealth system with CHWs called RapidSMS, which has become a key 
intervention in promoting maternal and neonatal health.  
The overarching goal in instituting RapidSMS was to make each pregnancy “everyone’s business.” RapidSMS aims to 
ensure that no woman dies due to pregnancy or delivery and to have all 30 districts record zero preventable maternal 
deaths. This system has since been extended to enable CHWs to monitor and report on a wider array of health events 
involving pregnant women and children for the critical window of 1,000 days – from the first signs of pregnancy 
through the age of two years – when risk of death is highest.
About RapidSMS
R apidSMS is a mobile phone-based technology being used related to specific behavior change communications cam-throughout Rwanda to improve community maternal paigns or health threats that CHWs should be aware of in 
and child health. This tool helps CHWs track women’s ante- their community.
natal care visits, identify women at risk, refer them to health The RapidSMS system enables CHWs to rapidly communi-
facilities, and improve communication with the facilities in cate with other levels of the health system, promotes routine 
the event of an emergency. The system also requires CHWs contacts between CHWs and at-risk populations in their 
to regularly reach out to families at the household level and communities, and enables supervisors at the health center 
send simple text messages to the MOH reporting significant level and above to monitor CHWs’ performance. It has a 
events occurring during a woman’s pregnancy, delivery, and very simple message format and works with basic mobile 
the first year after the infant’s birth. Once received at the phones. Plasticized instruction cards serve as quick reference 
central level, these messages are stored in a web-enabled guides that make it very easy for CHWs to send messages for 
database and used to inform the ministry’s strategic plan- each type of alert.  Since their simple mobile phones lack the 
ning, technical supervision, monitoring and evaluation, and capacity to store all of the guidelines for health service deliv-
resource coordination.  For certain messages sent by CHWs, ery and use of the RapidSMS system, these A4 cards list the 
the system raises an alert and provides immediate feedback codes for each event and give examples of how to compose 
with guidance to the CHWs about specific actions to take.  the different type of SMSs CHWs may need to send.  Each 
It can also be used for widespread distribution of messages message contains the National ID number of the mother 
mHEALTH COMPENDIUM  SPECIAL EDITION 2016  n  63
Figure 1. 
RapidSMS Rwanda sample 
registration code format
so that they can be linked together and allow for tracking the 
history of individual pregnant women.
The slightest evidence of warning signs, as itemized in the 
list of codes, should prompt the CHWs to not only refer the 
woman for care but also accompany the mother to a facility, 
reducing a potentially life-threatening delay in receipt of care.
Program Design Process
With technical and financial support from UNICEF, Rap- budget, design a training curriculum, and train over 1,000 
idSMS was first piloted by the MOH in Musanze District community health supervisors who then trained over 45,000 
in 2009. The application follows national and international CHWs, many with no experience in the use of mobile 
guidelines for care and was intended to address three delays phones. Through IHSSP, USAID also procured and dis-
which can cause maternal death, namely in seeking care, tributed phones to 10,000 of the CHWs in 30 districts and 
reaching care, and in effective intervention. The logic of provided the first series of plasticized instruction cards for 
the program is to have 100% registration, following up on the CHWs to prepare and send messages through the system. 
identified risk cases, ensuring assisted deliveries, and using When the system was initially set up, it had a fairly basic in-
emergency alerts when appropriate. terface that enabled staff at the health center level and above 
After demonstrating positive results in the pilot district to monitor the logs of messages received, but only provided 
(highlighted below), the MOH began a national roll-out limited decision support. Significant effort went into design-
of the system in June 2010. The USAID-funded Integrated ing compelling graphic interfaces that calculated indicators 
Health Systems Strengthening Project (IHSSP), managed and helped these staff more easily navigate their way through 
by MSH, helped the ministry to develop a roll-out plan and the system.
Growth in Scale
The system was introduced in 2009 by the MOH’s Commu- information system (SISCom) nationwide, helped the MOH 
nity Health Desk with UNICEF support in Musanze, one of develop a roll-out plan, budget, curriculum, and schedule 
Rwanda’s 30 districts. By May 2010, one year after initiating of training of trainer sessions to be implemented across the 
the RapidSMS system, prenatal care visits in Musanze Dis- country.  The initiative also benefited from support from 
trict had increased by 25%, home deliveries had dropped by the highest levels of government, with Her Excellency Mrs. 
54%, health facility deliveries rose by 26%, and under-five Jeannette Kagame, First Lady of the Republic of Rwanda, 
mortality had declined by 48%.  participating in the ceremony to hand out the first 10,000 
Based on this success, the MOH, through its eHealth phones.  Other partners working at the district level, includ-
technical working group and the Community Health Desk, ing HealthBuilders, focused on reinforcing the use of the 
strongly urged other partners to participate in a national system through supervision and the creation of dashboards 
roll-out of RapidSMS.  USAID provided funding for 10,000 that enabled health center staff to monitor the coverage of 
phones, the Bill & Melinda Gates Foundation provided the different services provided by their CHWs.  
another 5,000 (through the Phones for Health project), In November 2012, the first RapidSMS retreat took place 
and the MOH purchased the remainder.  MSH, which had where the group expanded RapidSMS from one module that 
recently introduced a new computerized community health tracked the pregnancy cycle (version 1) to version 2 which 
64  n  RAPID SMS RWANDA 
consists of six modules: the pregnancy cycle, post-delivery SMS messages are sent to a toll-free number—using a short 
period, newborn care, deadly childhood diseases (pneumonia, code—so there is no cost to the CHWs to use the system.  
diarrhea, and malaria), nutrition, and children living with The MOH pays the SMS charges. Initially, this project was 
disabilities (cleft palate/cleft lip). The latter was later dropped linked with Phones for Health, which included a public-pri-
to avoid overloading CHWs with multiple program activities. vate partnership with MTN and Voxiva, so the SIM cards 
The system currently receives approximately 12,000 messages and server hosting were provided for free, and SMS messages 
a day (average since January 2016) from CHWs. The MOH were charged at a discounted rate.   When that initiative was 
is interested in using the system for other data-collection discontinued in 2014, the server was relocated to Rwanda’s 
needs, including immediate reporting of maternal deaths state-of-the-art National Data Center. 
from hospitals.
Evaluation and Results 
Rwanda has achieved impressive progress in reducing ma- RapidSMS provided a source of data on the activities of each 
ternal and child mortality between 2010 and 2015. While a CHW,  the Community Health Desk saw an opportunity to 
key intervention implemented by the MOH, RapidSMS was address this by using the RapidSMS data to calculate specific 
one of a number of initiatives in the health system over this indicators of individual performance and split the cooper-
period of time, making it challenging to attribute specific ative’s PBF funds to reward CHWs in the top performance 
improvements in maternal and child health to the mHealth quintiles with a greater share of the funds.  
program alone. This new approach, utilizing individual-level RapidSMS 
 An impact evaluation of a separate program, Rwanda’s data, is still in the process of nationwide implementation. 
CHW performance-based financing (PBF) program, imple- Now health centers are aware of the number of pregnant 
mented from 2012-2014 tested several different approaches women in their community, CHWs can easily communicate 
to incentivizing high-impact services at the community level. with health centers during emergencies, and patients needing 
The study looked at both the demand and supply sides of urgent care can receive ambulance transportation to health 
service delivery.  The study found relatively little impact from facilities. The system helps to ensure that CHWs in the com-
the CHW performance incentives for a variety of reasons: munity maintain regular face-to-face contact at the house-
performance was calculated at the CHW cooperative level hold level with all pregnant women and infants. This keeps 
(there is one cooperative per health center catchment area), the CHWs accountable to the people they serve, as the data 
and all CHWs received the same amount within a cooper- are triangulated with information on expected pregnancies 
ative, regardless of their individual efforts.  Realizing that and births that are collected at the health facilities. 
Sample regional dashboard
mHEALTH COMPENDIUM  SPECIAL EDITION 2016  n  65
Photo by Ivan Ngoboka
Figure 2.  
RapidSMS Rwanda Contiuum of Care Model 
Lessons Learned in Program Implementation and Scaling
The initial implementation plan for the RapidSMS program Other key challenges encountered included the following:
did not account for the challenges of charging phones in 
n Misunderstanding by CHWs of case definitions for 
a village setting without convenient access to electricity, RapidSMS indicators
nor the malfunctioning of nearly one-quarter of the phone 
chargers during the first year of national roll-out.  Some n Difficulties in using mobile phones due to English lan-
solar chargers were purchased but have not been available in guage barriers and lack of knowledge  of how to use the 
sufficient quantities.  In most cases, the CHW cooperatives text message capabilities of their phones
replaced chargers by using their own funds. n Limited use of RapidSMS data by local leaders and med-
A discounted SMS rate had been negotiated for the program, ical personnel (doctors and nurses) 
however, after several years; the negotiated cost per mes- n Lack of full coverage of all pregnant women reported by 
sage was actually higher than the market price, which had CHWs using RapidSMS, especially in urban areas
decreased over time.  Organizations need to ensure that the 
n Lack of printed registers for recording RapidSMS mes-
contract with their mobile network provider enables them to sages for better follow-up
index their discount on the actual rates.  
n Insufficient funding for supervisors to follow up with 
CHWs on RapidSMS activities
66  n  RAPID SMS RWANDA 
Future Plans 
RapidSMS Rwanda is currently operating at national scale. in pregnant women that need to be handled carefully 
The system is used by over 45,000 CHWs and their supervi- (e.g. HIV+) (MSH)
sors in 475 health centers, and provides information for deci-
n Connect the program  with a mobile money system to 
sion-making at the national level as well. Part of the platform pay CHW performance incentives directly through their 
is being upgraded to RapidPro, an open source platform phones based on metrics calculated using data reported 
released in 2014 which features easier-to-configure data visu- through RapidSMS (MSH)
alization. As part of Rwanda’s Health Enterprise Architecture 
initiative, the MOH worked with many partners (includ- n Continue to support the use of the RapidSMS data by 
ing Jembi Health Systems, Regenstrief, and InSTEDD) to health center and district-level staff through training and 
integrate RapidSMS data into a national shared health record supervision to monitor the performance of their CHWs 
repository and to generate alerts to CHWs immediately after and triangulate with the health center data on antenatal 
registering a pregnant women with known pregnancy-related care, deliveries, and treatment for malaria, pneumo-
risk factors.  While this has not been rolled out nationally, nia, and diarrhea (UNICEF). This will address many 
it was a proof of concept that sets the stage for a range of challenges such as clarifying case and indicator defini-
interoperability scenarios that can improve referral and conti- tions, learning how to use phones more effectively, and 
nuity of care at the community level. reinforcing the importance of routine use of the system.
Additional ongoing and future plans for the program, and n Strengthen the RapidSMS coordination mechanism 
the partner organization, include: through monthly and quarterly national-level meetings, 
including annual reviews of the system and tools and 
n Continue work to improve interoperability between technical validation meetings (UNICEF)
RapidSMS and other data management systems used 
within the country. In particular, interoperability with n Consolidate SMS, USSD, and other high-volume com-
the PBF system in District Health Information Soft- munications contracts within the MOH and Rwanda 
ware 2 (DHIS2) is planned to allow for payment of Biomedical Center to negotiate better terms for Rap-
performance incentives. Connection  with the electronic idSMS communications charges with the local mobile 
medical records system’s shared health record would phone companies (MOH)
allow for CHWs to be alerted to pre-existing conditions 
Snapshot: RapidSMS Rwanda
Geographic Rwanda
Coverage
Implementation 2009–2011 (pilot)
Dates 2012 to present (scale-up)
Implementation Ministry of Health (coordination, funding, and 
Partners project management)
UNICEF (funding, technical assistance)
MSH (technical assistance for systems, 
interoperability
Donor(s) USAID
UNICEF
Contact Randy Wilson, Team Lead: Research, M&E and KM, 
Information Rwanda Health Systems Strengthening Project, 
rwilson@msh.org
Additional Resources/ Information
References:
1. Rwanda Demographic and Health Survey 2005. Calverton, MD, National Institute of Statistics of Rwanda and ORC Macro, 2006. 
2. Rwanda Demographic and Health Survey 2014-5. Calverton, MD, National Institute of Statistics of Rwanda, Republic of Rwanda Ministry of 
Health and ICF International, 2015.
mHEALTH COMPENDIUM  SPECIAL EDITION 2016  n  67
