 
GXALERT 
Despite this diagnostic advance, 
however, paper-based laboratory 
registers can take weeks or 
months before they are delivered 
to a central office and keyed into a 
monitoring and evaluation (M&E) 
system by hand.  This may result in 
delayed treatment of Multi-Drug 
Resistant Tuberculosis (MDR-TB), 
as well as a higher likelihood of 
infecting others with MDR-TB, 
including facility-based health care 
workers. 
GxAlert is a system which attaches 
a 3G USB modem to GeneXpert 
machines and ensures real-time 
reporting of results to a 
BRIEF OVERVIEW centralized database.  By reducing time of reporting TB 
Only 66% of the estimated number of incident TB cases diagnostic results, GxAlert will enable national TB 
globally were diagnosed and reported to the WHO in programs to move second-line drugs to the right 
2011, due in part to a reliance on a proven but time- location, alert facility personnel to take precautionary 
consuming process of sputum smear microscopy used to measures, and ensure that infected individuals begin 
diagnose TB in many low- and middle-income countries. treatment immediately.  Faster treatment initiation will 
Diagnosis of drug resistant TB also remains a particular improve outcomes and reduce risks of MDR-TB positive 
challenge, given the infrastructure, biosafety patients infecting others.   
requirements and human resources needed to conduct 
traditional culture and drug susceptibility testing (DST). 
The Xpert MTB/RIF assay, recommended by the WHO ABOUT GXALERT 
in December 2010, allows for the simultaneous In January 2013, the WHO Stop TB Partnership began 
detection of TB and rifampicin resistance (a first-line TB rolling out 149 Cepheid GeneXpert rapid TB diagnosis 
drug) in under two hours, using a platform that entails machines to 27 nations. A single GeneXpert test takes 
fewer biosafety and human resource requirements than 90 minutes to present results, versus the current three 
traditional culture-based DST. Furthermore, the months for a cultured test. Although the results were 
sensitivity of Xpert MTB/RIF for detecting TB is available rapidly, in pre-launch rollouts in Nigeria in early 
significantly higher than that for microscopy, particularly 2012, these rapid results were still being transcribed 
in patients with HIV infection and children who are less into paper ledgers, resulting in months-long delays in 
able to provide adequate sputum samples. reporting and numerous transcription errors along the 
way. 
The TBXpert Project, funded by UNITAID and 
executed by the WHO Stop TB Department and the A team from Abt Associates shortened this reporting 
Stop TB Partnership, will provide approximately 1.4 cycle from months to mere seconds and improved data 
million Xpert MTB/RIF test cartridges and over 220 quality by partnering with GeneXpert manufacturer 
GeneXpert instruments for the rapid detection of TB Cepheid to network the GeneXpert test devices with 
and rifampicin resistance in 21 recipient countries in existing electronic disease surveillance systems under an 
2013-2015.  initiative called GxAlert. (See www.GxAlert.com.)  By 
64 mHEALTH COMPENDIUM   │    VOLUME 2 
 
 SERVICE DELIVERY 
adding a 3G USB modem and innovative processes to translate data feeds into better mobilization of staff 
GeneXpert devices, GxAltert networks the diagnostic and resources 
machines and provides the following new capabilities:   
 Implementation will provide a roadmap for using 
Automatically send SMS text or email alerts to MOH global data standards with existing M&E/alert/open 
officials when a new MDR positive or Rif positive case is data tools to develop rapid responses by a health 
detected.  system  
Monitor usage and expiration dates of cartridges, and 
utilization rates of each device.  CONCLUSION 
View real-time machine errors to determine if additional Technology plus health systems strengthening activities 
training or technical support is needed. can improve a National TB Program’s ability to: 1) 
curtail the spread of MDR-TB by responding more 
The faster reporting time allows the Nigerian Federal rapidly to diagnosis; 2) accurately forecast drug stocks; 
Ministry of Health to aggregate MDR-TB test results in 3) monitor the comparative quality of clinics’ diagnostic 
real-time, directly into eTB ManagerTM or their M&E efforts; 4) improve accountability through transparency 
tool of choice. This enables the Federal Ministry of and open data; and 5) protect health IT investments 
Health to begin MDR treatments faster and move through real-time aggregate monitoring of device 
second-line drugs where they are needed most. utilization, error rates, and malfunctions. 
EVALUATION AND RESULTS 
GEOGRAPHIC COVERAGE 
In a pilot conducted in Nigeria in October 2012, 
Nigeria 
GeneXperts successfully and securely transmitted 
simulated data from Nigeria into the GxAlert cloud-
based system.  The pilot confirmed that data could be IMPLEMENTATION PARTNERS 
received at GxAlert by multiple GeneXpert devices at Abt Associates is leading a team of partners which 
the same time.   include Cepheid, Nigeria Federal Ministry of Health, and 
Management Sciences for Health  
Following testing and validation in March 2013, the 
Nigeria Ministry of Health approved full scale-up of FUNDER 
GxAlert to its remaining 24 GeneXpert devices and will 
Abt Associates  
become the first nation with a fully networked MDR-TB 
alert system.  An Abt team is currently in the field 
scaling up the GxAlert solution from pilot to national CONTACT INFORMATION 
level. Abt Associates 
 Martha Benezet, TB Manager  
The GeneXpert machine also tests for influenza, HIV Email:  Martha_benezet@abtassoc.com 
and by 2017, 37 diseases in total, making the technology 
solutions built for TB scalable to other health 
information platforms. 
LESSONS LEARNED 
 While technology provides the conditions for 
change, country-based models are needed to 
  MHEALTH COMPENDIUM  |  VOLUME 2 65 
