“I learned that I should not 
be afraid to talk about my 
feelings. Before I started in 
the group, I felt like I was 
different to other people.” 
—Khuluma participant
PROJECT KHULUMA
IMPLEMENTATION DATE:  December 2013 to February 2015
Creating mobile phone support groups for HIV-infected adolescents 
in South Africa
There is growing awareness that HIV/AIDS-affected and -infected adolescents may be at increased risk 
of mental health problems and distress.1 Depression and anxiety are associated with noncompliance 
of medical treatment which, in turn, can further impact health. In South Africa, challenging home 
environments and stigma in the community weaken support structures at a crucial time when young 
people are navigating their developing sexuality and HIV status, as well as many other issues associated 
with adolescence.2 Despite the need for more support structures for HIV-infected adolescents, such as 
support groups, in countries like South Africa it can often be challenging to provide them.3 Challenges 
include stigma, discrimination, finding a space to run the support groups in often overcrowded hospitals 
and having adequately trained staff and the capacity to provide regular sessions. Furthermore, in many 
under-resourced contexts, individuals have to travel long distances to access health care facilities with 
limited access to transport. These opportunity costs may mean choosing not to attend support groups, 
which are often seen as “nice-to-have” rather than essential in facilitating compliance of treatment and 
providing support through the various related challenges of HIV/AIDS.
About Project Khuluma
Through the use of mobile phones, Project Khuluma range of topics. The adolescents have the opportunity to pro-facilitates peer-led support groups for HIV-infected  vide direct input into the support they receive and can come 
adolescents aged 13 to 18 years old. Khuluma provides up with topics that they want to discuss. Guest speakers are 
facilitated and interactive support to groups of 10 to 15 also invited into the groups to run facilitated discussions 
participants. Participants are able to communicate amongst on specific topics such as sexual health, nutrition, or career 
themselves and with a facilitator via mobile phone— advice. Each support group runs for three months. At the 
currently using short message service (SMS)—about a broad completion of each support group cycle, interested partici-
18  n  BEHAVIOR CHANGE COMMUNICATION
SHM Foundation
Lessons Learned 
n The Khuluma groups are currently run in English. Most 
participants have felt comfortable communicating in 
English, but some clearly would have found it easier to 
speak in their own language. Having facilitators who 
understand the other languages used, in addition to 
being competent in English, is valuable.
n To date, the project has provided participants with basic 
pants are invited to continue involvement in the project as mobile phones. In the recruitment process and in 
peer mentors who will help with future groups. The project the way that Khuluma promotes the project there 
team provides these peer mentors with ongoing training, has been some confusion with some participants 
support, and supervision. A training tool, available as a  thinking that they will receive a smart phone. This 
mobile application, has been developed to assist the mentors. has led to some participants not actively participating in 
their group because they had different motivations. It is 
Evaluation and Results clear that more needs to be done to emphasize the true 
purposes of the group to potential participants, and to 
Project Khuluma is ongoing, and as of March 2015 was ensure that participants understand.
entering a phase of in-depth evaluation. Pre- and post-
interviews have been conducted with each participant. The Conclusion 
assessment is underpinned by the information-motivation-
behavioral skills (IMB) model to assess changes in the areas Khuluma offers support to adolescents that is accessible from 
of adherence motivation, knowledge of HIV, perceptions any location, and simultaneously provides an opportunity 
of internalized stigma, social support, adherence behaviors, to further explore the issues facing HIV-infected adolescents 
and life skills.4 As of March 2015, the project has worked and how best to address them. 
with more than 100 adolescents, and has supported 
adolescents in Gauteng, Mpumalanga, and the Western Going forward the SHM Foundation team implementing 
Cape provinces in South Africa. Over 30,000 SMS messages the project is working on models of sustainably financing 
have been sent among the participants, demonstrating the the operating costs and expansion of the support groups, 
need of participants to discuss issues they share with others. with a view to scaling up across South Africa and further 
Abandonment, discrimination, and fears of disclosure development of the mentorship program. n
are among major themes discussed. Conversations about 
adherence are common, centering on why sometimes it is 
difficult to take medication. Other discussion topics have 
focused on encouraging and reminding each other to take 
their medications. Much of the communication so far has 
been related to information support primarily on HIV and 
sexual reproductive health.
Initial evaluation findings have been encouraging, with a 
significant increase in perceived social support and significant 
decrease in levels of internalized stigma and attributed stigma 
among the participants. There also appears to be a trend Geographic Coverage: South Africa
towards an increase in adherence self-efficacy. Khuluma Implementation Partners: The SHM Foundation; Kalafong 
participants have expressed how the project has given them Hospital; Steve Biko Academic Hospital; University of 
the chance to connect with others who are in a similar Pretoria; Kidzpositive; Groote Schuur Hospital; University of Cape Town
situation to them on an emotional level. 
Donor: The SHM Foundation
Contact Information: Jennifer Koen, Khuluma Project Manager, 
Jennifer@shmfoundation.org
mHEALTH COMPENDIUM  VOLUME 5  n  19
