NO-YAWA 
Mobile services to improve reproductive health among youth in Ghana  
BEHAVIOR CHANGE COMMUNICATION 
Implementation date: January 2013 to December 2015  
In Ghana, only 15.6 percent of all women aged 15-24 use a modern FP method1. Yet 68 percent of women (same age group) 
expressed unmet need for FP2. With 13 percent3 of teenagers pregnant, evidence suggests that many young people are not 
empowered or lack knowledge to exert their sexual and reproductive rights. Occurrence of teenage pregnancy is significantly 
higher, up to 23 percent among teens in some regions4,5. Though accurate data are limited, a 2004 study showed two-thirds of 
pregnancies amongst 15-19 year olds were unwanted6, and according to research conducted by Pathfinder International in 2008, 
one in seven occurs among women younger than 20 and two in five unsafe abortions occur among women under 25. 
To address these needs, Grameen Foundation and its partners DKT International and Marie Stopes International designed the 
No-Yawa Project in Ghana. Through No-Yawa, which means “No Worries” in local slang, the partners are integrating mobile 
behavior change information, youth-targeted contraceptive social marketing, and youth-friendly clinic services to create a social 
movement for improved sexual and reproductive health among youth ages 15-24 years, throughout the Ghana.  
About No-Yawa 
No-Yawa is a national forum for youth to discuss sexual and youth in six local languages.  The “story messages” 
r eproductive health issues. The initiative offers a toll-free 24- supplement educational messages’ health facts, to engage 
hour hotline, a variety of mobile behavior change content youth emotionally on culturally-sensitive sexual health issues 
s ervices, and clinics in urban areas where staff have been that include coercive sex, condom negotiation, teenage 
trained to be sensitive to youth needs and provide safe- pregnancy, abstinence/choices, and peer pressure. 
haven where young Ghanaians can talk openly about 
 No-Yawa utilizes a Facebook page and project website as sensitive sexual health issues.  
additional venues for outreach, and will soon launch mobile 
As the lead on No-Yawa’s mHealth component, Grameen web-based interactive educational content, quizzes, chat 
F oundation created and sends educational SMS and voice rooms, and collective story-building services.  
messages, plus engaging “story messages”, to registered 
 
 
 
22  |  mHealth Compendium Volume 4 
 Evaluation and Results Likeability and Relevance of No-Yawa messages 
To date, approximately 126,000 youth have signed up for 
% users who found messages useful 90% 
mobile services across Ghana. A phone-based user 
% users who found messages clear and understandable 85% feedback survey conducted with a random sample of 40 No
-Yawa mobile service clients provided a rapid, early read on 
% users who changed their behavior as a result of 34% 
youth response to the mobile services:  
listening to messages 
No-Yawa will continue conducting user feedback surveys 
Communication with others about ASRH 
with larger samples of respondents to monitor youth 
% users who spoke to someone else about what they 62% response and self-reported outcomes.  
learned from the messages 
% users who told their friends or family to join No- 24% Lessons Learned 
Yawa mobile service 
 Developing locally-relevant content that pushes 
Interest On-Demand Services and Social Media Engagement 
boundaries while not alienating more conservative 
youth is a challenge; extensive user-centered design 
% users who were interested in on-demand messaging 87% 
service work is critical, combined with ongoing user feedback 
and revisions 
% users who said they would be willing to pay for on- 83%  Keeping content relevant and emotionally engaging 
demand SMS messages 
requires creating multiple channels for youth to access 
% users who have internet on their phone 97% the information; this also requires that the service 
provider be highly interactive, with built-in “rewards” 
Top 2 social media platforms used by clients on their Facebook; such as peer recognition, discounts, and prizes 
phone WhatsApp 
 Intensive outreach through theatre groups, community 
% users who were interested in a No-Yawa App 91% radio, and other channels is needed to connect rural 
youth to the full array of mobile and web-based social 
media services 
 While mobile services were designed for youth, focus groups discussions conducted among adult “gatekeepers” at the 
start of the program indicated high unmet need among adults for the mobile content; where possible, content for both 
youth and their guardians should receive messages simultaneously to encourage dialogue and support broader social 
change.  
Conclusion 
No-Yawa aims to reach 250,000 young people in Ghana with Geographic Coverage: Ghana 
messaging on sexual health by December 2015. In its remaining Implementation Partners: Grameen 
months, No-Yawa will focus on achieving wide-scale registration and Foundation, DKT International, and Marie Stopes 
engagement, updating content based on ongoing feedback from youth International (MSI)  
and partners, and continuing to introduce technology-based 
Funder: Embassy of the Kingdom of the 
components to increase interactivity and knowledge sharing. Netherlands 
Contact Information: 
Grameen Foundation | Caitlin Burton, Business 
Development Manager, Grameen Foundation (202
-628-3560, cburton@grameenfoundation.org);  
Karen Romano, Ghana Country Director,  
(+233244313137, 
kromano@grameenfoundation.org) 
See References on page 89. 
 
mHealth Compendium Volume 4  |  23 
