  
  
Tupange SMS Commodity Tracking System 
Brief Overview 
Family planning (FP) commodity security is an integral 
part of successful FP service delivery. Timely and 
constant availability of the entire range of FP methods 
in health facilities is essential in increasing family 
planning uptake and, in turn, improving use of FP and 
decreasing unmet need.  Perennial stock-outs of FP 
commodities at facility level have been identified as one 
of the key factors that hampers effective service 
delivery.  
 
In order to address these challenges, in collaboration 
with the Ministry of Public Health and Sanitation and 
the Kenya Medical Supply Agency (KEMSA), the Kenya 
Urban Reproductive Health Initiative, locally known as Tupange, developed and rolled out the Informed Push 
Model (IPM) for FP commodity distribution. Tupange is funded by the Bill and Melinda Gates Foundation and 
implemented by a consortium of five agencies, led by Jhpiego, in partnership with Marie Stopes Kenya, Pharm 
Access Africa Ltd, The National Council for Population and Development, and the Johns Hopkins Center for 
Communication Programs.  
 
The IPM is a distribution model that relies on timely and good quality information to make resupply decisions.  
The data is provided through the Tupange SMS Commodity Tracking System (TSCTS), which uses mobile 
technology to transmit FP commodity stock status data to a web based platform. The data is then analyzed 
and feeds into the IPM to inform re-supply or re-distribution to facilities. The TSCTS is implemented in three 
project urban sites: Mombasa, Kisumu, and Nairobi. The program was awarded in 2009 and runs up to 2014.  
 
 
 
 Geographic Coverage: 
Kenya 
 
 Implementation Partners: 
Jhpiego leads a team of partners which includes:  Marie Stopes Kenya | Pharm Access 
Africa Ltd | The National Council for Population and Development |the Johns Hopkins 
Center for Communication Programs 
 
 Funder: 
Bill and Melinda Gates Foundation 
 
 For More Information Contact: 
Gates Foundation 
 Clea Finkle, Program Officer, Family Planning; 
Tel: +1-206-709-3670, email: clea.finkle@gatesfoundation.org 
Tupange  
 Neson Keyonzo,  Project Director; 
2nd Floor, Arlington Block, 14 Riverside Drive, P.O. Box 66119 – 00800; 
Tel:  +254-728-175810; email:  jdhiman@tupange.or.ke 
 51 
 
Logistics 
 
Tupange SMS Commodity Tracking System (TSCTS) 
About TSCTS 
To ensure a consistent supply of family planning 
commodities and reduce stock-outs, Tupange 
introduced a web-based commodity tracking system 
which uses short text messages (SMS) to monitor 
commodity levels in Tupange-supported facilities, and to 
ensure that stock-outs are reported in time by facilities 
to ensure rapid restocking.  The staff at health facilities 
are offered pre-paid phone credit and then use their 
personal mobile phones to send coded text messages in 
a specific sequence and format to the centrally 
automated system to report stock-outs. They 
immediately get a response, which created a sense of  
ownership of the system. • The system is user friendly, so the concept was 
 easy to understand; 
The SMS reports are used to quickly determine stock- • Improved reporting rates have led to improved 
out situations and the interventions needed, much faster quantification, forecasting and redistribution/ 
than the manual system in which reporting forms are distribution thereby minimizing stock-outs; 
filled on a monthly basis.  Reports on the new system • Increased reporting rates for stock levels in all 
are filtered to a web interface where users with can Tupange supported facilities (currently at about 
easily access and download data using a password. With 80 percent); and  
almost instant reception of reports, the system has • Timely reports allow staff time to react to 
enabled quick and efficient response to FP commodity potential stock-outs or overstock situations. 
stock-outs; nearly all facilities on the system report  
promptly and on time whenever commodities run low. Lessons Learned 
 
• Facility staff were overwhelmed with manual 
A facility manager authorization is required in order for 
paper based reporting tools. An SMS report 
staff to report a commodity shortage. Additional 
was easily embraced as it was seen as an 
commodities are supplied based on the report received. 
efficient & time saving method for reporting 
Physical inventory checks are done, and end user 
data using current technology. 
support is given. 
 • The health staff rotations at the records office 
(in health facilities) were short and this left a 
Evaluation and Results challenge of data ownership and data quality in 
The technology has now been scaled up in Nairobi, handing over.  This was solved by increasing 
Mombasa and Kisumu. As of December 2011, a total of rotation period of staff shifts that improved 
99 facilities were using the mHealth application. data quality and made data more useful for 
Improvements have been noted in reporting accuracy, decision making by the health facilities. 
indicated by a decrease in errors and unformatted  
messages being received. Some of the key results Conclusion 
include: 
 Overall, TSTCS provides a very good platform for • Real–time reports allow faster and informed 
monitoring and reporting stock-out of commodities to 
decision making;  
meet health population needs. 
• Increased FP uptake due to availability of range 
of commodities; 
Information was excerpted from:  
Tupange Newsletter, January 2012, Volume 1 Issue 2; www.tupange.or.ke;  
PowerPoint presentation at http://www.slideshare.net/lenoyuga/tupange-sms-tracking-system-quick-pictorial-on-impact/download 
52  
