MOBILE HIV & MALARIA DIAGNOSIS 
AND REPORTING SYSTEM 
Improve disease monitoring in Zimbabwe 
DATA COLLECTION 
Implementation date: October to December 2013 
In 2012 and 2013, 15 percent of Zimbabwe’s population was HIV positive and half the population was at risk of contracting 
malaria. Accurate diagnosis of disease is needed to guide patient treatment and timely reporting of results is needed to guide 
disease control programs. The challenge is that most disease reporting still relies on paper-based systems. These systems often 
have gaps such as errors in data or delays in reporting.  In 2013, Global Solutions for Infectious Diseases (GSID), the University 
of Washington and Dimagi created a mobile application to analyze and capture RDT results at the point of care and report 
them to a secure web-server for remote monitoring by public health officials.  
About Mobile HIV & Malaria Diagnosis and Reporting System 
The Android-based software utilizes CommCare’s case This system has the capability to photograph and analyze 
m anagement and reporting features, developed by Dimagi, to HIV or malaria RDT results. The application captures the 
digitize case report forms and Open Data Kit (ODK) type of test used, time, date, and location, as well as allowing 
s oftware (developed by the University of Washington) to the HCW to enter demographic data. The results are 
process, analyze and return RDT results with computer transmitted wirelessly to a central, web-accessible database 
v ision algorithms. The mHealth tool seeks to: that aggregates the data and provides customized reports for 
use by health officers. The data assist in tracking and 
 Analyze and deliver RDT results to health care workers 
managing patients’ cases and monitoring disease trends and 
 (HCWs) at the point of care health commodity consumption. All data are secured and 
 Provide a universal reader capable of reading multiple 
made available based on the national regulations and 
RDTs from various manufacturers 
 guidelines. 
 Automate data collection and eliminate key sources of 
errors 
  Reduce HCWs’ workload by digitizing reporting 
 Enable high-level supervision and quality assurance of 
health workers’ RDT administration 
 
 Provide real-time, accurate disease reporting 
          
 
32  |  mHealth Compendium Volume 4 
Evaluation and Results 
Table 1 - Zimbabwe Study Summary (Oct - Dec 2013) Working with the Zimbabwean Ministry of Health and Child Care 
(MOHCC), a pilot study was conducted across five sites in 
HIV Malaria
Manicaland Province: one provincial hospital, two district 
Number Positive Number Positive
hospitals, and two rural health centers. The application was 
Male 214 17% 749 24% calibrated to read six different RDTs distributed by the MOHCC 
Female 648 13% 965 20% (three  for HIV and three for malaria). During the study, over 
Total 862 14% 1714 22% 2,500 test results were collected (summarized in Table1). 
Based on interviews, HCWs said the application was easy to learn and use. Actual data entry required about 90 seconds per 
result.  Moreover, they strongly believed that it would improve their workload, primarily by eliminating paper-based 
reporting requirements on a daily, weekly and monthly basis.  
One of the primary goals was to validate the application by comparing the results from the application to those from visual 
interpretation by the trained HCWs during actual service provision. The study successfully demonstrated a high 
concordance between the software and visual interpretations. The results have been submitted for publication.  
The GSID project provided one phone per clinic, with 60 nurses sharing 15 phones across five different sites. Each user was 
given a unique login, allowing multiple users to access CommCare on one phone. Supervisors were able to monitor 
individual locations and hospital departments’ performance through CommCare reports. 
During the study, GSID used images uploaded to CommCareHQ to conduct quality assurance, identifying when the nurses 
were performing RDTs incorrectly (such as using too much solution or applying too much blood to the receptor). 
Representatives at the Central Lab in Harare were able to follow up directly with specific sites, reviewing proper procedures 
for performing RDTs.  
Lessons Learned Geographic Coverage: Manicaland Province, 
Zimbabwe  
 HCWs can quickly learn and easily incorporate the mHealth 
application into their existing workflow without major Implementation Partners: Global Solutions for 
disruptions.  Infectious Diseases (GSID); Dimagi, Inc.; Open 
 Relevant data can be easily collected and rapidly reported for Data Kit (ODK), University of Washington; 
remote monitoring by central public health authorities.  Zimbabwe Ministry of Health and Child Care  
 Future studies will need to assess how real-time data can be Funder: Econet Wireless Zimbabwe  
incorporated with other data sources and used to improve 
Contact Information: 
monitoring and management of disease control programs.  
Global Solutions for Infectious Diseases | Ian 
Francis, Director for Diagnostics and Surveillance 
Conclusion (ifrancis@gsid.org) 
After a successful pilot, expanded use of the mobile application would Dimagi | Kieran Sharpey-Schafer, South Africa 
improve health care, from the point of care up through the senior Country Director (ksharpey@dimagi.com) 
level of MOHCC. For patient-level management, the application 
University of Washington | Nicola Dell, 
provides  standardized interpretation of diagnostic results to guide 
(nixdell@cs.washington.edu) 
the appropriate care provided by even minimally trained health 
workers, in resource-limited settings. From the public health See References on page 89. 
perspective, the infectious disease reporting cycle can be dramatically 
shortened using mHealth, allowing health officers to gather, assess 
and respond to real-time disease occurrence for improved disease control. Results can be monitored to detect outbreaks 
and trends of specific diseases can be evaluated to support evidence-based decision making. Accurate supply consumption 
data will better inform supply-chain managers. Data can also be used by program funders to enhance transparency and 
provide better monitoring and evaluation at all levels.  
 
mHealth Compendium Volume 4  |  33 
