Electronic 
recording and 
reporting for 
tuberculosis 
care and 
control

Electronic 
recording and 
reporting for 
tuberculosis 
care and 
control
WHO Library Cataloguing-in-Publication Data
Electronic recording and reporting for tuberculosis care and control.
1.Tuberculosis – prevention and control. 2.Tuberculosis – therapy. 
3.Disease notification – methods. 4.Medical records systems, 
Computerized. 5.Registries. I.World Health Organization.
ISBN 978 92 4 156446 5 (NLM classification: WF 200)
© World Health Organization 2012
All rights reserved. Publications of the World Health Organization are available on the 
WHO web site (www.who.int) or can be purchased from WHO Press, World Health 
Organization, 20 Avenue Appia, 1211 Geneva 27, Switzerland (tel.: +41 22 791 3264; 
fax: +41 22 791 4857; e-mail: bookorders@who.int). Requests for permission to 
reproduce or translate WHO publications – whether for sale or for noncommercial 
distribution – should be addressed to WHO Press through the WHO web site  
(http://www.who.int/about/licensing/copyright_form/en/index.html).
The designations employed and the presentation of the material in this publication do 
not imply the expression of any opinion whatsoever on the part of the World Health 
Organization concerning the legal status of any country, territory, city or area or of 
its authorities, or concerning the delimitation of its frontiers or boundaries. Dotted 
lines on maps represent approximate border lines for which there may not yet be full 
agreement.
The mention of specific companies or of certain manufacturers’ products does not 
imply that they are endorsed or recommended by the World Health Organization in 
preference to others of a similar nature that are not mentioned. Errors and omissions 
excepted, the names of proprietary products are distinguished by initial capital letters.
All reasonable precautions have been taken by the World Health Organization to 
verify the information contained in this publication.  However, the published material 
is being distributed without warranty of any kind, either expressed or implied.  The 
responsibility for the interpretation and use of the material lies with the reader.  In no 
event shall the World Health Organization be liable for damages arising from its use.
Designed by minimum graphics
Printed in Malta
WHO/HTM/TB/2011.22
 Contents
Acknowledgements v
Abbreviations vii
Introduction 1
Chapter 1. Identifying general requirements 6
A. Organization 
 1.1 Is there a functioning TB recording and reporting system in place? 7
 1.2 Who needs to provide overall oversight and participate in decision- 
  making related to the adoption, design and implementation of an  
  electronic recording and reporting system for TB? 7
B. Scope 
 1.3 What are the primary objectives of building an electronic recording  
  and reporting system for TB care and control?  9 
 1. 4 Who are the users and beneficiaries of the system? 9 
 1.5 Which patients will the system cover? 12
 1.6 Which locations will the system cover? 13 
 1.7 Will the system be a stand-alone system or will it be integrated with  
  other electronic systems? 15 
 1.8 What elements of paper-based recording and reporting should be  
  maintained? 17
 1.9 Is the basic unit of recording clinical data a patient, a case or a group  
  of cases? 19
 1.10 What data items need to be captured? 21 
Chapter 2. Identifying detailed requirements  24
A. Capabilities 
 2.1 Who enters data, where and when will data be entered, and how do  
  data flow within the system? 25 
 2.2 What data quality assurance processes are required? 28 
 2.3 How is feedback provided to system users? 31 
 2.4 What standard outputs, reports and other analyses are required? 32 
 2.5 What are the data entry screen or interface requirements? 37
 2.6 How will data confidentiality and security be ensured? 37
iii 
ELECTRONIC RECORDING AND REPORTING FOR TUBERCULOSIS CARE AND CONTROL
B. Resources 
 2.7 What staffing is required? 39 
 2.8 What user support is needed? 40
 2.9 What technical support is needed? 41
 2.10 What level of service availability, response times and contingency  
  planning is required? 43 
 2.11 What funding is required for both start-up and routine operations? 44
 2.12 How long will electronic data be retained and will they be archived? 45
C. Infrastructure
 2.13 How is the electronic recording and reporting software made available  
  to users? 47
 2.14 What devices will users need to use the system? 48 
 2.15 What database software is required? 50
 2.16 Where will the servers be located? 51
 2.17 What communications networks are needed? 52
 2.18 What are the electrical power needs? 53 
D. Case studies 
 2.19 Key characteristics of an established system in China and of a system  
  under development in Kenya  54 
Chapter 3. Selecting a solution  61
 3.1 Looking for a solution 61 
 3.2 Procurement 62 
 3.3 Choosing the solution 62 
 3.4 Finalizing the agreement 64
Chapter 4. Implementing an electronic recording and reporting system 65
 4.1 The general implementation phases 65 
 4.2 Planning  66 
 4.3 System development and roll-out (including pilot phase, training at  
  field and central level, and scale-up) 70 
 4.4 Maintenance (including evolution, monitoring and evaluation) 71
Annex 1. Development of this document 76
iv
A cknowledgements
This guide on electronic recording and reporting is the result of a major collaborative 
effort involving 9 agencies and institutions and 21 individuals. This document 
was funded by the United States Agency for International Development under the 
USAID Tuberculosis CARE I, Cooperative Agreement No. AID-OAA-A-10-000020. 
Development of the guide was led by the World Health Organization (WHO) in close 
cooperation with the KNCV Tuberculosis Foundation (KNCV) and Management 
Sciences for Health (MSH). Hazim Timimi in the WHO Stop TB Department’s TB 
monitoring and evaluation team coordinated the production of the document, under 
the guidance of Katherine Floyd and Philippe Glaziou.
The document outline was developed by Ana Bierrenbach, Jacques van den Broek, 
Dennis Falzon, Katherine Floyd, Philippe Glaziou, Nico Kalisvaart, Joel Keravec, Claire 
Moodie, Charalambos Sismanidis and Hazim Timimi.
Dennis Falzon led the development of a country questionnaire, with input from 
Katherine Floyd, Philippe Glaziou, Charalambos Sismanidis and Hazim Timimi. 
Responses to the questionnaires were received from Amal Bassili, Stéphane Bastier, 
Ana Ciobanu, Ali Habib, Fei Huang, Elmira Ibraim, Hillary Kipruto, Lindiwe Mvusi, Ucha 
Nanava, Gisele Pinto de Oliveira, Joseph Sitienei and Vija Riekstina.
A total of 21 authors and contributors produced material for the guide and took 
part in a meeting to review its contents. These were Ibrahim Abubakar (Health 
Protection Agency, UK), Amal Bassili (Eastern Mediterranean Regional Office, WHO), 
Stéphane Bastier (MEDES Institute for Space Medicine and Physiology, France), Ana 
Bierrenbach (independent consultant, Brazil), Jacques van den Broek (KNCV), Dennis 
Falzon (WHO-HQ), Katherine Floyd (WHO-HQ), Philippe Glaziou (WHO-HQ), Fei 
Huang (Center for Disease Control and Prevention, China), Nico Kalisvaart (KNCV), 
Joel Keravec (MSH), Aamir Khan (Interactive Research for Development, Pakistan), 
Claire Moodie (MSH), Liliana Pievaroli (WHO-HQ), Cristian Popa (National Institute of 
Pulmonology, Romania), Sai Pothapregada (the Global Fund), Delphine Sculier (WHO-
HQ), Ying Shi (Ministry of Health, China), Charalampos Sismanidis (WHO-HQ), Hazim 
Timimi (WHO-HQ) and Fraser Wares (WHO-HQ). We thank Jaap Broekmans (former 
Executive Director of KNCV Tuberculosis Foundation and currently Chair of the WHO 
Global Task Force on TB Impact Measurement) for his excellent chairmanship of the 
meeting of authors and contributors and Tracy Mawer for her invaluable administrative 
support in organizing the meeting. We thank our colleagues in WHO regional and 
country offices for their help in identifying countries and people to attend the meeting 
and for their help in obtaining responses to questionnaires.
We are grateful to the following people who provided suggestions, commented 
on earlier drafts or who reviewed the final draft of this document: Owais Ahmed 
v 
ELECTRONIC RECORDING AND REPORTING FOR TUBERCULOSIS CARE AND CONTROL
(Interactive Research for Development, Pakistan), Emily Bloss (Centers for Disease 
Control and Prevention, USA), Julia Ershova (Centers for Disease Control and 
Prevention, USA), Hamish Fraser (Partners in Health, USA), Ali Habib (Interactive 
Research for Development, Pakistan), Tom Hiatt (WHO-HQ), Vahur Hollo (European 
Centre of Disease Prevention and Control, Sweden), Elmira Ibraim (National Institute 
of Pulmonology, Romania), Ramesh Krishnamurthy (WHO-HQ), Fuad Mirzayev (WHO-
HQ), Daniela Mohaupt (Stop TB Partnership, Switzerland), Chris Seebregts (Medical 
Research Council, South Africa), Jitendra Suryavamshi (National Tuberculosis Institute, 
India) and Philippe Veltsos (WHO-HQ). 
The document was edited by Karen Ciceri.
vi
A bbreviations
CSV comma-separated values
DOTS the internationally recommended strategy for TB control until 2006, and the 
first component and foundation of its successor, the Stop TB Strategy
DR-TB drug-resistant tuberculosis
DST drug susceptibility testing
GIS geographic information system
HIV human immunodeficiency virus
HMN Health Metrics Network
IT information technology
KNCV KNCV Tuberculosis Foundation
MDR-TB multidrug-resistant tuberculosis
MoH Ministry of Health
MSH Management Sciences for Health
NGO nongovernmental organization
NTP national TB control programme (or equivalent)
PDA personal digital assistant
RFP request for proposals
SOP standard operating procedure
TB tuberculosis
USAID United States Agency for International Development
WHO World Health Organization
XML extensible markup language
vii 

  Introduction
Recording and reporting of data is a fundamental component of care of patients 
with tuberculosis (TB) and control of the disease. Data recording and reporting is 
necessary to monitor trends in the TB epidemic at global, national and subnational 
levels; to monitor progress in the treatment of individual patients and groups (cohorts) 
of patients and ensure continuity of care when patients are referred between health-
care facilities; and to plan, raise funds for, implement and evaluate programmatic 
efforts to control TB, including forecasting the numbers of cases and the associated 
requirements for staffing, medicines and laboratory supplies; and analysing treatment 
outcomes. When high-quality data are available, successes can be documented and 
corrective actions taken to address problems that are identified. 
Recording and reporting data about people who have TB symptoms and those 
who are diagnosed with TB is, nonetheless, a data-intensive process. Treatment 
regimens span many months (or years in some cases), and patients need to take 
anti-TB drugs at least a few times a week and often daily. Compliance with treatment 
must be recorded regularly (daily for drug-resistant treatment and weekly for drug-
sensitive treatment). The results of laboratory tests are needed for the microbiological 
diagnosis of TB; to determine the susceptibility of Mycobacterium tuberculosis isolates 
to anti-TB drugs; to monitor patient response to medication; and to determine cure or 
failure of treatment.
There is a strong tradition of recording and reporting in TB care and control. 
Building on the success of national model programmes established in southern and 
east Africa in the 1980s,1 a standardized system for paper-based recording and 
reporting of the number of cases diagnosed with TB and their treatment outcomes 
was rolled out worldwide from the mid-1990s as one of the five elements of the World 
Health Organization’s (WHO) DOTS strategy. DOTS – the internationally recommended 
strategy for TB control until 2006 – remains the first component and foundation of 
its successor, the Stop TB Strategy.2 This paper-based system includes TB treatment 
cards that record information about the patient’s history of treatment; TB registers 
in which data for all cases within a particular health-care facility are documented; 
quarterly reporting forms for sending summaries of aggregated data on notifications 
and treatment outcomes for all cases within a particular geographical area to 
higher administrative levels (up to national level); and well-understood supervision 
and quality control processes. Within a decade, more than 99% of the world’s TB 
cases were being recorded and reported in countries that had adopted the WHO-
1 Murray CJ, Styblo K, Rouillon A. Tuberculosis in developing countries: burden, intervention and cost. 
Bulletin of the International Union against Tuberculosis and Lung Disease, 1990, 65:6–24.
2 Raviglione MC, Uplekar MW. WHO’s new Stop TB Strategy. Lancet, 2006, 367:952–955.
1 
ELECTRONIC RECORDING AND REPORTING FOR TUBERCULOSIS CARE AND CONTROL
recommended recording and reporting system.1,2 Today, TB data are comparable 
across many thousands of treatment facilities worldwide, and WHO is able to report 
on the global TB epidemic and progress in TB care and control using the resulting 
standard datasets that countries report to WHO each year.3 
  The move to electronic recording and reporting systems
Since the mid-1990s, there have been transformational changes in information 
technologies and communication networks. According to the International 
Telecommunications Union, the number of Internet users reached an estimated 
2 billion people by the end of 2010 (numbers doubled between 2005 and 2010) and 
the number of subscriptions to mobile phones reached 5.3 billion.4 Most health-care 
workers in even the poorest countries are familiar with mobile phone technologies 
and many use them regularly in their daily lives. The spread of mobile and web-based 
technologies is dramatically reducing the barriers to implementing electronic systems 
that existed until the very recent past. 
In this context, it is not surprising that there is growing use of and interest in 
electronic recording and reporting of TB data. 
There are various potential benefits to be realized when TB data are captured and 
stored electronically, compared with paper-based reporting systems. The immediate 
benefits include:
Data quality. Transcription of data from one paper-based record to another is prone 
to error and there is no built-in mechanism for identifying and correcting mistakes. 
In an electronic system, validation checks can be an integral part of recording 
and reporting; for example, warnings may be generated when implausible or 
inconsistent values are entered, prompting the person entering the data to check 
and (if appropriate) correct information.
Workload. Aggregation and analysis of data and their reporting to higher 
administrative levels are tedious and labour-intensive tasks in paper-based 
systems. This problem grows rapidly as the number of patients being treated or 
the number of treatment centres increases. Electronic systems can reduce the 
workload involved by automating some of the tasks; for example, by generating 
report summaries and pre-specified checks for data completeness and validity;
Data access. Paper-based systems rely on quarterly reports of aggregated data. 
Data on individual cases or patients are thus not readily available above the level 
of a health facility. When electronic records are available, they can be transferred 
to and shared with anyone, whatever their location. This means that at national 
1 Global tuberculosis control: a short update to the 2009 report. Geneva, World Health Organization, 2009 
(WHO/HTM/TB/2009.426).
2 Revised TB recording and reporting forms and registers – version 2006. Geneva, World Health 
Organization, 2006 (WHO/HTM/TB/2006.373; also available at  
http://www.who.int/tb/dots/r_and_r_forms/). The most recent WHO recommendations on recording 
and reporting for drug-resistant TB specifically were published in 2008 and 2011. See (i) Guidelines for 
the programmatic management of drug-resistant tuberculosis: emergency update, 2008. Geneva, World 
Health Organization, 2008 (WHO/HTM/TB/2008.402) and (ii) Multidrug-resistant tuberculosis (MDR-
TB) indicators. A minimum set of indicators for the programmatic management of MDR-TB in national 
tuberculosis control programmes. Geneva, World Health Organization, 2011 (WHO/HTM/TB/2010.11).
3 Global tuberculosis control: WHO report 2011. Geneva, World Health Organization, 2011 (WHO/HTM/
TB/2011.16).
4 The world in 2010: ICT facts and figures. Geneva, International Telecommunication Union (available at 
http://www.itu.int/ITU-D/ict/material/FactsFigures2010.pdf).
2
INTRODUCTION
level, for example, a much richer quantity of data become available for analysis, 
interpretation and use. 
Timeliness of information. Paper-based records take time to aggregate and 
transfer to higher levels of the system. Electronic systems can automate the 
aggregation process and save time and effort as well as reduce the possibility of 
errors in generating aggregate reports. In some electronic systems, when coupled 
with an electronic communications network such as a national web-based system, 
data can be made available instantly, in real time, and to many more people. 
Flexibility. It is difficult to modify paper-based systems when recording and reporting 
requirements are updated. New printed materials such as forms, registers and 
reporting templates need to be developed, printed and distributed and older 
versions of printed materials removed from circulation. This can be a slow process. 
For example, five years after international recording and reporting guidelines were 
updated to include HIV status in TB registers and reports, many countries with 
paper-based systems were still unable to accurately report on treatment outcomes 
disaggregated by HIV status.1 In contrast, with careful planning and the right skills, 
well-designed electronic systems can be modified relatively quickly. 
Data analysis and reporting. When data are available in well-structured and 
well-managed electronic format, they can be imported into powerful statistical 
packages for analysis and research, and into geographic information systems (GIS) 
for mapping and spatial analysis and research. When data are stored electronically, 
it is also possible to automate the production of standard outputs and reports for 
use at different levels of the system (for example, at national, district and health-
facility levels). Annual reports at the national level become much easier to produce 
and disseminate. 
Managing complex data. The complexity of data has increased in recent years, 
especially with greater attention to diagnosis and treatment of drug-resistant TB. 
Data complexity is easier to manage in an electronic system, provided adequate 
data management procedures and staff are available. For example, an electronic 
system facilitates monitoring of drug dosages, changes of treatment regimen and 
assessment of treatment outcomes (outcomes for multidrug-resistant TB (MDR-TB) 
treatment are easy to compute electronically, but are very easy to get wrong using 
manual calculations). 
Delivering more data more quickly and easily, with better quality and in an accessible 
format that allows a more thorough analysis are the potential benefits of adopting 
electronic systems for recording and reporting. If these “immediate” benefits are 
fully realized, other “bigger picture” benefits could result. Benefits could include 
better patient care, better programme management and better monitoring of 
trends in the TB epidemic nationally, regionally or locally. For example, staff could 
be alerted automatically using up-to-date information about treatment compliance 
or clinic visits so that they could take action to prevent a patient from defaulting 
from treatment; purchase of drugs and laboratory supplies could be based on close 
to real-time information, avoiding potential stock-outs; linking to other national 
health-management information systems such as those for HIV provides decision-
1 Global tuberculosis control: WHO report 2011. Geneva, World Health Organization, 2011 (WHO/HTM/
TB/2011.16).
3 
ELECTRONIC RECORDING AND REPORTING FOR TUBERCULOSIS CARE AND CONTROL
makers with a richer picture of the health situation; linking to other local information 
systems such as laboratory and pharmacy systems makes key patient data available 
to clinicians; it could become easier for non-NTP care providers to notify TB cases. 
These benefits have already been realized and documented in many countries around 
the world and some examples are highlighted in this guide.
  About this guide 
While the potential advantages of electronic recording and reporting are considerable, 
so too are the potential pitfalls. Adopting electronic recording and reporting is not 
simply about choosing a piece of software: it is also about changing how people 
work. It may be difficult to even know where to start, especially in countries with no 
previous experience of introducing an electronic system for recording and reporting 
of TB data: what are the critical questions to ask? what are my options? what is 
recommended among the range of choices available? where can I go for expert advice 
and support? Without any guidance, it is easy to make mistakes, and those mistakes 
may cost considerable time, energy and money. 
As interest in electronic recording and reporting for TB care and control has 
grown substantially, so too has the demand for clear guidance on how to select, 
design, implement and maintain such systems. However, while agencies such as 
WHO, the United States Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC), the KNCV 
Tuberculosis Foundation (KNCV) and Management Sciences for Health (MSH) have 
helped several countries to introduce electronic recording and reporting (often with 
a specific focus on MDR-TB) and have convened meetings to facilitate sharing of 
experience among countries that have implemented such systems, there has been no 
published guidance on the subject. 
This guide aims to fill that gap by providing practical advice for countries planning 
to introduce electronic recording and reporting systems, or to enhance existing 
systems. It is intended for the following groups of people, who are likely to be involved 
in the design and implementation of electronic recording and reporting systems for TB 
care and control:
 national TB control programme (NTP) managers and their staff, including district 
TB control officers, who are considering a switch from paper-based systems to 
electronic recording and reporting systems;
 procurement officers, legal officers, project managers and software developers 
who are working with NTP managers to commission an electronic recording and 
reporting system;
 health information system managers who are in charge of developing and 
implementing a strategy for electronic recording and reporting and eHealth1 
projects;
 consultants and technical agencies who are asked to support the development 
and implementation of information and communication technology for electronic 
recording and reporting systems.
1 Defined by WHO as the use of information and communication technologies in support of health and 
health-related fields, including health-care services, health surveillance, health literature and health 
education.
4
INTRODUCTION
The guide responds to a clear mandate vested in WHO by the World Health Assembly. 
In 2005, the Health Assembly urged Member States to promote eHealth services 
and requested WHO to support Member States by disseminating best practices 
and guidelines.1 More recently, and more specific to TB, the Health Assembly has 
promoted the strengthening of “health information and surveillance systems to ensure 
detection and monitoring of the epidemiological profile of multidrug-resistant and 
extensively drug-resistant tuberculosis and monitor achievement in its prevention and 
control” through both country and WHO action.2 
The guide is structured in four major chapters. 
Chapter 1 defines 10 critical questions that need to be asked and answered when 
considering the adoption of an electronic recording and reporting system and at 
the design stage (that is, before commissioning the implementation of a system). 
These identify the general scope of the system. Understanding and answering 
these questions does not require a high level of expertise in information technology 
(IT), but the answers are essential for the IT experts who will design and implement 
the system. The importance of each question is explained, the options to be 
considered are described and recommended approaches provided.
Chapter 2 defines 18 more detailed questions about the desired capabilities of 
the system, the resources that will be needed and the technical (IT-related) 
infrastructure that need to be asked and addressed at the design stage. The 
importance of each question is explained, the options to be considered are 
described, and recommended approaches are provided. With the exception 
of some of the infrastructure questions, understanding and answering these 
questions does not require a high level of IT expertise, but the answers are 
essential for the IT experts who will design and implement the system.
Chapter 3 explains how to set about commissioning an electronic system that 
meets the standards defined by answers to the questions posed in Chapter 1 and 
Chapter 2. 
Chapter 4 provides guidance on implementing an electronic system, drawing on 
recent experience. 
Throughout these chapters, country examples are provided to illustrate what the 
questions, options and recommendations mean in practice. 
The guide also includes an Annex and is accompanied by a web appendix. The 
Annex explains the process that was used to develop the guide. The web appendix 
(http://www.who.int/tb/publications/electronic_recording_reporting/) contains 
complementary material and is a living resource to which new material will be added 
as it becomes available. For example, the web appendix includes links to WHO 
guidelines on TB recording and reporting, and in future will showcase particular 
systems (for example using videos and examples of outputs).
1 Resolution WHA58.28. eHealth. In: Fifty-eighth World Health Assembly, Geneva, 16–25 May 2005, 
Resolutions and decisions; annexes. Geneva, World Health Organization, 2005 (WHA58/2005/
REC/1):108–110. Available from: http://apps.who.int/gb/ebwha/pdf_files/WHA58/WHA58_28-en.pdf
2 Resolution WHA62.15 Prevention and control of multidrug-resistant tuberculosis and extensively drug-
resistant tuberculosis. In: Sixty-second World Health Assembly, Geneva, 18–22 May 2009, Resolutions 
and decisions; annexes. Geneva, World Health Organization, 2009 (WHA62/2009/REC/1):25–29. 
Available from: http://apps.who.int/gb/ebwha/pdf_files/WHA62-REC1/WHA62_REC1-en.pdf
5 
 CHAPTER 1 Identifying general 
requirements 
This chapter identifies 10 questions that need to be considered to define broad needs 
when planning to adopt electronic recording and reporting for TB care and control.
 Organization:
 Is there a functioning TB recording and reporting system in place?
 Who needs to provide overall oversight and participate in decision-making 
related to the adoption, design and implementation of an electronic recording 
and reporting system for TB?
 Scope:
 What are the primary objectives of building an electronic recording and 
reporting system for TB care and control?
 Who are the users and beneficiaries of the system?
 Which patients will the system cover?
 Which locations will the system cover?
 Will the system be a stand-alone system or will it be integrated with other 
electronic systems?
 What elements of paper-based recording and reporting should be maintained?
 Is the basic unit of recording clinical data a patient, a case or a group of cases?
 What data items need to be captured?
The importance of each question is explained, the options to be considered are 
described and recommended approaches are provided. 
Understanding and answering these questions does not require a high level of 
IT expertise, but the answers are essential for the IT experts who will design and 
implement the system.
This initial activity may be time-consuming, but it will save time and resources 
in the long term. Together with the results of Chapter 2, it will help NTPs to develop 
clearly structured and justified proposals that can also provide a foundation for 
resource mobilization. 
6 
CHAPTER 1. IDENTIFYING GENERAL REQUIREMENTS
 A. Organization
 1.1 Is there a functioning TB recording and reporting system in place?
  Rationale 
When planning for a new electronic system, it is important to know the foundations 
upon which it will be built and to determine if there are any critical conditions that 
have to be met before even considering building a system.
Implementing an electronic system may expose weaknesses in the existing TB 
programme’s recording and reporting culture, and these weaknesses need to be 
addressed before embarking on implementing an electronic system. 
  Recommendations 
 WHO-recommended case definitions and standards for recording and reporting of 
TB cases1,2,3,4,5 should already be in place, either on paper or on a combination of 
paper and electronic systems. 
 National guidelines for TB care and control should already be in use in the country 
and should comply with updated, internationally-recommended norms.
 Staff involved in TB care should already be familiar with the basic data items 
that need to be recorded and with established reporting and data monitoring 
procedures.
 1.2 Who needs to provide overall oversight and participate in  
decision-making related to the adoption, design and implementation 
of an electronic recording and reporting system for TB?
  Rationale
Introducing a new electronic system has long and far-reaching implications for the 
way people and organizations work. It affects many people, not just those who 
interact directly with an information system. The decision is therefore a strategic one 
and needs to be taken with involvement and support of a wide range of stakeholders. 
Forming a decision-making body with representation from multiple stakeholders is 
an important step. The decision-makers need to understand the objectives of a new 
system, know what resources are available, understand existing working methods 
within TB treatment programmes (in both public and private sectors if relevant), be 
1 Revised TB recording and reporting forms and registers – version 2006. Geneva, World Health 
Organization, 2006 (WHO/HTM/TB/2006.373; also available at  
http://www.who.int/tb/dots/r_and_r_forms/). 
2 Treatment of Tuberculosis: guidelines for national programmes, 4th ed. Geneva, World Health 
Organization 2010:57–59 (WHO/HTM/TB/2009.420; also available at  
http://www.who.int/tb/publications/tb_treatmentguidelines/).
3 Multidrug-resistant tuberculosis (MDR-TB) indicators: a minimum set of indicators for the programmatic 
management of MDR-TB national tuberculosis control programmes. Geneva, World Health Organization, 
2010 (WHO/HTM/TB/2010.11; also available at  
http://www.who.int/tb/challenges/mdr/programmatic_guidelines_for_mdrtb/).
4 Guidelines for the programmatic management of drug-resistant tuberculosis: emergency update, 2008. 
Geneva, World Health Organization, 2008:219–235 (WHO/HTM/TB/2008.402; also available at  
http://www.who.int/tb/challenges/mdr/programmatic_guidelines_for_mdrtb/).
5 Three interlinked patient monitoring systems for HIV care/ART, MCH/PMTCT and TB/HIV: standardized 
minimum data set and illustrative tools. Geneva, UNAIDS, UNICEF and the Global Fund to Fight AIDS, 
Tuberculosis and Malaria, 2010 (also available at  
http://www.who.int/hiv/pub/imai/three_patient_monitor/).
7 
ELECTRONIC RECORDING AND REPORTING FOR TUBERCULOSIS CARE AND CONTROL
aware of relevant infectious disease treatment programmes and reporting systems, 
and know about information-system regulations in the country. 
Note that this decision-making body is not the same as those that will be needed 
during the development and implementation phases when more specialized tasks will 
be undertaken, such as user acceptance testing.
  Recommendation
Establish a body with the appropriate competence, authority and with an adequate 
representation of all key stakeholders.
Country-wide systems. A national electronic system for TB needs to fit within a 
national framework for disease surveillance and for health information management. 
Key decision-makers, or sponsors, will be those within the national ministry of health 
responsible for public health. Health programmes other than TB (such as HIV) will 
need to be involved. 
The decision-making body could take the form of a steering committee1 with 
representatives from some or all of the following sectors:
 users and beneficiaries (including staff and patients) of the electronic recording 
and reporting system (Section 1.4);
 ministries responsible for health, disease surveillance and health information 
systems;
 tuberculosis control (e.g. NTP) at different administrative levels, including experts 
in managing the care of patients with TB and drug-resistant TB (DR-TB), plus 
representatives of staff who would have to use the system;
 TB care providers outside the NTP, such as private sector practitioners;
 health information technology specialists;
 laboratory networks;
 pharmacies or dispensaries;
 legal experts and IT experts knowledgeable about regulations and standards 
(including identification and confidentiality) governing information systems in the 
country;
 external agencies providing technical or financial support.
Local systems. Establish a steering committee with representatives from users and 
beneficiaries of the system (Section 1.4). Here it will be important to consider the 
input from the body responsible for managing an existing national TB surveillance 
system.
1 This body is referred to as the Project Board in PRINCE2 (http://www.prince-officialsite.com/) which is 
a formal approach to project management.
8
CHAPTER 1. IDENTIFYING GENERAL REQUIREMENTS
  B. Scope
 1.3 What are the primary objectives of building an electronic recording 
and reporting system for TB care and control?
  Rationale
This is a fundamental and strategic decision that will determine the nature, design, 
content and complexity of the system to be commissioned. All subsequent decisions 
should accord with the primary objectives of the system.
  Options
The primary objectives of an electronic system can range from a national to a local 
focus, for example:
 Improving surveillance and public health. Examples include improving the 
coverage, quality and timeliness of data available to decision-makers on TB 
patients and their treatment outcomes, improving monitoring of trends in TB 
disease burden or enabling rapid responses to emerging problems.
 Improving programme and resource management at health-care facilities, 
subnationally and nationally. For example, preventing drug stock-outs (Box 1.1) 
or relieving clinical staff from the burden of reporting.
 Improving clinical care of individual patients. For example, improving day-to-
day management of patient care at facility level (Box 1.2) or facilitating referrals 
from non-NTP providers.
Detailed goals and indicators can be associated with these primary objectives (see 
also Section 4.5).
Individual systems may span more than one of these areas; a detailed patient 
management system could feed data into a more general national surveillance 
system. Hierarchical systems are made up of multiple locally-focused systems whose 
data are combined at subnational or national levels. 
Much of the focus in this document is on national systems for surveillance 
and management (which is the focus of the WHO Global Task Force on TB Impact 
Measurement1), but this does not detract from the importance of local electronic 
systems that support the delivery of diagnostic and treatment services for patients 
and that are able to feed data into national surveillance systems.
  Recommendation 
Clearly define the primary objectives of the proposed system. 
 1.4 Who are the users and beneficiaries of the system?
  Rationale
The identification of users and intended beneficiaries of the system is closely linked to 
the objectives discussed in Section 1.3. It helps to identify which groups to consult 
and to involve during both the planning and implementation phases. Introducing 
an electronic system will change how some people have to work and may result in 
1 http://www.who.int/tb/advisory_bodies/impact_measurement_taskforce/
9 
ELECTRONIC RECORDING AND REPORTING FOR TUBERCULOSIS CARE AND CONTROL
Box 1.1
Electronic platform helps to prevent second-line anti-TB drug stock-outs in Brazil 
The web-based e-TB Managera system for programmatic management of drug-susceptible 
and drug-resistant TB was introduced in Brazil in 2004. It integrates case management, 
medicine control and epidemiological surveillance into a single platform.
The medicines module uses automated functions for calculating quantities to order, 
management of drug distribution, tracking inventories with expiry dates and documenting 
overall consumption quantities. This allows the national TB program (NTP) to avoid drug 
stock-outs over a specified time period. Unexpected delays in procurement are managed 
centrally by distributing adequate security (buffer) stock and matching the exact needs of 
each treatment centre with the number of patients enrolled for treatment, as recorded in 
the system. 
The ability to monitor and manage second-line anti-TB drug supplies centrally using a web-
based system in a continental-size country such as Brazil has made it possible to overcome 
many of the problems typically faced in second-line drug management.
 FIGURE 1.1 Drug supply management is a primary objective of the e-TB Manager system in 
Brazil (source: MSH)
a e-TB Manager was developed by MSH and introduced in Brazil in partnership with the Ministry of 
Health and the Helio Fraga TB Reference Centre.
changes to existing roles and responsibilities, and in the creation of new ones. Such 
changes need careful planning and management, so it is crucial to identify and involve 
all those affected.
  Recommendations 
 Identify points at which the system will be used, for example:
 people entering data directly, at local level;
 people using the data directly while interacting with the system, such as a 
treatment supporter looking up a patient’s address to plan a home visit, or a 
requesting physician receiving laboratory results;
10
CHAPTER 1. IDENTIFYING GENERAL REQUIREMENTS
Box 1.2
Electronic platform enables real-time monitoring of directly-observed treatment  
in the community
The Indus Hospital in Pakistan introduced a mobile-phone-based electronic system 
for recording and reporting of MDR-TB DOT (directly-observed treatment) data. The 
community-based programme involves treatment supporters visiting the homes of MDR-TB 
patients to perform DOT. Each treatment supporter is given a mobile phone containing 
software that allows them to enter DOT data electronically. These data can then be 
uploaded to the hospital’s patient database in real-time over the phone network or, where 
mobile network connectivity may be unreliable, completed electronic forms can be stored 
on the phone and then bulk uploaded when connectivity is available. This method also 
allows real-time monitoring of treatment supporters to ensure that patients are being 
visited every day.
 people viewing or receiving reports (including graphs or maps) generated 
by the system, such as a data manager reviewing notification trends during 
the previous quarter, a pharmacy manager reviewing projected stock levels, 
or a programme manager at national level retrieving standard performance 
management reports;
 people extracting data from the system to conduct their own analyses using 
statistical or geographical information software;
 people viewing or using reports released into the public domain.
 Identify all groups that will interact directly with the system by entering or 
retrieving data, and all groups that will benefit from the outputs of the system and 
who therefore have an incentive to use it. Examples of such groups include:
 Local (or facility) level:
— clinical staff such physicians, nurses, medical assistants
— patients
— relatives or carers of patients
— treatment supporters (Box 1.2),
— administrative staff such as receptionists, dedicated data entry clerks
— laboratory staff
— pharmacy staff
 Subnational, national or international level:
— district and regional TB managers
— NTP management staff
— ministry of health
— funders of TB treatment programmes
— national and international surveillance programmes
— researchers
— the general public (Figure 1.2)
11 
ELECTRONIC RECORDING AND REPORTING FOR TUBERCULOSIS CARE AND CONTROL
 FIGURE 1.2 The NTP in the Netherlands makes aggregated reports, graphs and maps based on the 
collected data available to everyone via a public website (source: http://www.tbc-online.nl)
 1.5 Which patients will the system cover?
  Rationale
Many systems are constructed around the WHO-recommended district TB register, 
which provides a framework for registering individual data for TB patients requiring 
treatment. 
Any system specification will need to define the intended scope, as this will 
influence the choice of aspects such as data sets, data flows, types of users, screens, 
outputs and work flows. Unforeseen changes to scope (and indeed to primary 
objectives) introduced after development and roll-out have begun could have a major 
impact on implementation of a system resulting in delays and increased costs. So 
system scope needs to be clear at the outset. This includes defining types of patients 
from which the system will be capturing information, which could also include patients 
who do not have active TB (for example, people with suspected TB), those with latent 
TB infection, people in known risk categories or contacts of confirmed cases. 
Extending the remit of a system beyond TB patients increases the data entry and 
data management workload, so the benefits of doing so needs to be weighed against 
the additional costs.
  Options
The system could include:
1. all diagnosed TB patients;
2. only a subset of TB patients, such as MDR-TB patients;
3. initially only a sub-set of patients and will be expanded at a later stage to cover all 
TB patients;
or
4. links to different systems covering different sub-groups of TB patients so that all TB 
patients are eventually covered for surveillance nationally.
In addition, TB suspects, patients screened for TB (regardless of result), sometimes 
systematically for occupational health purposes, or because of their HIV status, or 
contacts of TB patients could also be considered for inclusion in the system.
12
CHAPTER 1. IDENTIFYING GENERAL REQUIREMENTS
  Recommendations 
 Aim for coverage of all notifiable TB patients, microbiologically or clinically 
diagnosed, drug-susceptible or drug-resistant, based on national policies and case 
definitions.
 If this is not possible:
 explain why coverage will not be universal, for example because certain settings 
have very specific or complex needs outside the primary aim of the system and 
operate under difficult conditions; 
 outline conditions or a timeline for if and when the system could be extended to 
include all TB patients; 
 make sure system specifications do not prevent future expansion to other case 
types.
 Establish a clear rationale if patients other than notifiable TB cases are to be 
included in the system.
 1.6 Which locations will the system cover?
  Rationale
The specific needs and conditions that exist in different settings may influence the 
decision on coverage. For example, the administrative structure in a country or the 
remoteness and lack of infrastructure of some of its regions may make it difficult to 
achieve nationwide coverage immediately or in the near future. On the other hand, 
the system could be built with the intention of including health-care providers who are 
not traditionally engaged with, or report data to, NTPs, such as hospitals or private 
general practitioners.
  Options
The system could include:
1. all locations and all providers of TB diagnostic and care service (both public and 
private) in the country
2. only a subset of locations, defined by these categories:
a. Geographic location: such as principal urban areas or specific districts within 
a country
b. Type of facility: such as treatment centres, laboratories, pharmacies, 
hospitals, regional or national administrative offices (Figure 1.3)
c. Sector: such as public treatment facilities, the private sector (Box 1.3), refugee 
camps, military establishments or prisons.
or
3. initially only a sub-set of locations and will be expanded at a later date to cover all 
locations in the country that provide TB diagnostic and care services.
  Recommendations
 Aim for nationwide surveillance of all TB patients, either through nationwide 
coverage of a single system or via integration of information from multiple systems 
in the country.
 If this is not possible, describe why coverage will not be universal, and outline 
conditions or a timeline for if and when electronic recording and reporting could be 
extended to include all TB patients in the country. 
13 
ELECTRONIC RECORDING AND REPORTING FOR TUBERCULOSIS CARE AND CONTROL
 FIGURE 1.3 This shows the facilities using Romania’s web-based system, which is based at the 
National TB Surveillance Unit. MDR-TB units and special facilities such as prisons also 
use the system. Hospitals are not shown because they do not use the system  
(source: Romania National TB Programme)
National TB surveillance unit
County TB unit
TB dispensary MDR-TB centre TB laboratory
Special units  
(police, army, prisons)
Box 1.3
Creating an opportunity to engage with the private sector
The Indus Hospital in Karachi, Pakistan, treats a large number of MDR-TB patients. It built 
an electronic system to help manage the complexity inherent in managing these patients.
In January 2011 it extended its electronic TB recording and reporting system to implement 
an incentive scheme to reward private doctors and community health workers for 
identifying and referring TB suspects, confirming TB cases and for ensuring TB patients 
successfully complete treatment. Family doctors and community health workers report 
their activities electronically using a mobile phone interface to the Indus Hospital system. 
Payments (‘conditional cash transfers’) are made via mobile banking facilities directly to the 
doctor or community heath worker’s mobile phone.
The Indus Hospital reported a doubling of TB case notifications after launching the 
scheme.a Many of these cases would never have been notified in the past and their disease 
and treatment in the private sector would have remained unknown to the NTP.
a http://www.stoptb.org/news/stories/2011/ns11_039.asp
14
CHAPTER 1. IDENTIFYING GENERAL REQUIREMENTS
 1.7 Will the system be a stand-alone system or will it be integrated with 
other electronic systems?
  Rationale
Electronic systems rarely exist in isolation. Knowing the broader information 
landscape helps to identify the key stakeholders who need to be involved when 
strategic decisions are made (as discussed in Section 1.2) and is an important factor 
when developing specifications for a new system. A number of systems which include 
elements of TB recording and reporting may already exist. These may have been built 
with a different primary objective, such as vital registration (especially mortality), HIV, 
pharmacy or laboratory data management (especially results of drug-susceptibility 
testing). Data from such systems may need to be made available within the TB 
recording and reporting system.1
Other examples of differentiation could be by sector (TB patients registered in a 
health insurer’s system), or by funder (TB projects supported by a particular agency). 
  Options
The system could be built:
1. with mechanisms to send and/or to receive data from other systems; this is known 
as interoperability and is often made possible through the adoption of agreed data 
protocols and standards,
2. as a module or extension of an existing broader electronic system such as a 
national infectious disease surveillance system, or an electronic patient record 
system (Box 1.4, Figure 2.1 and Box 4.3),
or
3. with no interaction or data exchange with any other electronic system.
  Recommendations 
 Take a “whole system view” by mapping all existing paper and electronic systems 
that are relevant to TB care and control. This is especially important if TB services 
are fragmented with multiple service providers playing different roles.
 Find out if the ministry of health (or its equivalent) has defined a national 
framework (such as an Enterprise Architecture2) for building and integrating health 
information systems, information systems requirements and an associated data 
dictionary, a set of commonly used and agreed terms (controlled vocabularies), or 
a national indicator repository into which the new system must fit.
 Integrate systems whenever feasible3 making sure that the benefits of doing so 
are clearly defined and that they are consistent with the primary objectives of the 
1 See also Framework and standards for country health information systems, 2nd ed. Geneva, World 
Health Organization, 2008 (also available at  
http://www.who.int/healthmetrics/documents/framework/).
2 An Enterprise Architecture defines the key elements and relationships in an organization (or a 
health information system), the methods for designing health information systems in terms of a well 
defined set of building blocks, including showing how the building blocks fit together and how the 
communication between the building blocks can be achieved. See The Case for a National Health 
Information System Architecture; a Missing Link to Guiding National Development and Implementation 
http://www.who.int/healthmetrics/tools/1HMN_Architecture_for_National_HIS_20080620.pdf via 
http://www.who.int/healthmetrics/tools/
3 Such as TB and HIV. See Three interlinked patient monitoring systems for HIV care/ART, MCH/PMTCT 
and TB/HIV: standardized minimum data set and illustrative tools  
http://www.who.int/hiv/pub/imai/three_patient_monitor/
15 
ELECTRONIC RECORDING AND REPORTING FOR TUBERCULOSIS CARE AND CONTROL
Box 1.4
The development of web-based surveillance of TB in China
The public health emergency caused by the SARS outbreak in 2003 highlighted the lack 
of actionable public health information and prompted the government to develop a real-
time web-based Infectious Disease Reporting System (IDRS). The system was launched 
in 2004 for 37 notifiable infectious diseases, including TB. A case-based TB Information 
Management System, using the same web platform and linked to the IDRS, was launched in 
2005. This replaced the previous paper-based TB quarterly reports.
By the end of 2010 the IDRS was used by over 68 000 health care facilities nationwide, 
including 97% of hospitals at county level and above and 82% of township-level clinics and 
around 25 000 new cases of infectious diseases are reported each day. Many of these 
facilities operate outside the NTP and in the past had not been notifying its TB cases to the 
NTP.
A total of 965 000 new and relapse TB cases were notified in 2009, accounting for 17% 
of the 5.8 million cases notified worldwide. This is up from 454 000 cases notified in 
2000 and illustrates the scale of the system’s achievement in dramatically improving TB 
notification rates.
 FIGURE 1.4 Depicts the dramatic rise in TB case notifications in China beginning in 2003, the 
first year where data were collected using the IDRS (source: WHO global TB database)
80
60
40
20
0
2000 2001 2002 2003 2004 2005 2006 2007 2008 2009 2010
system as defined when answering Section 1.3. Factors to consider when deciding 
whether the benefits are justified by the effort needed to integrate systems 
include:
 available funding
 human resources
 IT infrastructure such as communications networks
 extent of the TB epidemic
 existence of other epidemics and associated systems
 health information policies within the country
 existence of data and systems standards for interoperability and data exchange 
 Identify which data items are essential (“non-negotiable”) and which are desirable 
but optional for integration.
16
Cases per 100 000 population
CHAPTER 1. IDENTIFYING GENERAL REQUIREMENTS
 1.8 What elements of paper-based recording and reporting should be 
maintained?
  Rationale
An electronic system usually needs to interact with paper-based records at different 
stages. There is often a hybrid of paper and electronic patient records, for example 
detailed patient clinical data held on paper, with a subset recorded electronically and 
then routine TB reports produced electronically (see Figure 1.5 for another example). 
There may also be legal requirements for certain documents to be kept on paper.
It is unlikely that the ultimate goal would be to have a completely paperless system 
of recording and reporting for TB patients countrywide.
Standardized paper-based registers, forms and report templates have been long-
standing features in DOTS and the Stop TB Strategy. TB control staff are familiar with 
their use. The robustness of these tools for record-keeping is largely attributable to 
the efforts spent over many years on using common case definitions and recording 
similar variables rather than the fact that data are collected on paper. 
 FIGURE 1.5 TB case information in Georgia is collected at district level on paper forms.  
These are sent to regional level by regular mail where they are recorded electronically 
(source: MEDES, France)
Central coordination site
9 regional sites
Regional coordination site
New organizational level
Individual TB notification 
form sent by post
District level
TB TB TB
notification notification notification Laboratory
  Options
Table 1.1 lists documents commonly used in TB control programmes and identifies 
which of these could be transferred to an electronic recording and reporting system. 
There are various types of recording documents to consider, for example:
 core patient details: such as patient records and registers which form the basis 
of TB surveillance
 records of events: such as treatment cards
 communications or messages: such as notifications, referrals or requests for 
investigations which could be partially or wholly generated by an electronic system, 
either in digital or in printed format. Whether these documents are used digitally 
depends on whether related systems such as laboratory or pharmacy systems exist 
and can receive and act upon electronic messages(see also Section 1.7).
17 
ELECTRONIC RECORDING AND REPORTING FOR TUBERCULOSIS CARE AND CONTROL
Table 1.1
Documents used in TB control
Could be transferred to an 
electronic system?
Patient records
Patient identification card Possibly (2)
TB treatment card (including DR-TB treatment card) Possibly (1)
Clinical records for TB patients Possibly (1)
TB patient appointment card Possibly (2)
Discharge letters from facilities Possibly (2)
Patient registers
Register of TB suspects Yes
Register of TB contacts Yes
District TB register Possibly (3)
Laboratory registers (results for sputum smear, culture, drug susceptibility testing or 
Possibly (3)
Xpert MTB/RIF)
Patient referral
Patient notification Yes
Patient referral for TB care or specialist services Possibly (1)
Request for investigations (radiology, smear, culture, DST, Xpert) Possibly (4)
Drug prescriptions Possibly (4)
Management of drugs and supplies
Drugs and devices order form Possibly (4)
Laboratory supplies order form Possibly (4)
Drug stocks register Yes
Laboratory supply register Yes
Reports
Managerial and operational reports
Stocks of drugs Yes
Stocks of laboratory supplies Yes
Programme performance, supervision checklists, activity report Yes
Routine reports
Case detection Yes
Sputum conversion Yes
Treatment outcome and TB/HIV activities Yes
MDR-TB indicators Yes
(1) Only if electronic recording and reporting is routinely used for case management and recovery of electronic records is reliable at 
the point of care; if records are home-based then keeping to paper format is recommended.
(2) Only if electronic recording and reporting is routinely used for case management and patients can store appointment details, for 
example on their mobile phones.
(3) Only if electronic records are reliably available where the register is kept. 
(4) Only if integrated systems exist between the requesting centre and the other services.
18
CHAPTER 1. IDENTIFYING GENERAL REQUIREMENTS
Print-outs from electronic systems may still be necessary, for example the patient 
identification card could be generated by an electronic system and printed. 
Alternatively, regulations in a country may require that paper records are kept and 
that electronic data can only be captured from paper records.
  Recommendations
 Check legal requirements to identify which documents have to be kept on paper.
 Refer to Table 1.1 when deciding which elements of TB recording and reporting are 
to be kept on paper.
 Do not put the well-being and efficient management of TB patients at risk through 
a drive to completely eliminate paper recording and reporting. 
 Parallel runs using paper and electronic systems may be necessary during initial 
system roll out, but plan to restrict this to a limited testing period and to avoid a 
long-standing “pilot-project”.
 1.9 Is the basic unit of recording clinical data a patient, a case or  
a group of cases?
  Rationale
The type of clinical information entered into the system has a direct bearing on the 
types of outputs it can generate. When the focus of the system is individual patients 
then a greater variety of reports can be produced compared to when the focus is 
simply the total number of cases seen by a facility in a given time period. 
The system may also hold other data such as those related to programme 
activities, laboratory supplies, budgets or human resources where the unit of 
measurement will differ. This section focuses on patient-specific information.
  Options
The basic unit of recording could be:
1. Individual data at the point of data entry. 
or
2. Aggregated totals only at the point of data entry. Aggregated data are typically 
found in reports where the numbers of cases are the focus and individual details 
are not important; aggregated totals are not usually found at the point of data entry 
(Box 1.5).
The advantages of storing individual data include:
 records can be used during clinical management of patients;
 records of every encounter with a patient result in a detailed longitudinal profile for 
each TB case and enable case- or patient-based analyses (for example, mapping 
the location of new TB cases);
 variables of interest can be added over time, such as risk factors like smoking 
status or the presence of diabetes, which can then be used to create new types of 
aggregated and dis-aggregated reports;
 data quality checks can be implemented, for example identifying duplicate entries 
or identifying implausible data combinations such as pregnant men;
 links can be made to records in other databases to retrieve additional information 
such as DST results from a laboratory information system;
19 
ELECTRONIC RECORDING AND REPORTING FOR TUBERCULOSIS CARE AND CONTROL
Box 1.5
Phasing in of case-based recording and reporting in Viet Nam
The Vietnamese TB surveillance system (VITIMES) is being developed by the NTP, MoH 
and local IT companies in three distinct phases. The first phase provided district-level 
aggregated data entry. The second phase, under development in 2011, will provide district-
level case-based data collection. The third phase will add other disease notifications to the 
system.
 up-to-date drug management forecasts can be calculated and consumption 
monitored based on patients’ real data, and these can be aggregated at any level 
of the supply chain.
Individual data could be stored as:
1. Patient-based records: this is where a patient (an individual person rather than 
a TB case) is the basic unit of recording. If there is a reliable, nationally-unique 
identifier for all or at least an appreciable proportion of TB patients when they 
present for care, such as an ID card number or social security number,1 then 
records can truly be patient-based. If coverage of the system is national then the 
system could be built to recognize relapsed TB patients automatically using records 
of their earlier TB episodes; the patients’ previous treatment history would be 
known accurately.
 Transfers between treatment units could be handled smoothly: the receiving 
unit will have access to the patient’s details and overall the system will be able 
to calculate treatment outcome rates accurately. Moreover, if a national patient 
identifier is in use it can identify or prevent duplicate entries and make data 
exchange with other information systems much easier. 
or
2. Case-based records: this is where a case of TB, and associated care and 
treatment information is recorded. There will typically be a case identifier held 
in the system to link various items of information related to the TB case, and this 
identifier may be confined to a limited part of the system (such as a treatment 
facility). This makes it difficult or impossible to identify previous treatment 
episodes automatically, particularly if the patient had been treated at a different 
facility.
A unique national patient ID is often not available, so a compromise could be to hold 
the detailed patient-based records at local or sub-national level and only key variables 
in case-based records at the national level. Alternatively, records may be matched at 
a higher level to identify duplicate patient records and corrected identifiers exported 
back down to lower levels.
1 At the time of writing, the Unique Identification Authority of India was implementing a project called 
Aadhaar to issue all residents of India a unique 12-digit identification number, with biometric data such 
as fingerprints and Iris scans used to validate identities  
http://uidai.gov.in/aadhaar-technology.html
20
CHAPTER 1. IDENTIFYING GENERAL REQUIREMENTS
Another less useful option could be to hold the detailed patient-based records 
at local or sub-national level and only aggregated data at the national level, but this 
would limit the ability to detect duplicates or to link records of transferred patients.
  Recommendations 
 The ideal system would use patient-based records at the point of data entry using 
a unique national personal identifier that is also used by other information 
systems.
 If unique national personal identifiers are not available, but recognized and well-
managed sub-national or local patient identifiers are in available (such as a 
hospital number), use patient-based records at the point of data entry.
 If patient-based records are not feasible then use case-based records at the point 
of data entry whenever possible. 
 A system based on aggregated data at point of data entry will not offer the full 
benefits of electronic recording and reporting, and is not encouraged.
 1.10 What data items need to be captured?
  Rationale
System developers need to know about all data that will be held in the system. 
This will include a core set of variables needed to satisfy the minimal reporting 
requirements as per WHO recommendations. This includes the variables needed to 
calculate or generate indicators based on existing indicator definitions (including how 
they are calculated).
  Recommendations
 Specify all data to be held in the system, including (see also Figure 1.6):
 Data items for programme management and TB surveillance at sub-
national, national and international levels, such as those needed to produce 
WHO-recommended reports. Some data items captured for patient and 
programme management at local level can feed into this level.
 Data items for patient management at local level, such as address, HIV 
status, co-morbidities, treatment details and laboratory results. See Table 1.2 
below for some suggested patient management data items. 
 Data items for programme management at local level, such as staffing or 
activities. Some of these data items may only be needed at the local level whilst 
others may feed into the sub-national or national levels.
 Data items for work flow management and system administration, such as 
names of health care facilities or names and roles of users. These will depend 
in large part on the technical solution selected and may not be easily defined 
beforehand.
 Data items for system monitoring and audit, such as access logs and time 
stamps. These are usually captured automatically.
Note that some data items will not be immediately obvious until decisions have been 
made about workflows and data management processes (see Chapter 2). 
 Develop a data dictionary and keep it up-to-date. This documents data items in 
terms of variable names, definitions, data formats, allowed values, codes and 
21 
ELECTRONIC RECORDING AND REPORTING FOR TUBERCULOSIS CARE AND CONTROL
 FIGURE 1.6 Screen shot of a user’s home page in the e-TB Manager system showing the four main 
functional areas and associated data available (source: MSH, Brazil)
categories. Identify relationships between data items (for example a patient has a 
name, but can be cared for by multiple treatment facilities). 
 Identify the level (local, sub-national, national) at which each data item is needed. 
 Include all data items needed to calculate or generate the currently-recommended 
core set of indicators (see footnotes on page 7) plus any needed for country-
specific indicators based on existing indicator definitions (including how they are 
calculated).
 Identify which of the possible data items are absolutely essential to fulfil the 
objectives of the system and which items are desirable but optional. There is 
always a trade-off to be considered: additional data items increase the burden and 
associated costs of data entry. Bear in mind that the main purpose of the system is 
to manage day-to-day operations rather than to conduct research.
 If a new system is to replace an existing electronic system, identify the data items 
to migrate from the old to the new system. Migrating data can be difficult and 
time-consuming and it has to be done carefully and accurately, so it needs to be 
planned for at the very beginning of the project.
 It may be worth considering data items that may be needed in the near future, 
or other types of data that have become possible with recent technological 
advances, such as GPS coordinates or digital x-ray images. A realistic and practical 
list is more useful than an aspirational one because there are usually cost and 
compatibility implications when data items are added or modified (for example 
analysing trends over time becomes more difficult).
For example, in 2010 WHO endorsed the use of Xpert MTB/RIF as a diagnostic tool 
and, as this guide was being prepared (2011), WHO is reviewing TB case definitions 
and parameters for reporting. Electronic recording and reporting would also need to 
provide, among laboratory methods, options for registration of Xpert MTB/RIF results 
for confirmation of TB and resistance to rifampicin.
22
CHAPTER 1. IDENTIFYING GENERAL REQUIREMENTS
Table 1.2
Data items for patient registration and management at local levela 
Geographical data Region, district, facility, facility sector (such as public, private,…), facility type (such as 
treatment centre, pharmacy, laboratory, prison,…)
Identification and Unique patient or case ID,b other patient IDs (e.g. related register numbers), name, 
demographic data address, telephone numbers, date of birth, sex, origin (such as national, foreign,…), 
criteria for assigning origin (such as birth place, citizenship,…), risk group (such as 
prisoner, slum dweller,…).
Clinical data Date of first contact with health services, date of TB diagnosis, site of TB disease, 
previous anti-TB treatment (before current episode), HIV test, HIV test date, HIV 
status, is the TB patient receiving antiretroviral therapy?, is the TB patient receiving 
co-trimoxazole preventative therapy?, other important risk indicators and co-
morbidities (such as smoker, diabetic,…).
Bacteriology data Bacteriological confirmation, method (such as smear, culture,…), reason (such as 
diagnostic, follow up,…), date sample collected, date result determined.
Drug susceptibility data Method (such as solid media, liquid culture,…), drugs to which resistance was tested 
(such as rifampicin, isoniazid, …), date sample collected, date result determined, result 
(such as susceptible, resistant,…).
Treatment (summary) data Date of start of treatment, treatment regimen (such as first line, …), intermediate 
treatment result (such as conversion, died, defaulted,…), final treatment result (such as 
cured, completed,…), date of end of treatment.
Treatment (details) data Drug taken, dose, date, observed.
a Note that this is not a formal data dictionary, nor is it a comprehensive data model as it does not specify all possible data items 
nor how these data items relate to each other. The data model for a patient-based system will be different to the data model for a 
case-based system.
b Patient-based systems use a unique patient ID whereas case-based systems use a unique case ID that may also be facility-
specific.
23 
 CHAPTER 2 Identifying detailed 
requirements 
This chapter identifies 18 questions that need to be considered to define detailed 
requirements once the broad scope has been identified (see Chapter 1).
 Capabilities
 Who enters data, where and when will data be entered, and how do data flow 
within the system?
 What data quality assurance processes are required?
 How is feedback provided to system users?
 What standard outputs, reports and other analyses are required?
 What are the data entry screen or interface requirements?
 How will data confidentiality and security be ensured?
 Resources
 What staffing is required?
 What user support is needed?
 What technical support is needed?
 What level of service availability, response times and contingency planning is 
required?
 What funding is required for both start-up and routine operations?
 How long will electronic data be retained and will they be archived?
 Infrastructure
 How is the electronic recording and reporting software made available to users?
 What devices will users need to use the system?
 What database software is required?
 Where will the servers be located?
 What communications networks are needed?
 What are the electrical power needs?
The importance of each question is explained, the options to be considered are 
described and recommended approaches are provided. With the exception of some 
of the infrastructure questions, understanding and answering these questions does 
not require a high level of IT expertise, but the answers are essential for the IT experts 
who will design and implement the system. Case studies at the end of the chapter 
show how two countries have addressed these questions. 
This initial activity may be time-consuming, but it will save time and resources in 
the long term. Together with the results of Chapter 1, it will help NTPs to develop 
clearly structured and justified proposals that can also provide a foundation for 
resource mobilization.
24 
CHAPTER 2. IDENTIFYING DETAILED REQUIREMENTS
 A. Capabilities1
 2.1 Who enters data, where and when will data be entered, and how do 
data flow within the system?
  Rationale
System designers need to understand the various processes and activities involved 
in TB care and how data flow within the system, including where data come from, 
who enters them, where they are entered, when they are entered and how often. 
System designers also need to understand the roles and responsibilities of users as 
they interact with the system and as data flows through the system, to know about 
approval and checking procedures.
Data may be generated in one place but only entered into a system at a later stage. 
For instance, a patient may be detected with TB and started on treatment in a rural 
health facility but only registered in an electronic system when paper documents 
reach the designated data entry point. The source documents may be registers 
(laboratory, pharmacy, cases) or the patient’s medical notes, such as the TB treatment 
card or requests for sputum smear microscopy tests. 
There may be more than one data entry point, for instance at health facilities 
and at laboratories. This is expected in particular for patients with drug-resistant TB 
where drug regimens are more complicated and in whom monitoring is more intensive 
and prolonged. Information may need to be retrieved from other health-information 
systems such as pharmacies or vital registration systems.
The administrative structure of a country plays an important role in workflows, 
particularly when data flow from local up to national levels. Each administrative level 
may, for example, implement its own checks as it consolidates its data before making 
them available higher up the chain.
The nature of data flow is also important. If a primary objective of the system is 
to provide real-time, up-to-date information at the national level, then data must be 
consolidated immediately at the national level and delays reduced to a minimum. 
This would preclude adopting a system that is based on subnational units sending 
their data to the national level at predefined, but long intervals such as monthly or 
quarterly.
It is also useful to estimate the size of data sets to be transferred, the number 
of transfers (for example, the number of treatment facilities sending data to district 
level each day, and the size of each delivery) and the workload placed upon staff. 
This allows system designers to plan for adequate data transfer capacity and for 
programme managers to plan for adequate human resources.
  Options for documentation
The answers to questions 2.1 to 2.4 could be documented or illustrated in the form of 
user stories or use cases. User stories are short informal phrases about what a user 
tries to achieve in a particular situation; use cases describe in detail all interactions 
between users and the system, and include both inputs and outputs.2 These help 
1 The expression Functional requirements is often used to describe system capabilities; that is, what a 
system is to accomplish and how it is supposed to behave.
2 http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/User_story and http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Use_case
25 
ELECTRONIC RECORDING AND REPORTING FOR TUBERCULOSIS CARE AND CONTROL
systems analysts and software developers to understand how the system is to be 
used and how users expect it to behave.
Another useful way of describing system behaviour is to illustrate how a patient 
“moves” through the system as they progress through various diagnostic and 
treatment phases.
  Recommendations
 Describe all the situations and activities in which data are entered into the system. 
For example:
 Directly, without the use of paper records:
interactions with patients (e.g. consultations, supervision of medication)
digital output of diagnostic systems (e.g. digital x-ray, GeneXpert instruments)
 Recording of data found in paper documents, such as:
— TB treatment cards, or equivalent medical records of treatment
— Laboratory request forms
— Laboratory results received on paper forms
— X-ray results received on paper and film
— Patient transfers between treatment facilities
 Describe who will need to enter data, and the workload involved. For example:
 examining physician
 nurse
 medical assistant
 community health worker
 administrative staff
 laboratory technician
 pharmacist
 patient or relative/guardian of patient.
 Describe where, when and how often data will be entered. For example:
 during or immediately after consultation;
 during or immediately after supervision of medication;
 in the health care facility administrative office at specific regular intervals such 
as end of the working day, end of the week or end of the month;
 immediately after microscopy result is established;
 when patients are transferred from one treatment centre to another.
 Aim for immediate data capture at source when it is generated, for example at 
facility level.
 Identify and describe any data flows, for example:
 Data sets to be received from external systems, such as patient management 
systems, electronic health records, laboratory systems, pharmacy systems, 
other public service providers such as prisons and harm reduction services, and 
private service providers.
 Data sets to be sent to external systems such as electronic medical records, 
administration, finance, pharmacy (electronic subscriptions), laboratory 
(electronic test requests).
 Data sets to be sent from treatment facilities to higher administrative levels, 
such as treatment records or treatment outcomes sent to district level.
26
CHAPTER 2. IDENTIFYING DETAILED REQUIREMENTS
 FIGURE 2.1 Simplified overview of data flows in China’s web-based system showing  
the two-way and real-time exchange of data between the Infectious Disease 
Reporting System and the more specialized TB Information Management System 
(source: Chinese Center for Disease Control and Prevention)
Local CDC
Hospital web
connection
IDRS database TBIMS database
Hospital
web
connection
Hospital
TB dispensary
 Data sets exchanged between treatment facilities, for example when patients 
are transferred.
 Data sets to be received from mobile input devices (if not instantaneous).
 Develop a diagram that gives an overview of data flows (Figure 2.1 shows a 
simplified example). This is especially useful when data are combined in stages, 
such as when subnational levels maintain separate databases and then send their 
data to a separate national database. Working with systems analysts will allow 
for more detailed diagrams to be developed, showing how data move through 
elements of the system and how they are transformed as they move.
 Describe how often data would need to be integrated at subnational or national 
level, for example:
 in real-time (facilities connected directly to a national or subnational database);
 at fixed-time intervals, such as hourly or daily.
 Aim for real-time data transmission or consolidation wherever possible, or with 
the minimum amount of delay if real-time operations are not possible at particular 
locations. Therefore, use digital networks (such as the Internet or cellular phone 
networks) to transmit or consolidate data. Only transfer data physically using 
digital media such as memory sticks or CD-ROMs if networks are not available or 
are unreliable.
27 
ELECTRONIC RECORDING AND REPORTING FOR TUBERCULOSIS CARE AND CONTROL
 Aim for automatic integration or importation of data generated by other electronic 
systems (such as laboratory systems) without manual data re-entry.
 2.2 What data quality assurance processes are required?
  Rationale
Checking and approval processes are familiar in paper-based recording environments. 
For example, district supervisors regularly visit treatment facilities to cross-check 
laboratory registers and TB patient registers. Moving to an electronic system may 
mean replacing the existing processes of checks and balances with new ones. These 
will need to be fully described: the people involved, their responsibilities in the 
process, when they take place, how they happen, and what happens to records at 
each stage.
The concept of data governance is useful. It means thinking about the people, 
processes and information technology required to ensure that data can be trusted.1 
It is about putting people in charge of fixing and preventing problems with data and 
establishing clear responsibilities for data quality.
  Options
Data quality assurance processes can be integrated into all levels of the system. 
Some countries may add extra emphasis to these by, for example:
 Creating a national data management unit responsible for establishing and 
monitoring data quality procedures. Local or subnational data managers could also 
be considered.
 Adopting systematic approaches to quality management such as those required for 
ISO90012 certification (Box 2.1).
Box 2.1
Developing a quality management system in the UK
The Health Protection Agency in the UK has been developing a quality management system 
under which the electronic TB surveillance system, amongst others, will operate. It is 
working towards ISO9001 certification of its quality management system. Key principles 
include:
● Commitment of senior management
● Audits and evaluation
● Comprehensive record-keeping to allow tracing of problems
● Customer-driven, allowing for complaints and feedback
● Documented development process and including tests for quality and user satisfaction
● Mechanisms for implementing quality improvement
1 http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Data_governance
2 http://www.iso.org/iso/iso_catalogue/management_and_leadership_standards/quality_
 management.htm
mmm
28
CHAPTER 2. IDENTIFYING DETAILED REQUIREMENTS
 FIGURE 2.2 Part of a screen shot showing real-time validity checking at the time of data  
entry. The user is prevented from entering an invalid combination of dates and the 
error is explained, allowing the user to correct the date before it can be saved 
(source: Health Protection Agency, UK)
  Recommendations
 Consider how those responsible for data entry actually use the data. If they rely on 
the data for their work, they will be looking at the data regularly and will spot errors 
and have an incentive to correct them. If data entry is simply a one-way process 
for data entry clerks, other feedback mechanisms will be needed such as real-time 
data validation checks.
 Define real-time data validation checks at the point of data entry, such as:
 enforcing data types (for example numeric fields cannot accept text);
 defining mandatory fields (such as a patient’s name and sex) without which a 
record cannot be saved;
 defining plausible ranges for numeric variables;
 enforcing valid options for categories by using drop-down lists or tick boxes 
instead of entering free text;
 checking valid formats for some fields such as identifiers;
 defining hierarchies such as districts within a region;
 defining “skip” or conditional fields (for example, do not ask about drug 
regimens if a patient has not started treatment yet);
 checking for implausible or illogical combinations (for example, a male patient 
cannot be pregnant; date of diagnosis cannot be before date of symptoms 
onset) (Figure 2.2);
 deriving or calculating fields rather than requiring data entry (for example, if 
date of birth is known there is no need to enter the age of a patient, or if patient 
address is known the local authority is automatically derived).
 Define system-generated deadlines and prompts such as alerting users to 
treatment outcome records that are due but have not been entered into the system 
yet so that these can be followed up to ensure data are entered without too much 
delay.
 Define regular data validation algorithms to be run by designated staff at different 
levels (for example, data managers at national or subnational levels) and to be 
run at well-defined stages or frequencies with well-defined follow-up or clean-up 
29 
ELECTRONIC RECORDING AND REPORTING FOR TUBERCULOSIS CARE AND CONTROL
processes, and with full documentation of the results. Define algorithms to look 
for:
 missing items (Figure 2.3 and Figure 2.4);
 inconsistent data (Figure 2.4);
 suspected duplicate records;
 misclassified cases (such as new cases recorded as re-treatment cases);
 unusual trends in key indicators such as notification rates;
 unusual distribution of key indicators and identifying outliers;
 assessing completeness or under-reporting (for example, using record linkage 
or inventory studies linking records to those in other electronic systems such as 
laboratory systems, mortality databases or HIV registers).
 Define a specific type of unusual trend detection process to be run on a fixed, 
frequent schedule: an outbreak detection algorithm. This identifies unusual clusters 
of cases (geographically and/or temporally) and procedures for immediate 
investigation. It is useful to display any unusual trend using graphs and/or maps.
 FIGURE 2.3 A data quality monitoring report in China’s TB Information Management System used 
to identify extent of delays in receipt of data (source: Chinese Center for Disease Control and 
Prevention)
 FIGURE 2.4 Part of a screen shot from the e-TB Manager system showing a menu of missing data 
and data inconsistency reports, and the number of records identified by each report 
(source: MSH, Brazil)
30
CHAPTER 2. IDENTIFYING DETAILED REQUIREMENTS
 Establish external data checks involving supervisory visits to local facilities.
 Agree record completeness targets, particularly for core data items such as age, 
sex, geographical location and type of case (for example, “these variables are 
complete for at least 95% of notified patients”) and monitor the system to ensure 
these targets are met.
 Define regular checks against samples of original paper documents, if relevant.
 Ensure adequate resources will be available to carry out data quality activities: 
train staff so that all are aware of their roles and responsibilities; develop clear 
standard operating procedures (SOPs) for the various data quality processes. This 
helps to ensure uniformity of data quality mechanisms across all facilities using 
the system, especially when complemented by clear, up-to-date definitions of all 
terms and expressions used within the system. Some activities are specialized and 
time-consuming, so planning and budgeting for these staff is important (see also 
Sections 2.7 and 2.11).
 Do not use double-data entry. It adds a considerable data entry burden, is 
only intended to prevent transcription errors, and is not necessary if the 
recommendations in this section are implemented and if data are in constant 
use. Remember that this is a system for day-to-day operations, not a system for 
research.
 2.3 How is feedback provided to system users?
  Rationale
An electronic recording and reporting system gains better acceptance if it helps and 
informs all those who use it, not just those at the national level viewing aggregated 
outputs. It is important to enable those tasked with data entry to have a direct stake 
in, and an incentive to ensure, the accuracy of the data they enter.
  Recommendations
 Make data entry an element of engaging users in an interactive system. Ensure 
data entry is not just a mandatory chore. If staff need to use the data they enter to 
carry out their daily tasks, data entry is no longer a passive, one-way process.
 Think about who enters data: do they also need to use data in their work, for 
example to inform their decisions? Will they be adversely affected if data they see 
in the system are inaccurate? Will their work be made easier if they can correct 
data that are wrong? In other words, is there a feedback loop for those entering 
data so that data entry is not a passive, one-way activity? The analyses needed 
for workflows (Section 2.1), data quality processes (Section 2.2) and standard 
reports (Section 2.4) could identify feedback, such as:
 prompting users to act upon the data in the system, such as tracing missing 
data (Figure 2.5) or contacting patients who have not attended a clinic;
 making reports on standard performance indicators, such as case 
notifications, treatment outcomes or data completeness rates, available 
to all users so that staff within individual health-care units or districts can 
compare their performance with those of others regionally or nationally. This 
encourages two-way communications and shows staff how their work fits into 
a larger picture.
 higher administrative levels informing lower levels about data problems to be 
31 
ELECTRONIC RECORDING AND REPORTING FOR TUBERCULOSIS CARE AND CONTROL
 FIGURE 2.5 A user’s home page in the England and Wales TB surveillance system. Alerts highlight 
pending data that have not been received so that this particular user can follow up to 
ensure all expected data are received (source: Health Protection Agency, UK)
corrected, for example if higher administrative levels detect duplicated patient 
records.
 2.4 What standard outputs, reports and other analyses are required?
  Rationale
A core function of an electronic recording and reporting system is to show users 
accurate, timely and useful information upon which they can take meaningful 
decisions. Useful and actionable outputs transform a system from a passive 
repository of data into an engaging and interactive work tool.
Automatically producing standard reports allows more staff at all levels to 
understand what is happening and reduces the need for individual, detailed analyses 
to be conducted. However, staff will need training to understand and interpret system 
outputs, and how best to act upon them (see also Section 2.8 which discusses 
training needs).
There are two key types of outputs to consider: operational, which are concerned 
with the daily activities of running a TB treatment programme, and surveillance, 
which are concerned with epidemiological analyses and trends (examples are shown 
in Table 2.1).
  Options
Outputs such as alerts could be generated automatically based on triggering events or 
on a predefined frequency, such as daily or weekly. Outputs could also be generated 
on demand, such as when a manager needs to know the number of patients seen in a 
clinic during the previous week.
32
CHAPTER 2. IDENTIFYING DETAILED REQUIREMENTS
Table 2.1
Examples of operational and surveillance reports available within China’s TB Information 
Management System (source: Chinese Center for Disease Control and Prevention)
Category Examples of reports
Case detection Notification of various types of pulmonary TB, patient source and suspect examination
Treatment and management Sputum conversion, cohort outcomes, systematic management
NTP activity Funding, training, supervision, health education
Drug Quarterly drugs expenditure
Laboratory Blind re-check of sputum smear results
Others Basic information on TB dispensaries, human resources
Operational outputs can be tied to specific workflows for users, such as reminders, 
follow-ups and deadlines. Examples of actionable operational outputs include:
 an SMS alert sent to a patient so that they do not miss their appointment;
 identifying potential treatment defaulters so that they can be traced;
 alerts for when sputum examinations need to be done for a patient according to 
the standard treatment guidelines;
 tracking drug usage, expenditure (Figure 2.6) and stocks, and forecasting usage to 
prevent stock-outs;
 data quality algorithms (as mentioned in Section 2.2) to identify and correct faulty 
data.
Surveillance or epidemiological reports are often based on the standard set 
of indicators that WHO recommends for TB case-finding, sputum conversion and 
treatment outcomes (Figure 2.7 and Figure 2.8). Such reports (including tables, 
graphs or maps) can be generated routinely with minimum effort and with little risk 
 FIGURE 2.6 Drug usage and expenditure report automatically generated by the Indus Hospital 
system (source: Interactive Research for Development, Pakistan)
33 
ELECTRONIC RECORDING AND REPORTING FOR TUBERCULOSIS CARE AND CONTROL
 FIGURE 2.7 Standard MDR-TB treatment outcomes report generated automatically by e-TB 
Manager based on filters chosen by the user (source: http://etbmanager.org)
 FIGURE 2.8 Menu of reports based around standard surveillance indicators available in the 
web-based WEB-TBS surveillance system used by some countries in the Eastern 
Mediterranean region (source: WHO Eastern Mediterranean Regional Office)
34
CHAPTER 2. IDENTIFYING DETAILED REQUIREMENTS
 FIGURE 2.9 The Indus Hospital MDR-TB system stores GPS-encoded locations of patients in its 
database and can display these data in a map (source: Interactive Research for Development, 
Pakistan, not real patient data)
of computation errors, in contrast to the labour-intensive process needed to produce 
them when data are not recorded electronically.
Data in the system may be summarized in different ways in addition to the 
standard WHO format. For example:
 The output may be in the form of tables or graphs
 Geographic Information System (GIS) functions or web-based mapping services 
could produce maps showing where patient live by using data captured via GPS-
enabled portable devices or by encoding patient addresses (Figure 2.9).
 Displaying trends in notifications graphically using charts or maps is especially 
useful as it can identify unusual changes or spikes over time or in particular 
areas (Figure 2.10). Well-trained staff presented with good data visualization are 
often better than mathematical algorithms at identifying unusual patterns. This 
visualization is particularly important for detecting outbreaks, as discussed earlier, 
although staff such as surveillance officers will need training in analysis and 
interpretation of the data and the course of action to take, such as undertaking 
detailed cross-checking of data.
 Performing analyses such as two-by-two tables or logistic regression for risk 
factors.
 It may not be necessary for the core TB recording and reporting software modules 
to provide charting and visualization capabilities. Anonymous data could be 
exposed in a standard format (such as CSV or XML files1) without compromising 
the security or confidentiality of the data to be used by external software, such as 
statistical analysis packages, GIS, spreadsheets or data visualization software.
1 CSV = comma-separated values; XML = extensible markup language.
35 
ELECTRONIC RECORDING AND REPORTING FOR TUBERCULOSIS CARE AND CONTROL
 FIGURE 2.10 A set of time series of TB patient notifications by case type (new smear positive, new 
smear negative, etc., plus total) shows an unusual spike in total new pulmonary cases 
in a particular year. The graphs show that this is due to a sudden large number of 
cases recorded as “new pulmonary smear unknown or not done”. Highlighting this 
visually can prompt staff to go back to the source records to fix the problem
 It may not be necessary for the core TB recording and reporting software modules 
to produce specialized reports that are only needed occasionally by a small 
number of people. These could be produced by external software packages once 
anonymous data have been exported to them. 
  Recommendations
 Identify the audience for each output or report. Will the report be in the public 
domain or only available to users with appropriate access credentials? Which types 
of users (administrators, clinicians, laboratory technicians, surveillance officers, 
TB programme managers, etc.)? Which level in the hierarchy (local, district, 
regional, national)? Think about the needs of these different types of users. For 
example, a district programme manager would want to know about all patients 
transferred in or out of their treatment facilities, whereas regional-level staff may 
only be interested in transfers in or out of their region and not be concerned about 
transfers between facilities in a given district.
 Define outputs needed for each type of user and at each level (local, district, 
national), with a particular emphasis on actionable outputs; that is, useful, 
understandable and timely information upon which action can be taken.1
1 The significance of having useful information is emphasised in the introduction (pages 1–4) of 
Framework and Standards for Country Health Information Systems – Second Edition. Geneva, World 
Health Organization 2008. http://www.who.int/healthmetrics/documents/framework/
36
CHAPTER 2. IDENTIFYING DETAILED REQUIREMENTS
 Make sure the system will be able to generate standard indicators of programme 
performance with which NTPs are already familiar, such as quarterly cohort 
analysis.
 Make sure visual displays such as graphs or maps of spacial and temporal trends 
and of potential outbreaks can be created, either within the system or by using 
external software such as statistical, visualization or GIS packages.
 Train relevant staff to understand system outputs and know how to act upon those 
outputs.
 Enable authorized users to conduct customized analyses or to produce customized 
reports, either within the system or by using external software.
 Keep the data dictionary up-to-date to allow those conducting analyses to 
understand the data they are using.
 2.5 What are the data entry screen or interface requirements?
  Rationale
System designers need to understand how best to design the system’s screens.
  Recommendations
 Discuss rough sketches of screens with systems analysts, developers and users to 
reach a joint understanding about what is expected of the system.
 Display screens in a language with which staff are familiar. If more than one 
language is available, allow users to choose which language they want on their 
screens.
 Use date or time formats with which staff are familiar, including provision for any 
non-Gregorian calendars.
 Choose screen layouts that are compatible with or similar to standard paper-based 
TB recording and reporting forms, and compatible with electronic systems with 
which staff are familiar.
 Test and refine interfaces to ensure optimum usability and user-friendliness.
 2.6 How will data confidentiality and security be ensured?
  Rationale
TB recording and reporting systems hold sensitive personal data on patients. Many 
countries will have laws on how confidential or personal data should be stored and 
accessed, for example by restricting access to sensitive personal information to 
those directly involved in a patient’s care. There are various aspects of a system’s 
operations where data confidentiality could be compromised, such as:
 access to screens and reports;
 physical access to data files;
 data transmission via public networks or using portable media devices such as 
memory sticks, which can be lost or stolen.
  Options
Techniques to consider include:
 Role-based access to data: users of the system get access on a need-to-know and 
need-to-use basis. This identifies:
37 
ELECTRONIC RECORDING AND REPORTING FOR TUBERCULOSIS CARE AND CONTROL
a. which data items, screens and reports a user is allowed to see;
b. which data items a user is allowed to add, edit or delete;
c. for which set of patients the access rights above are defined.
 For example, someone working at a TB treatment centre could be prevented from 
seeing any patient who is being treated at a different centre. Someone working 
at the regional level could be allowed to see, but not modify, patient records from 
all treatment centres in that region, but not be allowed to see any patient records 
from other regions. Someone working at the national level could be prevented 
from modifying individual patient records, and could be prevented from seeing a 
patient’s HIV status, or even prevented from seeing any personal data.
 Training users in the importance of confidentiality and having them make a formal 
commitment by signing a document describing what they may and may not do with 
the data held in the system.
 Keeping automated detailed logs showing details of all user interactions with the 
system, including logging in, viewing and modifying data so that there are clear 
audit trails and that security breaches can be traced.
 Excluding access to personal data for those not directly involved in patient care.
 Preventing direct access to physical data files so that the only access users have 
to the data is via screens and reports.
 Physical security such as locking server rooms.
 Secure data transmission methods to prevent others from seeing data sent from 
one computer to another by using data encryption across public networks (such as 
https1), by using a Virtual Private Network (VPN) across public networks or by using 
private networks.
 Data encryption of physical media such as memory sticks.
  Recommendations
 Identify all legal requirements regarding data confidentiality.
 For access to screens and reports, implement role-based access permissions 
combined with individual user accounts.
 Restrict access to physical data files: these are best held on a server with no direct 
end-user access and not on a shared hard drive so that the only access users have 
to the data is via screens and reports.
 Restrict access for users not directly involved in patient care to anonymous data 
only. Care should be taken that individuals cannot be identified through using the 
other variables in the data, for example through a combination of age, sex and 
location.
 Ensure physical security (protection against theft) of all devices that store patient 
data.
 Use secure data encryption methods whenever possible to prevent others from 
seeing data transmitted between computers.
1 Hypertext Transfer Protocol Secure. This allows web browsers to communicate with web servers 
securely and is commonly used with web-based commercial services such as banking.
38
CHAPTER 2. IDENTIFYING DETAILED REQUIREMENTS
 B. Resources
 2.7 What staffing is required?
  Rationale
Staff at local, district and national levels will need to interact with various components 
of an electronic recording and reporting system. Some roles such as data entry, data 
management, data analysis or IT systems management may be new and require new 
skills. There will be an extra workload for some staff, especially for data entry. This 
change needs to be managed carefully.
An electronic recording and reporting system cannot function without adequately 
trained people (Box 2.2). It is crucial to identify the human resources needed to run 
the system and what skills they will need. This may depend on the solutions proposed 
by suppliers, but it is useful to describe any restrictions on staff tasked with managing 
or maintaining the system; for example, number, budget restrictions, location (can 
staff work remotely or do they need to be on site), security clearance, confidentiality 
agreements.
  Options
In addition to the staff needed to develop and roll out a new system, there may be 
others who are needed, for example:
 to fulfil new roles, such as surveillance or monitoring and evaluation officers;
 to engage private and public non-NTP providers in using the electronic system;
 to establish a data management unit with staff dedicated to data management. The 
tasks of the unit could include:
 managing and validating all national TB surveillance data for national monitoring, 
reporting and research;
 defining procedures and protocols for all data management activities;
 defining, maintaining and making available all indicator definitions;
Box 2.2
Staffing requirements in South Africa
An electronic recording and reporting system for TB (ETR.net) was introduced in South 
Africa in 2004. It incorporates data on notifications, patient medications, laboratory 
analyses and treatment outcomes. By mid-2011, there were close to 400 sites at district 
and sub-district levels entering data into ETR.net in all parts of the country, although not 
all facilities managing TB cases are included. Around 400 000 individual case records are 
added annually.
ETR.net is based on proprietary software and needs an in-country external agent for 
maintenance and development in addition to two full time equivalents employed by the 
TB control programme for day-to-day maintenance. There have been challenges using 
the system, for example because of limited capacity to do data analysis and, in some 
locations, lack of human resources to manage the data in the system. The workload of TB 
coordinators when using the system varies substantially but is largely due to differences in 
patient case loads.
39 
ELECTRONIC RECORDING AND REPORTING FOR TUBERCULOSIS CARE AND CONTROL
 providing and maintaining the tools, and training staff at subnational level, to 
send notified TB patient details from subnational levels to national level;
 maintaining database and system security and integrity, including taking 
backups and developing disaster recovery plans;
 preparing and maintaining data files for monitoring, reporting and research;
 coordinating related activities with external partners;
 reporting on data management activities to the NTP manager.
  Recommendations 
 Identify roles required at each level for operating the system (such as data entry, 
data management, user support, IT support, project management), the terms of 
reference, skills required and number of staff needed. This includes both short-
term (development and roll-out phases) and long-term needs.
 Develop a human resources plan with contingency for turnover to ensure the long-
term sustainability of the electronic recording and reporting system.
 2.8 What user support is needed?
  Rationale
Users of the system will need help while they develop new skills and familiarize 
themselves with a new way of working, new work flows, and new roles and 
responsibilities.
The system may, for example, create new situations that did not exist before, such 
as timely identification of clusters of cases. Staff will need to know how to act upon 
the data presented in these new situations.
  Options
Support mechanisms to consider include:
 training;
 providing “how to” guides or easy-to-follow SOPs;
 providing help desk or hotline services with defined response times;
 providing a web-based discussion forum (this proved to be a valuable resource 
when the NTP of Romania first launched its system);
 sharing experience with and learning from users in other countries that have 
moved from paper-based to electronic recording and reporting.
Some support activities could be done in-house using existing resources and some 
could be provided by external suppliers.
  Recommendations
 Describe the level of help and support required for all types of users, and the 
source of support (whether in-house or outsourced to external suppliers). Some 
users will have very specific roles and tasks and therefore have different support 
needs, so consider how these various subgroups can be supported.
 Ensure staff are adequately trained in using their part of the system.
 Provide written material such as SOPs.
 Provide interactive help facilities such as a help desk or hotline with clearly defined 
and agreed response times, or a web-based user support forum.
40
CHAPTER 2. IDENTIFYING DETAILED REQUIREMENTS
 2.9 What technical support is needed?
  Rationale
The technical infrastructure used by the system, such as PCs, printers, laptops, 
tablets, mobile phones, servers, network routers, power supply units, will need to be 
managed and any problems will need to be fixed quickly to ensure smooth operation 
of the electronic system.
Software maintenance is crucial. Bugs, changing requirements (such as the 
incorporation of new data items or reporting requirements) and availability of new 
techniques are in the nature of information technology and mean that any software 
deployed will change over time.
  Options
A variety of software licensing models exist which define:
 who owns the software;
 who has the right to modify the software;
 the fees that should be paid for the software (for example, some suppliers will 
charge for each software copy that has been installed on a device, while others 
may provide site licences allowing any number of installations on devices owned 
and hosted by the software customer.)
Open source software allows programmers to change and adapt software and to fix 
bugs without needing the permission of the original software developers. This work 
is often done collaboratively, so that the software evolves as a result of the work 
of a community of programmers. Some of these programmers may already live and 
work in the country, so engaging them helps to build local programming capacity and 
reduces the reliance on specialists from abroad.
The choice of software licence can have a long-term impact on the development 
and evolution of a system (Box 2.3).
For more on software licensing schemes, see section 4.6.1 of the Health Metrics 
Network draft guide on procurement and acquisition for health information systems.1
Box 2.3
Software ownership and lack of resources to fund upgrades
Romania engaged a local company to build its web-based TB recording and reporting 
system which was launched in 2005. The system is being successfully used nationwide. 
However, it has been difficult to engage the original software developers to upgrade the 
system and to fix bugs due to NTP budget restrictions: the NTP’s agreement with the 
original software developers did not include software maintenance and upgrades because 
the cost of such provision exceeded the available project budget at that time. The company 
has retained ownership of the source code and the NTP does not have the right to contract 
alternative software developers to modify the software.
1 http://wiki.healthmetricsnetwork.info/wiki-kigali/lib/exe/fetch.php?media=background:hmn_
 procurement_guide:hmn_procurement_guide_v5.2.doc
mmm
41 
ELECTRONIC RECORDING AND REPORTING FOR TUBERCULOSIS CARE AND CONTROL
Box 2.4
Open source software allows development of local expertise
Medes, a French non-profit organisation, developed the TB surveillance system in Georgia 
using a software platform which it developed and which it then made available as open 
source software.a This opens up the possibility for Georgian companies to take over 
maintenance and further development the TB surveillance system which would reduce 
dependence on Medes and help to foster local expertise. In 2011, for example, a Georgian 
company began developing a system to send laboratory results from the laboratory 
information system to the TB surveillance system.
a http://code.google.com/p/imogene/
A number of options may be available when deciding who will be responsible for 
software maintenance:
1. limited to the supplier: some suppliers may place restrictions through their 
software licences preventing others from having access to, or from modifying their 
programs (also called source code). If software suppliers do not allow access to 
source code, one way to guard against the risk of having unsupported software 
if the supplier goes out of business is for the supplier to place the source code in 
escrow;1
2. outsourced to other programmers, if this is permitted by the supplier;
or
3. programmers within the NTP or ministry of health.
Options may also be available when deciding from where to get the programming 
expertise needed to maintain the system, for example:
1. local software companies (Box 2.4);
2. local programmers;
3. open source development communities;
or
4. foreign experts.
  Recommendations
 Keep the system operational and fit for purpose by planning and budgeting for:
 system administration (such as regular backing up, network configuration, 
user account management or rolling out the system to a new TB treatment 
facility);
 hardware maintenance;
 fixing software bugs;
 developing new functionality in the software, such as adding new modules 
for specific patient groups, to support new activities, to provide new outputs 
1 Escrow is where the source code is held by a third party who will release the source code if certain 
pre-defined conditions arise, such as bankruptcy of the solution provider. See for example  
http://www.ncc.co.uk/article/?articleref=500005
42
CHAPTER 2. IDENTIFYING DETAILED REQUIREMENTS
(for example graphing or mapping capabilities) or building links to other health 
information systems (see Section 1.7).
 Establish mechanisms with those responsible for software maintenance to capture 
and manage bug reports and requests for new functionality:
 Define feedback channels (for example via a button in the software or a 
dedicated email address, or even via supervision visits or management 
meetings) for users to report bugs or to submit suggestions.
 Decide how information about reported bugs and suggested enhancements will 
be shared, and with whom.
 Agree how decisions to accept and implement or to reject suggested 
enhancements are made.
 Ensure that those responsible for software maintenance have well-defined and 
transparent procedures to log, track and act upon reported bugs, for example 
through the use of dedicated bug tracking software.
 Define severity scales and response times desired for each type of request, for 
example what length of delay is acceptable before a critical bug is fixed.
 Ensure that maintenance budgets include provision for bug-fixing and software 
upgrades.
 Check that software licences do not prevent the desired level of bug-fixing 
and software upgrading. Where funding is limited, ensure that there is at least 
provision or an agreement with the software suppliers to fix serious bugs that 
may not have arisen during the initial roll-out of the system.
 Ensure that up-to-date technical documentation of the system will be available 
and be maintained, particularly if programmers other than the original software 
developers will maintain and/or enhance the system.
 2.10 What level of service availability, response times and contingency 
planning is required?
  Rationale
Electronic systems may become integral part of work processes. This dependency 
carries the obvious risk that work may grind to a halt when there is a system outage. 
It is important to consider the consequences of system unavailability and to plan how 
people can continue to work during periods of system downtime.
Poorly-built or configured systems that cannot cope with the requested volume 
of work can be almost as bad as system downtime, with long delays between key 
presses and screen responses.
  Options
There may be a choice in how to continue working when the electronic system is not 
available:
1. Use paper recording while the system is down and consider how and when data 
are entered electronically once the system is available again.
or
2. Some systems allow users to work offline when networks or remote servers are 
down; data are then uploaded to servers when they are available again.
43 
ELECTRONIC RECORDING AND REPORTING FOR TUBERCULOSIS CARE AND CONTROL
  Recommendations
 Specify desired response times (for example, new page displayed in less than 3 
seconds or report generated in less than 10 seconds).
 Develop a business continuity plan that describes what to do if there is a major 
failure (such as extended periods of power cuts or more severe events such as a 
fire where servers are located); how daily work can be conducted; if an alternative 
electronic system would be put in place; if paper-based recording could be used as 
a temporary solution; how all data could be extracted and used to move to a new 
software solution.
 Define and implement a regular backup schedule (for example, daily) and a regular 
backup-testing schedule (for example, quarterly) to ensure backups can correctly 
restore both the electronic recording and reporting software and its data.
 Establish service level agreements with solution providers if the system servers 
are hosted at a professional data centre, and not hosted within NTP facilities. 
Service level agreements specify system uptime (for example 99.9% uptime during 
a calendar year, which is about 9 hours of system unavailability or downtime in a 
calendar year).
 2.11 What funding is required for both start-up and routine operations?
  Rationale
Funding needs careful consideration and long-term thinking to ensure that the system 
is sustainable beyond the initial implementation phase. A draft budget will need to be 
developed based on all the choices made (as covered in Chapters 1 and 2) so that 
funding can be secured. The budget needs to describe projected annual running costs 
in addition to start-up costs.
  Recommendations
 Develop a long-term budget identifying all possible costs and calculate a total 
cost of ownership (see Box 2.5 and, for more details, see Chapter 3). It will be a 
challenge to develop an accurate budget, but it is necessary to identify all possible 
costs, both fixed and variable, that need to be covered if the system is introduced 
and the timescale over which they are needed, which include:
 capital costs: hardware such as input devices, servers, printers, power supply 
units, air conditioning, network routers and firewalls;
 hardware maintenance and replacement schedules;
 initial software development and ongoing software maintenance and upgrades, 
including long-term support (see also Section 2.9 and Box 2.5);
 software licences, including any needed for operating systems, security and 
anti-virus systems in addition to any licences for the recording and reporting 
system itself (see Chapter 3). Note that if the software is in use in other areas 
of government, there may be a site licence allowing multiple installations of the 
software, eliminating the need to purchase additional licences;
 project management (especially during implementation and roll-out);
 procurement processes and legal fees;
 staffing, especially for data entry, data management, user support and system 
maintenance;
44
CHAPTER 2. IDENTIFYING DETAILED REQUIREMENTS
Box 2.5
Guidance material on funding for health information systems
The Health Metrics Network has developed a number of tools to help with assessing costs 
and sourcing funds for health information systems. These include:
● a detailed list of tasks that need to be considered in order to calculate the total cost of 
ownership of a proposed health information system. See 
 http://wiki.healthmetricsnetwork.info/wiki-kigali/lib/exe/fetch.
 php?media=background:hmn_procurement_guide:annexa_tco.doc 
 (or access it via the web annex at 
 http://www.who.int/tb/publications/electronic_recording_reporting/)
● guidance and tools to support country applications to the Global Fund.  
See http://www.who.int/healthmetrics/tools/gfapplication/
 training;
 service costs (for example, power usage, Internet access, network usage, 
mobile network subscription charges and SIM cards);
 consumables such as paper and ink for printers;
 any specific additional costs (for example, conditional cash transfers for private 
general practitioners who refer TB patients to the NTP).
 Develop a long-term funding plan for the project as a whole to guarantee the 
sustainability of the system, including start-up costs, annual running costs 
and sources of funding. A gap analysis would be useful to identify where and 
when potential financial shortfalls occur. A long-term funding plan such as this 
can be used to approach potential funders to raise the necessary funds for 
implementation.
 2.12 How long will electronic data be retained and will they be archived?
  Rationale
TB recording and reporting systems are built for the long term. When large numbers of 
patient records are anticipated, such as in countries with a high TB burden, it is useful 
to have a policy on how long electronic records will be kept in the system.
There may already be well-defined mechanisms for the retention and archiving of 
paper-based records. It is important to define specific mechanisms for the retention 
and archiving of electronic records.
Some countries may have legal requirements for electronic data storage or 
archiving, and for how long those records are to be kept.
  Options
Types of records that could be archived (each type could have a different retention 
policy):
 patient records;
 system access logs and audit trails;
 reports (e.g. aggregated notifications and treatment outcomes).
45 
ELECTRONIC RECORDING AND REPORTING FOR TUBERCULOSIS CARE AND CONTROL
Retention policy for patient records:
1. Keep all records indefinitely.
2. Retain basic patient identification information such as IDs, name, sex and date of 
birth, and a summary of TB treatment episodes; but archive extra details after a 
defined period has elapsed since the last encounter in the system (for example, 10 
years after the end of the most recent TB treatment episode).
or
3. Archive patient records entirely after a defined period has elapsed since the last 
encounter in the system.
Type of archives:
1. Electronic
or
2. Print records and archive the printouts, and delete the electronic records. This 
method could be costly and hard to maintain.
  Recommendations
Plan for the long term and define retention policies for different types of data as listed 
above. If detailed electronic records are not to be kept indefinitely, specify secure 
archiving and retrieval processes while ensuring that system functionality (such 
as automatically identifying patients with a previous history of TB treatment) is not 
compromised and that all legal requirements regarding data retention in the country 
are fulfilled.
46
CHAPTER 2. IDENTIFYING DETAILED REQUIREMENTS
 C. Infrastructure
 2.13 How is the electronic recording and reporting software made 
available to users?
  Rationale
Maintaining and upgrading software is inevitable: bugs are identified that need to 
be fixed, requirements change, for example if new case definitions are adopted. The 
logistics involved in rolling out updated versions of the application software to all 
users depend on the type of software chosen and, if not considered carefully, can 
result in a slow, costly and complicated process. 
Licensing fees could also be associated with where application software is 
installed, so the type of user software chosen also has a bearing on cost (see also 
Section 2.9 on technical support).
  Options
1. Users have access to the system via standard web browsers such as Internet 
Explorer, Firefox, Chrome or Safari, which are now available on most web-enabled 
devices. The electronic recording and reporting system itself resides on a remote 
web server and not on users’ devices.
 Advantages. All users have access to the same system and database. Updates 
and bug fixes are easy to roll out because they are applied to servers only and do 
not need to be applied to each user’s device. User support is much easier and 
there are no dependencies on the specific configurations of users’ devices. Server 
and data security and management can be carried out by dedicated professional 
teams.
 Disadvantages. There is a single point of failure: if servers are down or Internet 
connections are disrupted, the system is inaccessible. The web-based system may 
not work properly using old or non-standard-compliant browsers.
or
2. Users have access to the system via dedicated application software that 
needs to be installed on each user’s device such as their PC or mobile 
phone. This is sometimes called client software and is becoming increasingly 
known as an app on mobile devices. The data may be stored remotely, but can 
often also be stored locally on each user’s device. Client software can be quite 
complex, carrying out all data-related activities; however, it is also possible to have 
lightweight client software that provides a simple interface to the main application 
and data hosted on a remote server. Alternatively, client software can work with 
local copies of data and then synchronize at a later stage with a database hosted 
on a remote server.
 Advantages. The system can be used in the absence of network connections.
 Disadvantages. (on non-networked PCs in particular). Logistic difficulties in 
installing, testing, bug-fixing and upgrading software (for example, the addition 
of new data items) on all users’ machines (particularly in remote areas of large 
countries), in supporting users (help desk) and diagnosing problems, and in 
handling the variety of PC configurations likely to be found, such as different 
47 
ELECTRONIC RECORDING AND REPORTING FOR TUBERCULOSIS CARE AND CONTROL
versions of operating systems, library files, peripherals, memory and hard drives. 
When there is a large number of client installations on PCs with no Internet access, 
it is highly likely after a few years that different, sometimes incompatible, versions 
exist on different PCs, making support and upgrading extremely difficult. It is also 
difficult to guarantee security of data when distributed over a large number of 
locally-managed PCs.
  Recommendations
 When Internet connections are available and reliable, use a web-based system with 
a standard browser interface (not requiring additional plug-ins or custom additions) 
or a lightweight client (such as an app) on networked devices, which can be easily 
updated, and which preferably does not require devices to have specific versions of 
an operating system.
 When Internet connections are available and reliable, avoid heavyweight client 
software, especially those that have multiple dependencies (such as needing 
specific versions of an operating system or the presence of certain library or 
system files), unless updates can be rolled out easily over the web.
 2.14 What devices will users need to use the system?
  Rationale
With the increasing familiarity and use of portable devices such as mobile phones 
and tablet computers, desktop computers are no longer the only option for entering 
or retrieving electronic data. The spread of mobile phone networks to many remote 
rural areas means that mobile networks offer a viable and affordable mode of data 
connectivity (Figure 2.11).
 FIGURE 2.11 Both PC web browsers and mobile phones can be used with Georgia’s TB surveillance 
system (source: MEDES, France)
Web browser Android application
Local database
Online / offline
Web application
Synchronization
application
Central database
48
CHAPTER 2. IDENTIFYING DETAILED REQUIREMENTS
Box 2.6
Examples of using Personal Digital Assistants as input devices
A. Kenya
Data collection at district level takes place via small mobile computing devices called 
personal digital assistants (PDAs). District TB coordinators input health facility level data 
and send the data up to provincial/county level for aggregation and then inclusion in 
national aggregates. PDAs were being rolled out to more regions during 2011, although an 
evaluation has resulted in a decision to switch to using Androida-based tablet computers 
instead.
B. India
Using PDAs for TB data management was piloted in India in 2004. Users appreciated the 
benefits but the project also highlighted the challenges such as replicating changes in the 
data collection forms to the PDAs, customization of PDAs for each TB unit, the need for a 
central coordination and support team and commitment from the programme management 
team for implementation.
a http://source.android.com/
  Options
Types of devices:
 Interactive devices in which users can type in information or commands and can 
receive information from a central database:
 fixed-location, such as desktop PCs
 mobile, such as laptops, tablet computers, personal digital assistants (Box 2.6) 
and mobile phones. 
 Electronic data capture only:
 digital cameras
 bar code scanners
 digital x-ray devices
 laboratory equipment, such as GeneXpert instruments
 biometric sensors (such as fingerprint or iris scanners).
  Recommendations
When deciding which devices to use, take the following aspects into account:
 long-term sustainability: hardware costs (initial and replacement, along with 
the required hardware replacement schedule – for example every three years), 
connectivity costs (such as SIM cards and payment plans for mobile devices), 
availability, maintenance and upgrade requirements;
 location and security: where do the devices have to be used (for example 
at a treatment facility or at patients’ homes) and how can the risks of theft be 
minimized?
 usability: size and types of interfaces (text, graphics) that can be displayed;
 connectivity: does the device need to be connected to a network? Does the 
device provide access to web-based systems or is it restricted to using local 
(client) software (see also Section 2.13)?
49 
ELECTRONIC RECORDING AND REPORTING FOR TUBERCULOSIS CARE AND CONTROL
 reliability and care needed when using the devices;
 power needs and, where relevant, battery life;
 single- or multi-purpose: can the devices be used for other activities?
 type of data that can be entered, for example GPS-enabled mobile devices that 
can also provide location coordinates; 
 operating systems that are supported: are technical staff who are responsible 
for maintaining or configuring devices familiar with the operating system? Windows, 
for example, when not properly protected is prone to virus attacks making the 
device unusable and unsafe.
 2.15 What database software is required?
  Rationale
Data must be stored securely and reliably using a system that can store the amount 
projected to be needed in the long term and that can add, edit and retrieve data 
quickly enough for the expected growth in volume of requests.
  Recommendations
 Use a robust, industry-standard, well-proven and scalable relational database 
management system providing standard functionality such as:
 multiple tables of data with enforced relationships between them, such as 
patient demographic details and patient TB treatment;
 referential integrity; that is, ensuring there are no broken links between data 
tables, for example making sure there is always a patient demographic record 
associated with each laboratory result;
 allowing many users to have simultaneous access;
 efficient and standard data definition and querying language, such as Structured 
Query language (SQL);
 enforcing standard data types such as text, integer, float, date;
 adding user-defined views, functions and stored procedures;
 Unicode support to handle non-Roman scripts;
 error-trapping so that if one part of a complex data change operation fails, the 
database reverts back to its state before the change was attempted;1
 efficient indexing of tables and views for fast data retrieval;
 sufficient storage capacity to hold expected data items for the defined 
retention period and to support the expected rate of data addition and retrieval 
operations;
 robust role-based access permissions;
 backup facilities (both full and incremental);
 transaction logging;
 administrative tools to manage all of the above.
 Examples of such relational database management systems include (but are not 
limited to): Ingres, MySQL, Oracle, PostgreSQL and SQL-Server.
1 In the technical jargon, this means that database transactions are compliant with ACID principles of 
atomicity, consistency, isolation and durability.
50
CHAPTER 2. IDENTIFYING DETAILED REQUIREMENTS
 Databases designed for small-scale personal use on a desktop, such as Epidata 
or Microsoft Access, are not recommended for large-scale multi-user national 
or subnational systems. They could be used as part of client software running 
on desktops in remote locations with no Internet access, but care is needed to 
prevent users from accessing or modifying data files directly rather than through 
the recording and reporting software interface.
 Spreadsheets such as Excel are not relational databases and are not appropriate 
for data storage and data management. 
 2.16 Where will the servers be located?
  Rationale
Servers are computers that hold an application’s software and/or data and provide 
controlled access to these. Web servers provide access via web sites: users are not 
able to see the web server’s software nor to navigate its filing system. Database 
servers provide data to applications without users needing direct access to database 
tables or queries and without having direct access to its data files. Web-based 
recording and reporting systems need both types of server. When properly configured 
and professionally managed, servers provide a secure environment in which to run 
information systems used by large numbers of people.
This approach is scalable: it is relatively easy to add more users to the system. 
Techniques exist to add additional servers when one server is not able to respond 
quickly to all the requests made of it. Such load balancing results in better response 
times so that users do not have to wait too long for the system to show new screens 
or reports. Servers are usually located (hosted) in secure, controlled environments, 
well away from where their users are found.
  Options
Servers can be hosted by various entities such as:
1. commercial hosting providers
2. the NTP at national or subnational levels
3. ministry of health
4. research institutes
or
5. universities.
If the chosen solution is based on subnational levels maintaining separate databases 
that feed data to a national database, then hosting arrangements need to be 
considered for each of the databases used in this federated structure.
Cloud computing services are gaining momentum at the time of writing. Providers 
of these services manage their own servers and give clients access to software 
applications and/or data without clients needing to know which servers are being 
used, and without clients being allocated specific servers. Web-based e-mail services 
are an example of this. Commercial services (also known as Software as a Service 
and on-demand software) exist and these can be paid for by subscription fees based 
on some measure of usage (such as the number of users or the number of records 
edited, etc.).
51 
ELECTRONIC RECORDING AND REPORTING FOR TUBERCULOSIS CARE AND CONTROL
  Recommendations 
 Whenever possible, aim to host the electronic recording and reporting system’s 
databases on database servers.
 Identify any legal and institutional requirements for hosting. For example,
 is it acceptable for the entire application and/or its data be hosted remotely by 
a commercial hosting service?
 does the application have to be hosted by a specific agency?
 is it acceptable for the servers to be located in a foreign country?
 If the software and/or database is to be hosted outside the NTP, describe clearly 
the conditions of data security, confidentiality and ownership of software and 
data hosted on remote servers, and ensure that all data hosted remotely can be 
retrieved and downloaded by the NTP.
 2.17 What communications networks are needed?
  Rationale
The electronic recording and reporting system collects data locally but needs to 
consolidate data nationally. Electronic networks are usually the most efficient way 
to transfer data, so identifying which networks can handle data communications is 
important.
  Options
Possible networks to use include:
1. local area networks, such as when transferring data within hospital facilities;
2. the Internet (via cable, Wi-Fi or satellite);
3. landline telephone networks;
or
4. mobile (cellular) telephone networks.
  Recommendations 
 Aim for real-time data transmission or consolidation wherever possible, or with 
the minimum amount of delay if real-time operations are not possible at particular 
locations. Use digital networks such as the Internet or mobile phone networks 
for data transmission or consolidation, ensuring that these can support data 
encryption, for example by using the https protocol or virtual private networks (see 
Section 2.6).
 Only transfer data physically using digital media such as memory sticks or CD-
ROMs if networks are not available or are unreliable (see also Section 2.1).
 Check whether there are any legal or practical restrictions on using public 
networks such as the Internet or mobile phone networks.
 Check if there are any bandwidth limitations, and time or cost restrictions.
 Assess the volume of data to be transported between different parts of the system 
and assess the bandwidth and suitability of existing and planned communications 
infrastructure to carry those data. This needs to be done for all levels in the system 
(such as facility-level and central server level).
52
CHAPTER 2. IDENTIFYING DETAILED REQUIREMENTS
 2.18 What are the electrical power needs?
  Rationale
Potential software developers or system suppliers need to be aware of any problems, 
limitations, special features or particular requirements regarding power supply that 
would affect how hardware and software will be deployed and managed.
  Recommendations 
 Identify the quality and availability of electrical power at all the sites that will be 
using the recording and reporting system, and consider how power requirements 
for all components of the system can be satisfied, including:
 data entry devices such as PCs or mobile phones;
 printers;
 database and web servers;
 communication devices such as network routers;
 cooling devices such as air conditioners in server rooms;
 Use uninterruptible power supplies (UPS) to maintain power to vital equipment such 
as servers, especially if power outages are common, and to allow those servers to 
be shut down safely when power outages are prolonged.
 Use surge protectors to protect all electronic devices, especially if power outages 
or fluctuations are common. 
53 
ELECTRONIC RECORDING AND REPORTING FOR TUBERCULOSIS CARE AND CONTROL
D. Case studies
2.19 Key characteristics of an established system in China and of a system under 
development in Kenya
These are very brief descriptions based on the key questions outlined in chapters 1 and 2. Full technical 
details are beyond the scope of these case studies.
A. China
The TB Information Management System (TBIMS), launched in 2005, is a web-based, case-based electronic 
reporting and recording system used by all TB dispensaries in China. It is linked to the nationwide Infectious 
Disease Reporting System (IDRS) and data about TB cases are exchanged between the two systems in real 
time.
1. GENERAL REQUIREMENTS
ORGANISATION
1.1 Is there a functioning TB Yes, following WHO-recommended case definitions and standards. National 
recording and reporting guidelines for TB care and control are in use and staff involved in TB care are familiar 
system in place? with the basic data items.
1.2 Who needs to provide A decision-making body was formed led by the National Centre for TB control 
overall oversight and and prevention at the Chinese Center for Disease Control and Prevention (China 
participate in decision- CDC), with representatives of: staff who would have to use the system (such as 
making related to the administrative staff in TB facilities and TB control staff at different administrative 
adoption, design and levels); experts in TB and drug-resistant TB care; ministries responsible for health, 
implementation of an disease surveillance and health information systems; legal experts and information 
electronic recording and technology experts with knowledge of the regulations and standards (including 
reporting system for TB? identification and confidentiality) governing information systems in the country.
SCOPE
1.3 What are the primary Improving surveillance and public health: improving the coverage, quality and 
objectives of building an timeliness of data available to decision-makers; monitoring of trends in TB disease 
electronic recording and burden; enabling rapid responses to emerging problems.
reporting system for TB Improving programme and resource management at health-care facilities: 
care and control? reducing the reporting burden on staff; engaging and motivating staff who can act 
on live data, such as outbreak containment, identifying and preventing potential 
treatment defaults or contact tracing; improving analysis and planning at country 
and global level.
Improving clinical care of individual patients: providing fast access to accurate, 
integrated patient data such as previous treatment history, latest laboratory results 
or current treatment compliance; better identification of patients requiring special 
treatment, such as HIV-positive TB patients or patients with drug-resistant forms of 
TB.
1.4 Who are the users and At the local level: physicians, township supervisors, dedicated data entry clerks, 
beneficiaries of the laboratory staff, TB dispensary staff.
system? At the subnational, national or international levels: district and regional TB 
managers, national TB programme management staff, ministry of health, national 
and international surveillance programmes.
About 10 000 staff in TB dispensaries and designated hospitals use TBIMS directly. 
TBIMS exchanges TB case data with the Infectious Disease Reporting System (IDRS) 
in real time. IDRS is available at all health facilities and has around 68 000 users, so 
staff at public hospitals report on, and track the status of, TB cases. 
54
CHAPTER 2. IDENTIFYING DETAILED REQUIREMENTS
1.5 Which patients will the All diagnosed TB patients (including MDR-TB patients), plus tuberculous pleurisy 
system cover? patients.
About 1 million patients are added each year. 
1.6 Which locations will the Geographic areas: the whole country.
system cover? Facilities: all TB dispensaries (NTP TB treatment centres and TB laboratories) and all 
NTP administrative offices.
Sector: all public sector TB treatment facilities.
About 3 000 TB dispensaries and designated hospitals use TBIMS. 
1.7 Will the system be a The system is not stand-alone. It sends and receives data with the IDRS in real time, 
stand-alone system so TB cases reported initially to IDRS are managed by TBIMS.
or will it be integrated There is a national framework for building and integrating health information 
with other electronic systems. 
systems?
1.8 What elements of Both paper and electronic forms are used for district TB registers, laboratory 
paper-based recording results registers and patient notification. All other forms (clinical records such as 
and reporting should be TB treatment cards and discharge letters, registers of contacts and TB suspects, 
maintained? referrals, requests for investigations, prescriptions, drugs and laboratory supplies 
order forms) remain paper-based. 
Managerial, operational and routine reports are generated electronically and 
printouts are stored for backup.
1.9 Is the basic unit of Data at the point of entry are case-based records. The unique record identifier is the 
recording clinical data notification number. 
a patient, a case or a 
group of cases?
1.10 What data items need to Data held about individual TB patients include demographic details, clinical data 
be captured? (e.g. date of TB diagnosis, TB site, co-morbidities, previous treatment history), 
bacteriological data (e.g. sputum smear and culture results), drug susceptibility 
testing results and treatment outcomes.
Data items, definitions, formats, allowed values and codes are documented in a data 
dictionary that is kept up to date.
2. DETAILED REQUIREMENTS
CAPABILITIES
2.1 Who enters data, where Staff in all TB dispensaries at province, prefecture and county levels enter data using 
and when will data be TBIMS. The patient-related data should be entered within 24 hours. NTP activity 
entered, and how do reports are entered within 5 days.
data flow within the Staff in public hospitals can enter data about TB cases using IDRS, which should 
system? also be done within 24 hours. This information is transferred to TBIMS in real time.
All data are entered in real time into the central database located in China CDC.
2.2 What data quality Real-time data validation checks at the point of data entry; supervisory site visits; 
assurance processes establishing and monitoring record completeness targets; adequate number of 
are required? trained staff available to carry out quality assurance processes; standard operating 
procedures have been developed and staff are trained to follow them.
2.3 How is feedback Staff involved in data entry: use data found in the system for other tasks; 
provided to system are prompted to act (e.g. tracing missing data or contacting potential treatment 
users? defaulters); have access to reports on standard performance indicators so that their 
performance can be compared with others at regional or national levels.
Staff at higher administrative levels inform those at lower levels about data 
problems.
55 
ELECTRONIC RECORDING AND REPORTING FOR TUBERCULOSIS CARE AND CONTROL
2.4 What standard outputs, Standard reports are defined, each with a known audience, for example national 
reports and other quarterly analysis reports are disseminated to all TB dispensaries at provincial 
analyses are required? level; standard indicators of programme performance (such as quarterly reports 
on treatment outcomes) can be generated; staff are trained to understand system 
outputs and how to act upon them; trained staff can conduct customized analyses 
or produce customized reports; data can be exported to external software such as 
statistical, visualization or GIS packages for analysis or to create graphs and maps; a 
data dictionary is available and kept up-to-date.
2.5 What are the data entry Chinese is used in all screens and reports. 
screen or interface 
requirements?
2.6 How will data The system is accessed using individual, not general, user accounts (usernames and 
confidentiality and passwords); role-based permissions define which data items, screens and reports 
security be ensured? different types of users can see and which data items they can modify; data storage 
devices are protected against theft; secure data encryption methods are used when 
data are transferred between computers or across the web (the system is accessed 
using a Virtual Private Network); user interactions are logged in audit trails.
RESOURCES
2.7 What staffing is A long-term human resources plan is in place to ensure long-term sustainability and 
required? a data management unit has been established with dedicated data management 
staff. 
Staff operating the system fulfil the following roles:
National level: data management, user support and project management.
Provincial and prefecture level: data entry, data management, user support and 
project management.
County level: data entry, data management and project management.
2.8 What user support is Training (adapted to various user roles) is conducted; written and easily-accessible 
needed? standard operating procedures are available; a help desk or hotline (via telephone or 
email) is available, as is a web-based discussion forum.
2.9 What technical support The budget includes provision for system administration, hardware maintenance, 
is needed? fixing software bugs and software enhancements. There is a feedback mechanism 
for users to submit bug reports and to suggest enhancements. There is a mechanism 
to prioritise bugs and change requests, with defined severity scales and agreed 
response times. Technical documentation is available and kept up-to-date.
The software is run under a commercial licence, with the supplier responsible for 
software maintenance. 
2.10 What level of service System response times have been defined (e.g. for network bandwidth of 24 Kbps:
availability, response • at least 90% of response times for data entry are under 10 seconds;
times and contingency • at least 90% of response times for batch queries are under 15 seconds;
planning is required? • at least 60% of response times for report generation are under 60 seconds and at 
least 90% are under 120 seconds.)
Backups are made on a regular schedule.
2.11 What funding is required There is a long-term funding plan and a long-term budget which includes provision 
for both start-up and for hardware maintenance and replacement, software maintenance (bug fixing, 
routine operations? enhancements) and training. Human resources are covered by a separate plan. 
The annual software maintenance cost (carried out by a software company) is about 
USD 20 000.
2.12 How long will electronic At present all records are kept on the system. Records may be archived in the future.
data be retained and will 
they be archived?
56
CHAPTER 2. IDENTIFYING DETAILED REQUIREMENTS
INFRASTRUCTURE
2.13 How is the electronic It is a web-based system with access via standard web browsers.
recording and reporting 
software made available 
to users?
2.14 What devices will users Desktop PCs and laptops.
need to use the system?
2.15 What database software The system uses Oracle database software.
is required?
2.16 Where will the servers At China CDC facilities.
be located?
2.17 What communications Internet: via cables and wi-fi. 
networks are needed? Data are integrated into the national database in real time.
2.18 What are the electrical Power from the national electricity grid is used for all components of the 
power needs? system (PCs, phones, printers, servers, network routers, air conditioning etc.). 
Uninterruptible power supply units and surge protectors are used.
B. Kenya
The TB recording and reporting system is currently paper-based at the health facility level, with quarterly 
reports aggregated manually at subnational and national levels. An electronic system based on district 
TB coordinators collecting case-based information from health facilities using Personal Digital Assistants 
(PDAs) or tablet computers began to be rolled out in 2009, but at the time of writing not all districts had 
made the transition. A national web-based system is being planned. (See also Box 4.1)
1. GENERAL REQUIREMENTS
ORGANISATION
1.1 Is there a functioning TB Yes, there is a paper-based system following WHO-recommended case definitions 
recording and reporting and standards. 
system in place?
1.2 Who needs to provide A steering committee (technical working group) was formed at the national level 
overall oversight and with a key focal person to take the lead. The committee reports on progress and 
participate in decision- consensus to a policy making organ of the ministry of health. The steering committee 
making related to the includes representatives of: staff who would have to use the system (such as 
adoption, design and administrative staff in TB facilities and TB control staff at different administrative 
implementation of an levels); experts in TB and drug-resistant TB care; ministries responsible for health, 
electronic recording and disease surveillance and health information systems; health information technology 
reporting system for TB? specialists; external agencies providing technical or financial support; training 
institutions; non-governmental organizations and the pharmaceutical sector.
SCOPE
1.3 What are the primary Improving surveillance and public health: improving the coverage, quality 
objectives of building an and timeliness of data available to decision-makers; monitoring of trends in 
electronic recording and TB disease burden; enabling rapid responses to emerging problems; improving 
reporting system for TB pharmacovigilance; enabling research; improving governance and accountability.
care and control? Improving programme and resource management at health-care facilities: 
reducing the reporting burden on staff; engaging and motivating staff who can act 
on live data, such as outbreak containment, identifying and preventing potential 
treatment defaults or contact tracing; improving drug supply management and 
preventing drug stock-outs; improving analysis and planning at country and global 
level.
57 
ELECTRONIC RECORDING AND REPORTING FOR TUBERCULOSIS CARE AND CONTROL
1.4 Who are the users and At the local level: physicians, nurses, medical assistants, dedicated data entry 
beneficiaries of the clerks, pharmacy staff.
system? At the subnational, national or international levels: district and regional TB 
managers, national TB programme management staff, ministry of health, funders 
of TB treatment programmes, national and international surveillance programmes, 
researchers.
Around 300 users are initially expected to use the system.
1.5 Which patients will the All diagnosed TB patients.
system cover? About 100 000 patients will be added each year.
1.6 Which locations will the Geographic areas: the whole country. All districts in the 215 TB control zones 
system cover? will use the system and all sites with web access will be able to view their data and 
reports.
Facilities: all NTP TB treatment centres and administrative offices, all hospitals, all 
TB laboratories (via links to the laboratory information system).
Sector: all public sector TB treatment facilities, all private sector TB treatment 
facilities, all prisons, all military establishments.
1.7 Will the system be a The system will not be stand-alone. It will exchange data with a laboratory 
stand-alone system information system. In the long term, the TB system will be integrated into the 
or will it be integrated Ministry of Health’s Health Information System which is also under development.
with other electronic There is a national framework for building and integrating health information 
systems? systems.
1.8 What elements of The proposed system will use electronic forms for district TB registers, patient 
paper-based recording notification, drug stocks register and laboratory supply register. All other forms 
and reporting should be (clinical records such as TB treatment cards and discharge letters, registers of 
maintained? contacts and TB suspects, laboratory results registers, referrals, requests for 
investigations, prescriptions, drugs and laboratory supplies order forms) will remain 
paper-based. 
Reports on drug stocks, laboratory supplies and treatment outcomes will be 
electronic while programme performance, case detection and sputum conversion 
reports will remain paper-based. 
1.9 Is the basic unit of Case-based data will be entered into the interim PDA/tablet-based system. The final 
recording clinical data web-based system aims to collect patient-based data, although the unique national 
a patient, a case or a patient identifier has yet to be determined because national IDs are only issued to 
group of cases? people upon reaching 18 years of age.
1.10 What data items need to Data held about individual TB patients include demographic details, clinical data 
be captured? (e.g. date of TB diagnosis, TB site, co-morbidities), bacteriological data (e.g. sputum 
smear and culture results), drug susceptibility testing results, detailed treatment 
data (e.g. drugs, dosage, dates) and treatment outcomes.
Data items, definitions, formats, allowed values and codes will be documented in a 
data dictionary that is kept up to date.
58
CHAPTER 2. IDENTIFYING DETAILED REQUIREMENTS
2. DETAILED REQUIREMENTS
CAPABILITIES
2.1 Who enters data, where For the interim solution, district TB coordinators will enter case-based information 
and when will data be from TB treatment facilities into a mobile device (tablet or PDA) during monthly 
entered, and how do supervisory visits to health care facilities. They later download the data onto local 
data flow within the computers. Case-based data are sent quarterly to subnational (provincial) level 
system? electronically, where reports can be generated. Case-based data are then submitted 
to the national level.
In the final web-based solution, case-based information could be entered at TB 
treatment facilities or by district TB coordinators. Case-based data are transmitted 
to the central server in real time, or after a short delay, depending on available 
network connectivity. There will also be modules for financial management and for 
pharmacies to capture consumption data.
Information about sputum samples submitted for culture and drug sensitivity testing, 
and their test results will be exchanged with the laboratory information system.
2.2 What data quality Real-time data validation checks at the point of data entry; automated deadlines 
assurance processes and alerts; data validation algorithms run at regular intervals; supervisory site visits; 
are required? establishing and monitoring record completeness targets; regular checks against 
samples of original paper documents; adequate number of trained staff will be 
available to carry out quality assurance processes; standard operating procedures 
will be developed and staff will be trained to follow them. 
2.3 How is feedback Staff involved in data entry: use data found in the system for other tasks; 
provided to system are prompted to act (e.g. tracing missing data or contacting potential treatment 
users? defaulters); have access to reports on standard performance indicators so that their 
performance can be compared with others at regional or national levels.
Staff at higher administrative levels inform those at lower levels about data 
problems.
2.4 What standard outputs, Outputs upon which action can be taken are defined for each type of user; standard 
reports and other reports are defined, each with a known audience; standard indicators of programme 
analyses are required? performance (such as quarterly reports on treatment outcomes) can be generated; 
visual displays (graphs or maps), including trends over time, can be created within 
the system; staff are trained to understand system outputs and how to act upon 
them; trained staff can conduct customized analyses or produce customized 
reports; data can be exported to external software such as statistical, visualization 
or GIS packages for analysis or to create graphs and maps; a data dictionary will be 
available and kept up-to-date.
2.5 What are the data entry All screens and reports will be in English.
screen or interface 
requirements?
2.6 How will data The system will be accessed using individual, not general, user accounts (usernames 
confidentiality and and passwords); role-based permissions will define which data items, screens and 
security be ensured? reports different types of users can see and which data items they can modify; users 
will not have direct access to the data files; users not directly involved in patient 
care will be restricted to viewing anonymous data; data storage devices will be 
protected against theft; secure data encryption methods will be used when data are 
transferred between computers or across the web; user interactions will be logged in 
audit trails.
59 
ELECTRONIC RECORDING AND REPORTING FOR TUBERCULOSIS CARE AND CONTROL
RESOURCES
2.7 What staffing is A long-term human resources plan is being developed to ensure long-term 
required? sustainability and a data management unit has been established with dedicated data 
management staff. The roles and responsibilities of staff required to operate the 
system at each level will be defined in the plan.
2.8 What user support is Training (adapted to various user roles) will be offered, along with a help desk or 
needed? hotline (via telephone or email).
2.9 What technical support The budget will include provision for system administration, hardware maintenance 
is needed? and software enhancements. There will be a feedback mechanism for users to 
submit bug reports and to suggest enhancements. There will be a mechanism 
to prioritise bugs and change requests, with defined severity scales and agreed 
response times, and a mechanism to manage and share information about bugs and 
change requests. Technical documentation will be available and kept up-to-date.
Open source software will be used, with internal programmers responsible for 
software maintenance. They will use bug-tracking software. 
2.10 What level of service A business continuity plan is being developed which will describe what to do if 
availability, response there is a major system failure. There will be regular schedules for backups and for 
times and contingency checking backups. 
planning is required?
2.11 What funding is required There is a long-term budget which includes provision for capital costs, hardware 
for both start-up and maintenance and replacement, initial software development, software maintenance 
routine operations? (bug fixing, enhancements), operating system and anti-virus licences, project 
management, staffing (including data entry, data management, user support), 
training and service costs (e.g. electricity, internet, mobile network subscriptions).
2.12 How long will electronic Patient records will be archived after a defined period has elapsed.
data be retained and will 
they be archived?
INFRASTRUCTURE
2.13 How is the electronic It will have two components: 
recording and reporting 1. A web-based system with access via standard web browsers. 
software made available 2. Dedicated offline software installed on a user’s device (such as a tablet 
to users? computer) that can synchronize with the remote server when network 
connections become available.
2.14 What devices will users Desktop PCs, laptops, tablet computers, personal digital assistants, digital cameras 
need to use the system? and barcode readers (the latter to be used mainly at the TB reference laboratory to 
read sample data).
2.15 What database software The main server will use MySQL database software. Tablet devices will use SQLite.
is required?
2.16 Where will the servers The main server will be hosted by the NTP but will also be mirrored to a server 
be located? hosted by the Ministry of Health.
2.17 What communications Internet (cables and wi-fi) and the mobile phone network.
networks are needed? Data will be consolidated in real time into the national database, except when 
network connections are not available in which case data can be held on local tablet 
devices and uploaded to the national system when connections become available 
again.
2.18 What are the electrical Power from the national electricity grid is used for all components of the 
power needs? system (PCs, phones, printers, servers, network routers, air conditioning etc.). 
Uninterruptible power supply units and surge protectors are used and spare 
batteries for tablet computers are available. 
60
 CHAPTER 3 Selecting a solution
This chapter describes the procurement process for purchasing an electronic health 
information system. It gives a brief outline of solicitation, selection, negotiation and 
contracting, and gives pointers to more detailed documentation developed by the 
Health Metrics Network. It is aimed at those without any specialist expertise to 
understand the key issues to be considered during these phases, to make informed 
choices about the available options, and to work with specialists such as procurement 
officers, legal officers, project managers and software developers to ensure that the 
most appropriate solution is commissioned.
 3.1 Looking for a solution
Once requirements have been defined (Chapters 1 and 2), the next step is to find an 
appropriate solution. It is likely that software already exists that provides most, if not 
all, of the technical requirements, but you may decide that you are looking for more 
than software delivery; for example, you may want a solution that provides and installs 
the necessary hardware and that provides the staff to administer the system.
The types of software solutions to think about include:
 developing a new system (“custom development”);
 using or modifying existing software. This can be either a complete package or 
could be made up of individual software modules that are integrated to create the 
desired solution. Open-source components (see Section 2.9) are often focussed 
on achieving specialized tasks, and need to be combined with others in order to 
create a functional system (Box 3.1).
Software that needs to run on a server can either be hosted within the organization’s 
IT infrastructure or can be outsourced to an external professional hosting 
organization.
Box 3.1
Integrating open-source components
The Indus Hospital in Pakistan used local programmers to create its system by adapting and 
integrating two open-source components: the OpenMRSa medical record system, and the 
OpenXDatab data collection platform, which was used to develop data collection forms that 
can be used on cellular phones.
a http://openmrs.org/
b http://www.openxdata.org/
61 
ELECTRONIC RECORDING AND REPORTING FOR TUBERCULOSIS CARE AND CONTROL
The people who will carry out the work also need to be identified. Possible options 
are:
 in-house staff (existing staff or those recruited specifically for the task);
 individual freelance contractors;
 commercial entities;
 non-commercial entities (such as international agencies engaged in supporting TB 
control programmes).
The work includes various tasks, and different people could be used for different 
tasks. Tasks include defining requirements; software design, development, testing, 
support and upgrading; hardware procurement, installation, maintenance and 
upgrading; training; and system administration. All of these tasks need to be worked 
out (see Chapter 4).
 3.2 Procurement
The Health Metrics Network (HMN)1 has been developing guidance material on 
procurement of health information systems.2
These documents provide a wealth of detailed practical guidance. What follows is 
a very short summary of those documents. Readers are advised to consult the latest 
version of HMN’s documents for full details (Box 3.2).
There may well be laws in place in your country that determine how you need to 
go about engaging the services of individuals or organizations. This will usually take 
the form of a bidding process by providers – such as competitive tender – following a 
“request for proposals” (RFP). This is required especially if the cost is projected to be 
above a certain threshold, to ensure an open and transparent procurement process. 
HMN describes an RFP as “a document used to solicit bids for a project, goods, 
or services, whether it is a health information system, equipment procurement, or a 
feasibility study” and it “lays out the requirements, evaluation criteria, and evaluation 
process”. In other words, it goes well beyond documenting the functional and 
operational requirements of the desired electronic system. It needs to be carefully 
drafted to ensure that the software delivered meets the needs of the users. HMN 
has produced a pro forma RFP document that you can use to develop your own RFP 
(Box 3.3) and also a document3 listing in detail the various tasks that need to be 
considered in order to calculate the total cost of ownership of a proposed solution.
 3.3 Choosing the solution
There will be a number of bidders competing for the work. HMN’s documentation 
gives advice on how to assess the bids and provides a scoring sheet to help identify 
the best proposal (price is not the only consideration). The documentation also gives 
advice on contracts, and contract negotiation and pricing. 
Conducting a competitive tender can be complicated and time-consuming. It will 
1 http://www.who.int/healthmetrics/ 
2 Draft versions are available at  
http://wiki.healthmetricsnetwork.info/wiki-kigali/doku.php?id=background_documentation and also 
on the web annex at http://www.who.int/tb/publications/electronic_recording_reporting/
3 http://wiki.healthmetricsnetwork.info/wiki-kigali/lib/exe/fetch.php?media=background:hmn_
 procurement_guide:annexa_tco.doc
mmm
62
CHAPTER 3. SELECTING A SOLUTION
Box 3.2
The Health Metrics Network (HMN)’s major keys to success for procuring health 
information systemsa
HMN describes the greatest challenge throughout procurement as the “long-term 
sustainability of the Health Information System” and lists the following major keys to 
success: 
● View technology as an integral part of a larger system, supported by adequate policies, 
funding, communication, and skilled leaders and staff.
● Create a long-term strategic plan for health information systems and technology.
● Maintain control of the purchasing process – demand good customer service.
● Understand the true and total cost of ownership – not just the cost of computers or 
software.
● Carefully match existing resources with the pace of implementation to allow for a 
sustained, incremental approach.
● Build local capacity to fully utilize the technology.
During procurement: 
● Understand your country’s holistic health information system needs, and buy a solution 
that addresses those needs.
● Buy what works best; expect vendors to prove their worth.
● Prepare contracts taking into consideration problems that will arise 5–10 years from 
now.
● Use [the HMN guide] to inform yourself throughout the complex process in which you 
are now engaging.
HMN emphasizes in its document that “organizational and not ICT (information and 
communication technology) needs drive the process” and to view software procurement as 
a long-term engagement.
a http://wiki.healthmetricsnetwork.info/wiki-kigali/lib/exe/fetch.php?media=background:hmn_
 procurement_guide:hmn_procurement_guide_v5.2.doc
usually need the expertise of specialists such as procurement officers within your 
country or Ministry of Health, especially as countries have their own rules about 
procurement that have to be followed.
When deciding on a solution, it is useful to hear the experience of others who have 
used or who are using a proposed solution. Find out who has used a particular system 
(such as an NTP) or worked with a particular supplier and contact them for more 
information. Ask to talk to managers or users, or both. If your budget allows, consider 
visiting in person to see how it works, or ask for a remote demonstration over the 
web1 so that they can show you some aspects of their system and you can see 
their screens while they talk you through them. Remember to ask about the issues 
discussed in Chapter 2 such as data quality assurance, training, staffing, resources, 
and technical and user support.
1 This is possible using services such as GoToMeeting, Skype or WebEx.
63 
ELECTRONIC RECORDING AND REPORTING FOR TUBERCULOSIS CARE AND CONTROL
Box 3.3
Table of content in HMN’s template RFPa
Section 1 – Instruction to bidders
Contains 30 subsections such as schedule of events, enquiries, examination of bids, 
contract negotiation, and payment terms and schedule.
Section 2 – Current situation at MoH
Contains 5 subsections including current IT situation. 
Section 3 – Scope of work
Contains 9 subsections such as critical success factors, modules to be implemented, 
project scope and data conversion. 
Section 4 – Proposal format
Appendix A – Financial proposal cost sheets
Appendix B – Functional requirements
  Patient management
  Disease surveillance 
  Registries module
  Administration module 
  Additional modules
Appendix C – Data requirements
Appendix D – Reporting requirements
Appendix E – Operational requirements
Appendix F – Security requirements
Appendix G – Performance requirements
Appendix H – Business requirements
Appendix I – Legal and regulatory requirements
Appendix J – Technical requirements
Appendix K – General requirements
Appendix L – Training requirements
Appendix M – Maintenance and support
Appendix N – Forms
Appendix O – Non-disclosure agreement
Appendix P – MoH Law, bylaws and regulations
a http://wiki.healthmetricsnetwork.info/wiki-kigali/lib/exe/fetch.php?media=background:hmn_
 procurement_guide:annexb2_sample_his_rfp.doc
 3.4 Finalizing the agreement
Once a decision has been made, you need to negotiate prices, and set up and sign 
contracts with the provider(s). Non-commercial providers such as nongovernmental 
organizations (NGOs), international agencies or universities may prefer a 
memorandum of understanding. In all cases, fees and services to be provided need 
to be stated clearly, including licence fees, escrow arrangements (if applicable), 
hardware costs, installation fees, warranties, service-level agreements and long-term 
support. Full details are beyond the scope of this document, and this is where you will 
need procurement and legal specialists to guide the process.
64
 CHAPTER 4 Implementing an electronic 
recording and reporting system 
This chapter discusses practical aspects to consider once the choice of an electronic 
recording and reporting system has been made. It includes examples of system 
development from various countries. Descriptions of factors for success and lessons 
learnt from implementing an electronic recording and reporting system are also 
provided. 
 4.1 The general implementation phases
The previous chapters focused on analysis, needs assessment and selection of an 
electronic recording and reporting system. This chapter addresses how to implement 
such a system. While conditions will vary across settings, there are some common 
themes relevant to all settings and systems. This chapter draws on the experience of 
countries and of technical agencies such as Management Sciences for Health (MSH) 
and KNCV Tuberculosis Foundation (KNCV) in implementing electronic recording and 
reporting systems for TB care and control.
Developing and implementing an electronic recording and reporting system is an 
iterative and evolutionary process. Change is a key feature and the technology will 
keep evolving even during the 1–2 years needed to make the conversion from a paper-
based system to an electronic system. 
This chapter describes the general implementation phases that are usually 
followed. The detailed steps within each project can be expanded or adapted 
according to the complexity of the proposed system and available resources, but the 
overall process will likely pass through four stages. This chapter will guide you through 
some key actions that should be taken, practical points for consideration and tips or 
lessons learnt from real-life examples for each phase of implementation. 
The four general phases (Figure 4.1) are as follows: 
 Planning (including needs assessment and selecting a solution)
 Development/Adaptation (including implementation of plan)
 Roll-out (including pilot phase, training at field and central level and scale-up)
 Maintenance (including monitoring, evaluation and evolution)
The four general phases are best thought of as a continuous cycle, part of a long-
term process rather than a one-off event. Many of the key questions discussed in 
Chapters 1 and 2 can be revisited with each cycle.
The four general phases can be broken down into more detailed steps that may be 
adapted to a particular country or situation to form the basis for an implementation 
action plan.
65 
ELECTRONIC RECORDING AND REPORTING FOR TUBERCULOSIS CARE AND CONTROL
 FIGURE 4.1 The four-step cyclical implementation process used by Management Sciences for 
Health (source: MSH) 
Planning
Assess needs
Select solution
Develop action plan
Maintenance Development/adaptation
Monitor and evaluate Write or adapt software
Upgrade software Test and pilot
Develop training materials
Roll-out
Start operations
Train users
 4.2 Planning
  Action plan
In addition to an analysis of electronic recording and reporting system requirements 
(Chapters 1 and 2), and deciding who will build and roll out the system and finalize 
contracts with them (Chapter 3), an action plan1 needs to be developed and agreed 
by the project’s decision-making body (Section 1.2) to define and organize the 
implementation process. The action plan should cover the following points: 
a) System description: Provide an unambiguous statement of the objectives 
of the system and detailed descriptions of the system. These will be based on 
the functional and non-functional requirements2 identified through the analyses 
discussed in Chapter 1 and Chapter 2, and documentation described in Chapter 
3. All stakeholders identified in Sections 1.2 and 1.4 as well as software 
developers need to reach a common understanding of what is being developed. 
b) Roles and responsibilities: Identify all parties involved in system start-up, 
implementation and maintenance, such as the NTP, software developers, project 
managers, steering committee and end-users (see Sections 1.2 and 1.4), and 
describe their roles during each phase of the implementation. For example, define 
who has the authority to approve major changes to the project plan, who will be 
doing system testing, and who will be doing data entry, analysis, data management 
and system maintenance once the system has been rolled out. 
1 The PRINCE2 project management approach uses something similar called a Project Initiation 
Document.
2 Functional requirements describe what a system is to accomplish and how it is supposed to behave, 
such as data quality processes or production of reports, whereas non-functional requirements describe 
overall characteristics such as response times or security.
66
CHAPTER 4. IMPLEMENTING AN ELECTRONIC RECORDING AND REPORTING SYSTEM
c) Human resources: Describe how many new employees or temporary contractors 
such as software developers or trainers are needed and when they will be engaged.
d) Funding: Describe short-term and long-term plans to cover the costs of all 
phases of implementation as discussed in Section 2.11. If funding comes from 
multiple sources, ensure all costs are covered across the various budgets. Include 
contingencies, for example to cover potential additional costs if implementation is 
delayed.
e) Project plan and timeline: Provide step-by-step details of all activities that 
will be carried out, including who will be involved in each activity, start and 
end dates, milestones and major products to be delivered (“deliverables”). Pay 
particular attention to training activities (IT, non-IT program management, data 
management, system use at the user level, etc.) and the phases of scale up (for 
example, going from two pilot sites to 10 sites to district or regional levels to full, 
nationwide implementation) (Box 4.1). Developing a detailed one-year plan with a 
broader-scale five-year timeline for both implementation and maintenance can be 
helpful, with the longer-term plan including regular reviews of the system and an 
adjustment mechanism. 
 Describe how and when the new electronic recording and reporting system 
will overlap with and/or replace existing paper-based systems, as discussed in 
Section 1.8. Replacement, if that is the ultimate goal, cannot happen overnight 
and a transition phase will be needed. Describe how recording and reporting will 
take place during roll-out, for example whether data will be recorded on paper and 
electronically at the same time, or whether some data will be transferred to the 
electronic system from paper. 
f) Expected outcomes: Provide a clear description of expected outcomes or 
results. Initial targets or indicators may be process-oriented (for example, 
completing deliverables on time during roll-out; see also Section 4.5). Indicators 
to measure impact on health outcomes and programme performance are needed 
for longer-term assessments. There is a shortage of high-quality studies evaluating 
the introduction and use of electronic systems in health care to determine whether 
and how the advantages claimed for electronic recording and reporting systems 
are achieved. Indeed, a call to action was issued in September 2011 to “generate 
the evidence and promote the appropriate integration and use of technologies” for 
health.1 Identify impact indicators if possible so that a rigorous impact assessment 
or cost-benefit analysis could be conducted.
  Lessons learnt from recent experience:
 Establish a steering committee and involve all stakeholders identified in Sections 
1.2 and 1.4 in the design and planning process as early as possible. Holding 
a national workshop is one option to consider if the proposed system is to be 
implemented nationally (Figure 4.2). Engaging stakeholders early and often will 
maximize their commitment and involvement.
1 Call to action on global eHealth evaluation: consensus statement of the WHO global eHealth evaluation 
meeting, 9 September 2011. Bellagio, Bellagio eHealth Evaluation Group, 2011 (available at  
http://www.ghdonline.org/tech/resource/call-to-action-on-global-ehealth-evaluation/).
67 
ELECTRONIC RECORDING AND REPORTING FOR TUBERCULOSIS CARE AND CONTROL
Box 4.1
Highlights from Kenya’s plan to develop an electronic recording and reporting system 
for TB care and controla
Objectives
To develop, implement (by the end of 2013) and maintain a patient-based and web-based 
national TB surveillance system that provides high-quality information for evidence-based 
decision-making at all levels.
Phase 1: Initial steps to start the development of the system (2009)
● Initiate a stakeholder workshop to give input for the renewal of the TB surveillance 
system;
● Draft a plan and refine through consultation and feedback from field visits at different 
levels;
● Form a Technical Working Group to guide the development process.
Phase 2: Roll out an interim solution (2009–2010)
● Define data flows from district to province to national levels and associated database 
management;
● Refine a software tool using personal digital assistants (PDAs)b that has already been 
piloted;
● Roll out an interim PDA data collection platform that uploads data to subnational 
databases.
Phase 3: Update TB surveillance indicators and definitions (2009–2010)
● Review monitoring and evaluation surveillance tools (including registers).
Phase 4: Upgrade the interim solution to a nationwide web-based system  
(2011–2013)
● Evaluate phase 2 (note that in 2011 this evaluation resulted in a decision to switch 
from using PDAs to using tablet computers running the open-source Android operating 
systemc);
● Roll out a web-based and case-based national system.
a Source: Development plan. Ministry of Public Health and Sanitation, Kenya, 2009.
b PDAs are small mobile computing devices that predate “tablet” computers.
c http://source.android.com/
 Engage with “owners” or users of other related electronic systems in the country, 
such as HIV, drug or laboratory systems at the earliest stages of development, as 
discussed in Section 1.7. It may be possible to leverage each other’s resources 
to benefit both or all parties, and there may be lessons learnt from implementing 
those other systems that could help your process.
 Appoint an experienced project manager1 and/or a project management team 
to steer the complex implementation process; to ensure all the necessary 
stakeholders are consulted regularly; to continually monitor progress and use of 
resources; to establish and enforce change-management procedures; and to adjust 
1 Formal project management approaches such as PRINCE2 (see  
http://www.prince-officialsite.com/ and  
http://www.best-management-practice.com/gempdf/PRINCE2_2009_Overview_Brochure_June2011.
 pdf) can be adopted, but a discussion of these approaches is beyond the scope of this document.
68
CHAPTER 4. IMPLEMENTING AN ELECTRONIC RECORDING AND REPORTING SYSTEM
 FIGURE 4.2 National workshop on the development of the TB and drug-resistant TB surveillance 
system in Indonesia, September 2011 (source: KNCV)
plans where necessary to ensure that agreed milestones are achieved with the 
resources still available to the project.
 Make sure standard operating procedures (SOPs) for current recording and 
reporting are properly documented and up to date before starting the roll-out of a 
new system (see also Section 1.1). Plan for changes to current processes such as 
data entry, data quality assurance and reporting before the transition occurs, and 
develop new SOPs that will be used once the new system has been adopted.
 Plan to develop and disseminate training materials, training-of-trainers strategies, 
user manuals and technical documentation such as data dictionaries, and 
hardware and software configuration and maintenance manuals. This is vital for 
long-term sustainability and protects against loss of knowledge and skills caused 
by staff turnover.
 If external agencies are involved in the first steps of implementation, agree a 
clear exit strategy and a process to hand over these external agencies’ roles 
permanently to parties within the country after ensuring that these parties have 
developed the capacity and have the resources to do so.
 Learn from others who have developed and rolled out similar recording and 
reporting systems. Section 3.3 mentioned visiting other sites in the context of 
selecting a solution. These contacts and discussions could be extended for the 
planning and roll-out phases.
69 
ELECTRONIC RECORDING AND REPORTING FOR TUBERCULOSIS CARE AND CONTROL
 4.3 System development and roll-out (including pilot phase, training at 
field and central level, and scale-up)
There are various approaches to managing software development and testing.1 
Consider how best to establish regular milestones at which users of the system can 
see and try out what has been developed and to give their feedback. This helps to 
ensure that the software being developed is what was intended and is fit for the 
purpose. Regular and open communications between software developers and users 
are key.
Many factors need to be taken into account during the planning phase, which 
will affect the piloting and scale up approach chosen, such as size of the country, 
complexity of the system, the urgency of system implementation and available human 
and financial resources.
Training of all affected staff is critical for both piloting and scaling up. This covers 
both technological aspects, such as how to use the software, and procedural and 
management aspects. Staff need to not only understand how to input data, but also 
how to manage the data and use the data for decision-making. Box 4.2 provides a list 
of data management topics that could be incorporated into training of users of the 
system such as district health officers, regional officers and NTP staff.
The pilot phase is a good time to test and improve staff training courses. It is much 
harder to change training approaches and materials once system roll-out has begun. 
A successful training approach may include a combination of system presentation, 
on-the-job training and mentoring, supportive supervision and remote support.
It is important to freeze versions of training materials and the system itself during 
the scale-up phase to maximize consistency in roll-out. As bugs are identified in 
roll-out, the team can fix them in a systematic way so as to avoid multiple versions of 
training materials or software in use at the same time.
The data management plan will need to be revised during this transitional phase 
Box 4.2
Sample TB data management activities that could be addressed  
in data management training 
● Procedures to collect and validate TB surveillance data;
● Procedures to transfer TB patient information from subnational levels to national level;
● Reporting on data management activities to monitoring and evaluation and NTP 
managers;
● Managing and using indicator definitions;
● Ensuring compliance with data file security and integrity procedures;
● Preparing and maintaining data files for monitoring, reporting and research;
● (For staff at the national level, if relevant): Maintaining the database and ensuring 
backup procedures are implemented;
1 In the classic “waterfall” approach, most of the programming is done according to detailed 
specifications with little interaction with the final users until the software has been delivered. In 
“agile” approaches, programming is conducted in a series of short iterations lasting maybe one or two 
weeks, with frequent consultations with system users where each iteration produces a functioning 
software module. Projects can also use a mixture of these approaches. The merits and pitfalls of these 
approaches are beyond the scope of this document.
70
CHAPTER 4. IMPLEMENTING AN ELECTRONIC RECORDING AND REPORTING SYSTEM
from paper-based to electronic recording and reporting. For example, will existing 
paper-held data be migrated over to the electronic system? If so, how and by whom? 
Are there enough trained staff available to carry out these tasks?
It is important to manage the sensitivities of staff during roll-out. Potential 
problems include:
 a reluctance to switch to a new way of working, especially if it upsets existing staff 
hierarchies, changes established workflows or conflicts with the culture of doing 
particular tasks;
 redundancies created by efficiencies generated through electronic recording and 
reporting may lower morale;
 reconciling the expectations of data management staff at different levels with 
those of the officers responsible for monitoring and surveillance;
 high staff turnover, making it difficult to ensure all staff are adequately trained;
 workers who are under-qualified or over-qualified for the new work to which they 
are assigned.
Roll-out may require an adjustment in how staff are managed. Providing a feedback 
mechanism for staff to voice their opinions, concerns and suggestions engages them 
in the implementation process and can be an effective way to identify and prioritize 
improvement to your system. 
 4.4 Maintenance (including evolution, monitoring and evaluation)
  Maintenance
Once roll-out is “complete” and all sites have trained staff and are using the system, 
it is easy to think that your work is done. However, like a paper-based recording and 
reporting system, regular training, updating of the system, supervision and monitoring 
is needed to make sure the system remains fit for purpose.1 
Plans, budgets and personnel are needed for upgrades, troubleshooting, bug-fixing 
and improvements, covering both hardware (such as PCs, servers, modems) and 
software (such as updates to security or anti-virus software on desktop computers, 
and updates of the electronic recording and reporting platform itself). It is best to 
have trained staff or contractors available in the long run to oversee or carry out 
necessary upgrades to both the hardware and software. If an open-source system 
is not being used it may be necessary to plan and budget for monthly or annual 
maintenance fees or contract renewal fees that are paid to the owner or developer 
of the software system (see Sections 2.7–2.11 and 2.13 for a detailed discussion of 
these matters). 
A long-term maintenance and evolution plan will help to lay down the ground rules 
for a successful roll-out and ongoing implementation. It is also important to develop 
change management processes such as a system to record and track all requested 
and implemented changes to the system (adaptations, fixing bugs, upgrades, etc). 
Such a tracking mechanism allows for rapid review of the maintenance situation at all 
levels of the system (reported bugs or requested changes) and allows for transparent 
1 A set of standards called ITIL for “identifying, planning, delivering and supporting IT services”  
(http://www.itil-officialsite.com/AboutITIL/WhatisITIL.aspx) is being increasingly used by providers of 
IT services and may be useful for those responsible for managing the IT component of the TB system.
71 
ELECTRONIC RECORDING AND REPORTING FOR TUBERCULOSIS CARE AND CONTROL
and organized documentation of these changes, such as actions taken and necessary 
approvals given (see also Section 2.9). 
Plan for the worst case scenario and develop a disaster recovery or business 
continuity plan. What happens if the server crashes? The NTP building burns down? 
Funding is cut? Walk through every bad scenario and develop a strategy to address it. 
Spell out and implement the actions needed to address these contingencies. 
Regardless of the initial funders, it is useful to develop and maintain a funding plan 
which lays out the role of each responsible party in the long-term (see also Section 
2.11). It may be appropriate to set up a memorandum of understanding or contract to 
formalize agreements for financial commitments as well as for technical or managerial 
responsibilities. 
  Evolution
It is likely that NTPs will want to add new aspects or functions to their electronic 
recording and reporting system (Box 4.3). For example, a country may start with an 
electronic recording and reporting restricted to MDR-TB patients and then decide 
to expand the system’s scope to include all TB patients. Small changes can likely 
be folded into regular maintenance plans for the system. However, major upgrades 
will likely need a new round of the implementation cycle – planning, development, 
piloting, roll-out, training, and maintenance (Figure 4.1) – which takes you back up to 
the beginning of this document. 
  Monitoring and evaluation
Like any new approach or intervention, the implementation of an electronic recording 
and reporting system requires monitoring and evaluation to show progress in roll-out, 
identify weaknesses in the system that need to be corrected and demonstrate the 
impact of the overall system. 
Indicators can be process-oriented, relating to performance of the system during 
roll-out and maintenance phases or can be impact-orientated, relating to the long-
term impact on health outcomes and programme performance (see also Section 
4.1f). Table 4.1 contains a list of illustrative process-orientated indicators which can 
be used for regular evaluation of a system and can be adapted to match country 
conditions. For example, if the system is only being implemented for MDR-TB case 
management, none of the drug-sensitive TB indicators would apply. Box 4.4 shows 
how some of these indicators are being monitored in Brazil.
72
CHAPTER 4. IMPLEMENTING AN ELECTRONIC RECORDING AND REPORTING SYSTEM
Box 4.3
Evolution of the TB Information Management System in China
The case-based TB Information Management System was launched in 2005 building on 
the platform of the web-based Infectious Disease Reporting System implemented in 2004 
following the SARS (severe acute respiratory syndrome) outbreak of 2003. The third version 
of the system was launched in 2011 with the addition of a new drug-resistant TB module. 
This follows an earlier upgrade in 2009 when the system’s architecture was changed to 
reduce the heavy load on its central servers. 
The system is made up of modules organized around data collection, quality assessment, 
output and system management (such as data dictionary management).
Ongoing challenges
Training: In addition to having to train system administrators in using the upgraded system, 
frequent staff turnover has meant that there is an ongoing need to train new system 
administrators.
Data exchange: Establishing standard datasets and mechanisms to exchange data with 
other public-health systems such as the vital registration system.
 FIGURE 4.3 The evolution of China’s TB Information Management System  
(source: Chinese Center for Disease Control and Prevention)
Requirements Requirements
analaysed analaysed
Feedback Upgrade built Feedback Upgrade built 
collected and tested collected and tested
2004 2005 2006 2007 2008 2009 2010 2011
Jan 2004 Jan 2005 March 2009 April 2011
Infectious Version 1.0 of Version 2.0 DR-TB module 
Disease TB Information launched. launched 
Information Management Core information to collect 
System System held on national information 
launched launched. server, more detailed on suspected 
Registers for information held and confirmed 
suspects, on local servers. cases of drug-
patients and Modules for data resistant TB.
laboratories quality assessment 
held on national and reminders for 
server. patient appointments 
added.
73 
ELECTRONIC RECORDING AND REPORTING FOR TUBERCULOSIS CARE AND CONTROL
Table 4.1
Possible indicators for monitoring the performance of a TB electronic recording and 
reporting system.
SYSTEM PERFORMANCE
●	 % of evaluated functionalities with correct functioning / needing adjustment / with bugs to be fixed
●	 % of electronic recording and reporting system users trained and active out of target number of users
●	 Number of months delay in implementing electronic recording and reporting action plan
●	 User friendliness and operator satisfaction ratings (user survey needed to measure these indicators) 
●	 Quarterly or annual cost of electronic recording and reporting system implementation and maintenance per TB 
patient entered in the system
●	 Cumulative annual or monthly downtime of central server (for web-based systems)
SYSTEM COVERAGE
●	 Number of TB or DR-TB units where the system has been rolled out and is in use (and % out of all units in the 
country) by the end of a quarter or end of a calendar year.
●	 Number of TB or DR-TB units trained with at least one person trained and using the system (and % out of all 
units where the system has been rolled out) by the end of a quarter or end of a calendar year.
DETECTION, REGISTRATION AND TREATMENT
●	 Number of TB suspects screened for TB and registered in the electronic recording and reporting system during 
a quarter or during a calendar year.
●	 % of TB suspects that are screened and registered in the system out of all TB suspects screened and registered 
during a quarter or during a calendar year.
●	 Number of TB cases diagnosed and registered in the system during a quarter or during a calendar year.
●	 Number of TB patients registered in the system during a quarter or during a calendar year with HIV status also 
recorded.
●	 % of TB patients registered in the system during a quarter or during a calendar year with HIV status also 
recorded.
●	 Number of MDR-TB suspects screened for DR-TB and registered in the system during a quarter or during a 
calendar year.
●	 % of MDR-TB suspects screened and registered in the system out of all MDR-TB suspects screened and 
registered during a quarter or during a calendar year.
TB OR DR-TB PROGRAMME ACTIVITY 
●	 Number of TB or DR-TB patients registered in the system who started treatment during a quarter or during a 
calendar year.
●	 Number of TB patients registered in the system during the previous calendar year for whom treatment 
outcomes have been recorded.
●	 % of TB or DR-TB patients whose outcomes are being recorded in the system out of all newly registered patients 
during a quarter or during a calendar year.
DRUG MANAGEMENT (IF APPLICABLE)
●	 Number of forecast exercises conducted to compare actual second-line drug consumption with projected 
consumption predicted by the system
●	 % accuracy between real second-line drug consumption versus projected consumption with electronic 
recording and reporting system
●	 Number of stock outs at sites using the drug management component of the system
●	 Calculated number of months of stock available at a specific time for each drug at each site using the drug 
management component of the system
●	 Average time taken during a calendar year to receive a given drug at a given site after an order has been placed
DR-TB, drug-resistant tuberculosis; MDR-TB, multidrug-resistant tuberculosis.
74
CHAPTER 4. IMPLEMENTING AN ELECTRONIC RECORDING AND REPORTING SYSTEM
Box 4.4
Examples of how indicators can be used to track implementation progress
Below are two examples of how e-TB managera implementation in Brazil is monitored. 
Figure 4.4 shows the number of active system users and the number of health units using 
the system. Tracking these indicators simultaneously can highlight any lag in training or 
system use. Figure 4.5 compares the case notifications with the status of treatment 
outcomes registered. This shows whether registered cases are being tracked properly in 
the system.
 FIGURE 4.4 Growth in coverage (number of units) and use (number of users) of e-TB Manager in 
Brazil, 2005–2010 (source: MSH, Brazil)
800
Units Users
600
400
200
0
2005 2006 2007 2008 2009 2010
 FIGURE 4.5 Cumulative number of MDR-TB cases notified and number with treatment outcomes 
recorded in the e-TB manager system in Brazil, 2005–2010 (source: MSH, Brazil)
6000
Notified cases Cases with recorded treatment outcomes
5000
4000
3000
2000
1000
0
2005 2006 2007 2008 2009 2010
a e-TB manager, developed by MSH with support from USAID, is a web-based tool designed to 
strengthen TB programmes by integrating case management, medicine control and surveillance 
information into a single platform. By the end of 2011, it was fully implemented in 5 countries, with 
another 10 countries that are either planning to, piloting or rolling out the system.
75 
Number of cases Number of units and users
 ANNEX 1 Development of this document
This document is the result of a collaborative project funded by the United States 
Agency for International Development under the USAID Tuberculosis CARE I, 
Cooperative Agreement No. AID-OAA-A-10-000020. The project proposal was 
developed in December 2010 by the World Health Organization (WHO) in close 
cooperation with the KNCV Tuberculosis Foundation (KNCV) and Management 
Sciences for Health (MSH).
A document outline and project plan was developed in January 2011 and a core 
group of authors with experience in designing and implementing electronic recording 
and reporting systems for TB care and control was identified from KNCV, MSH 
and WHO. Subsequently, additional contributors with experience in implementing 
electronic recording and reporting systems for TB care and control and representing 
all WHO regions were identified and invited to participate in the development of the 
guide. 
A questionnaire about key aspects of electronic recording and reporting was 
developed in February 2011 and sent to 11 countries with experience in designing and 
implementing electronic systems for TB care and control. Answers were received from 
Brazil, China, Georgia, Latvia, Moldova, Pakistan, Romania, South Africa and the WHO 
Eastern Mediterranean Regional Office. 
First drafts of the Introduction, Chapter 1 and Chapter 2 were produced by the 
core group of authors, building on the answers received in the questionnaires. 
A two-day meeting of lead authors and other contributors was held on 27–28 April 
2011 at WHO’s headquarters in Geneva, Switzerland. Country experiences from Brazil, 
China, Georgia, Kenya, the Netherlands, Pakistan, Romania, the United Kingdom 
and of the WHO Eastern Mediterranean Regional Office were presented on the first 
day. The second day was used to present and discuss the drafts of the Introduction, 
Chapter 1 and Chapter 2, and to agree on a plan to produce Chapter 3 and Chapter 4. 
Following the meeting in April, the core group of authors incorporated examples 
presented by countries to illustrate the options and recommendations provided in 
Chapter 1 and Chapter 2 with real practical examples. Chapters 3 and 4 were drafted. 
A full draft of the entire guide was sent for review in September 2011 to all 
authors and participants at the April meeting, and also to 9 reviewers. A final draft 
was circulated in November 2011 to the same group and also to 22 reviewers. Peer 
reviewers were selected based on their expertise in TB recording and reporting, 
HIV recording and reporting and/or their expertise in the development of electronic 
surveillance systems. Comments were received from 7 of the reviewers contacted.
Finalization of the entire document following internal and external peer-review as 
well as copy-editing were completed in February 2012.
76

Adopting electronic recording and reporting is not simply about choosing a piece of 
software: it is also about changing how people work. This is not a simple undertak-
ing. This document introduces the key questions to be considered and illustrates 
what the questions, options and recommendations mean in practice by drawing on 
examples of recent experience from a variety of countries. It is an essential resource 
for all those planning to introduce electronic recording and reporting systems for TB 
care and control, or to enhance existing systems. 
For further information about tuberculosis contact:
Information Resource Centre HTM/STB
World Health Organization
20 Avenue Appia
1211 Geneva 27
Switzerland
E-mail: tbdocs@who.int
Web site: www.who.int/tb
ISBN 978 92 4 156446 5
