  
  
C ommCare for Home-Based Care  
 
B rief Overview 
 
Home-based care providers (HCBPs) are 
community health workers that play a vital 
role in serving poor and hard-to-reach 
populations suffering from chronic diseases.  
They promote preventive care and convey 
important health information during regular 
visits to a patient’s home.  Being embedded in 
the community and experiencing the reality of 
a patient’s daily life, the CHWs are in a 
unique position to understand the challenges 
facing patients.  CHWs also have the 
potential to collect information that is needed 
at the national level about disease burden and 
barriers to adopting preventative health 
practices.     
 
CommCare, a software application that runs 
on mobile phones, was developed and scaled up by D-tree International in order to improve the effectiveness 
of Pathfinder International’s home-based care (HBC) programs in Tanzania. The tool assists HBCPs to screen 
for common problems, manage household visits and referrals for services, collect data, and report on program 
activities and outcomes.  Additionally, supervisory, as well as monitoring and evaluation (M&E) components of 
the program, help supervisors better manage their providers and programs in the field.  
 
The project start date was October 2008. There are currently over 300 HBPCs using CommCare who are 
trained and monitored by Pathfinder International, D-tree International and district municipal staff in Tanzania. 
HBPCs using CommCare are located in two districts in Dar es Salaam.  
 
  Geographic Coverage: 
 Two districts of Dar es Salaam, Tanzania 
 
 Implementation Partners: 
Pathfinder International is leading a team of partners which includes: 
D-tree International | National AIDS Control Program (Tanzania) | Temeke and 
Kinondoni District Councils 
 
 Funder: 
The Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC) 
 
 For More Information Contact: 
CDC Tanzania 
 Carol Mushi, Co-Agreement Specialist; 
Tel: +255-222-121-448; email: mushic@tz.cdc.gov 
Pathfinder  
 Mustafa Kudrati, Country Representative; 
Tel: +255-769-836-399; email: mkudrati@pathfinder.org 
D-tree  
  Dr. Marc Mitchell, President; 53 
Tel: +1 617-432-6322; email: mmitchel@hsph.hardard.edu 
 
Service Delivery 
 
 CommCare for Home-Based Care 
 
 
About CommCare  the phone-based system as advantageous because 
The phone-based tool simplifies the collection and records are not as vulnerable to destruction. 
transfer of data to a general database and offers  
decision-making support to HBCPs. The application Project staff have noted additional improvements to 
applies the guidelines for care and data collection that both the management and delivery of services. 
HBCPs are trained to follow and is used to support the • Improved reporting time from old paper 
delivery and management of community health services system collection and data entry 
including: (weeks/months) to instant (100 percent 
• HBC for people living with HIV/AIDS; availability on web-based dashboard for 
• Home-based counseling and testing (HBCT); supervisor). 
• TB screening at the community level; and • Use of SMS reminders to the HBCPs and their 
• Family Planning counseling using the Balanced supervisors resulted in an 86 percent reduction 
Counseling Strategy Plus approach (BCS+). in the days overdue for client visits (9.7 to 1.4 
 days). 
The application provides a checklist of activities which • Anytime visibility into the activity levels of 300 
are expected to be performed during each home visit, as users now possible, which enables remote 
well as reminders of appointments.  It gives HBCPs monitoring and follow up. 
access to electronic registration forms for new clients,  
follow–up forms for existing clients, referral options for Lessons Learned 
existing clients, and reminder options for pending • Simplicity of the mobile application is critical for 
referrals and visits to clients. It also provides HBCPs quick and easy use. 
with a list of appropriate steps for counseling clients and • It is important to limit the number of SMS 
basic information on the benefits, potential side effects, messages a single user receives as they can 
and efficacy of family planning methods. The tool runs easily become overwhelmed. 
off-line as a stand-alone application on the HBCPs java- • SMS reminders for the HBCPs alone are not 
enabled phone.  nearly as effective as when supplemented by 
 calls from supervisors. 
The HBCPs send their data to the server on a daily basis • It is important to plan as early as possible with 
using general packet radio service (GPRS), a packet the government and partners when 
oriented mobile data service, and from there, transitioning from paper reporting to electronic 
supervisors can view activities by HBCP and monthly reporting in order to reduce any double 
government and supervisory reports. An additional reporting.  
feature of the system is an SMS reminder that is sent to • Use of local champions or “superusers” can 
each HBCP and their supervisors notifying them of greatly improve field support capabilities. 
upcoming or missed follow-up visits.   
 Conclusion 
Evaluation and Results This project has demonstrated how successfully 
Five HBCPs in the Kibada area of Dar es Salaam were mHealth tools can be used to improve the delivery of 
trained to use the application in November 2008.  HBC and has shown the utility of mobile applications in 
Qualitative interviews were conducted with seven improving data collection, monitoring, and reporting. 
clients whom had been visited by HBCPs during this Although there is no concrete health outcome data at 
initial period, and overall, the clients spoke positively of this point, one can assume that the clients of these 
the phone-based system. The phones were seen by HBCPs are healthier than they would have been 
clients as better for privacy than paper records, given otherwise in a system where HBCPs would not 
that they are more discreet than paper notebooks and complete all of the required visits, referrals, counseling, 
cannot be read as easily by third parties. They also saw or checks for health issues.   
Information was excerpted from: 
http://www.commcarehq.org/users/commcare-tanzania/ 
54 http://www.w3.org/2008/10/MW4D_WS/papers/dtree.pdf   
