Example of service delivery 
report sent vis SMS
A=# clients attended
B=# U5 attended
C=# U5 with malaria
G=# U5 with pneumonia
F=# U5 with diarrhea
D=# U5 referred
E=# clients received FP pills
ACCREDITED Drug Dispensing Outlet
IMPLEMENTATION DATE:  April 2012 to May 2015 
Improving regulatory capacity to enhance pharmaceutical 
product and service quality 
Many people in rural Tanzania seek health care and medicines from retail drug shops, which historically 
had unqualified, untrained and unsupervised sellers.1 1 Launched in 2003, the Accredited Drug 
Dispensing Outlet (ADDO) program sought to improve access to affordable, quality medicines 
and pharmaceutical services in underserved areas through a combination of training, incentives, and 
regulatory oversight of set standards.2 One of the goals of Management Sciences for Health (MSH)’s 
Sustainable Drug Seller Initiatives (SDSI) program was to assure the ADDO program’s long-term 
sustainability by increasing access to data for informed program decision-making. With nationwide scale-
up and over 9,000 shops accredited or nearly accredited in Tanzania, the Pharmacy Council of  Tanzania 
(PC) needed a comprehensive database to organize information on ADDO and pharmacy facilities 
and personnel. In addition, PC was interested in using mobile technology to improve its communication, 
reporting, and fees collection systems for these facilities. SDSI collaborated with Invention and 
Technological Ideas Development Organization (ITIDO), a local group, to help PC meet its needs. 
About ADDO
Working with MSH and PC, ITIDO developed a and personnel fees, a short message service (SMS)-based web-based database of information on private sector reporting module for outlets to report on standard service 
drug outlets’ premises and personnel, including facility delivery-related indicators, and an SMS-based information 
registration, personnel qualifications and certifications, exchange module, which allows ADDO and pharmacy 
inspections, and payments of associated fees. ITIDO also personnel to send and receive information, for example, on 
developed mobile applications that link to the database accreditation requirements or drug recalls. The applications 
and include a mobile payment component for premises work with the basic mobile phones that ADDO personnel 
50  n  FINANCE
Rachel Lieber
already own, precluding the need for smartphones.3 SDSI Although feedback was mostly positive, some pharmacy 
tasked ADDO, pharmacy, and PC personnel with identifying personnel felt their training on the helpline was inadequate. 
features they wanted to see in the system; stakeholder input Others noted delays in receiving report confirmations or 
on the system design helps ensure sustainability. In addition, answers to queries from PC. Mobile money had allowed PC 
ITIDO developed the technology using JAVA-based open to collect fees quickly, and PC staff reported that mobile 
source software to ensure affordability and adaptability.  technology had improved communication between themselves 
PC, MSH, and ITIDO introduced the technology in the and ADDOs. A challenge was that not all PC departments 
Dar es Salaam and Pwani regions in May 2014 to determine were using the database, which limited its usefulness. Despite 
its ease of use and whether it improves regulatory capacity challenges, PC staff were eager to see that the tools were used 
and efficiency. The pilot involved 289 ADDO owners and effectively to improve their own operations and those of 
dispensers from Pwani, 218 pharmacy owners and personnel ADDOs and pharmacies. 
from Dar es Salaam, and PC staff. A process evaluation and 
qualitative interviews were conducted to assess user experi- Lessons Learned 
ences with the integrated mobile technology and database.  
After the pilot, ITIDO used the findings to refine the n Engaging and training all potential technology users 
applications. PC has entered into the system basic in the regulatory organization is critical to realizing the 
information on ADDOs and pharmacies nationwide, technology’s full potential and benefits.
including GIS coordinates, in preparation for the technology’s 
n Something as simple as a helpline may not be intuitive 
scale-up. SDSI and ITIDO also helped PC draft a technology to all, which limits its use; therefore, training time 
scale-up and sustainability strategy. Drug shop regulatory needs to be adequate to suit everyone’s needs.
agencies in other countries have already expressed interest in 
adapting and implementing the technology. n End-users, such as ADDO and pharmacy personnel, 
should receive aggregated feedback on service reports 
so that they know the data are being used.
Evaluation and Results 
During the four months of the pilot, all applications worked Conclusion 
well: 129 people used mobile money to pay more than 12 
million Tanzanian shillings or 6,443 USD in fees; over three The pilot of the database and mobile applications suite 
months, more than 750 service delivery reports were received demonstrated that low-cost technology using basic mobile 
from participating ADDOs (illustrated top left); and PC phones is a viable option for regulatory authorities seeking 
sent out 13,000 text messages and received over 200 queries.4 to collect data from remotely located private sector outlets. 
In-depth interviews were conducted with 28 ADDO owners/ The majority of ADDO and pharmacy users picked up the 
dispensers in Pwani region, eight pharmacy representatives mobile applications with ease and expressed appreciation 
in the Dar es Salaam region, and five PC staff members.5 for the technology. If taken to scale, the technology has 
Interviews provided perspectives on the utility of service the potential to improve PC’s ability to locate and manage 
delivery reports, the two-way helpline, and mobile money. rural ADDO facilities, track professional licensing status 
and collect related fees, and better communicate with the 
Respondents reported that all three applications saved them outlets. In addition, MSH has been working with regulatory 
time and money: authorities in Uganda and Liberia to adapt this database 
n Service reports: “This has made not only our life easier and applications to increase their own oversight efficiencies 
but also for PC themselves. They do not need to come to related to their accredited drug seller initiatives.  n
the outlets to collect the reports, and we do not need to 
go all the way to the district councils to submit them. It 
saves time and money.” (Dispenser, Kibaha)
n Helpline: “Oh yes, this service is good. You can send a Geographic Coverage: Tanzania
question asking about the process of opening a drug shop Implementation Partners: Management Sciences for Health; 
and you get all the information.” (Dispenser, Bagamoyo) Pharmacy Council of Tanzania; Invention and Technological 
Ideas Development Organization (ITIDO); Dr. Angel Dillip, 
n Mobile money: “It is also safe, you don’t need to carry Apotheker Consultancy Inc.
money every time; you might get robbed. Paying through Donor: Bill & Melinda Gates Foundation
M-Pesa is very safe.” (Dispenser, Bagamoyo)
Contact Information: Jafary Liana, Senior Technical Advisor, MSH 
Tanzania jliana@msh.org 
mHEALTH COMPENDIUM  VOLUME 5  n  51
