 Username
 Password
Home
 Course	Description
AKDN	eHRC	is	offering	a	year-long	online	certificate	course	in	eHealth.	This
course	is	designed	to	build	the	eHealth	capacities	of	professionals	working
in	the	health	sector.	It	focuses	on	helping	the	audience	understand	the
concepts	of	eHealth,	implement	eHealth	solutions	and	address	the
challenges	around	eHealth	service	delivery,	primarily	in	low-	and-middle
income	countries.	
The	course	consists	of	11	modules.	Each	module	is	delivered	asynchronously
over	a	period	of	three	weeks.	For	more	information,	visit	the	'Course
Structure'	tab	on	the	right	side	of	this	page.	
Each	module	below	also	includes	a	video	explains	the	module,	walks	you
through	the	weekly	activities	that	you	will	perform	and	outlines	what	is
expected	of	you	from	this	module.
 Module	1:	Introduction	to	Health	and	Health	Care	System
This	module	provides	an	overview	of	the	basic	concepts	of	health	and
the	health	system.	It	explains	the	importance	of	health	in	an	individual's
life	for	supporting	a	better	future	and	discusses	various	challenges
currently	faced	by	health	care	systems	around	the	world.	Moreover,	it
sheds	light	on	the	mission	and	health-related	activities	implemented	by
the	World	Health	Organization	(WHO),	to	improve	the	health	status	of
people	in	developing	countries.	
																																																											
																																																																																																															
Module	Timeline:	Apr	17,	2017	-	May	07,	2017
								 Go	to	the	Module
 Module	2:	Introduction	to	Information	and	Communication	Technology
This	introductory	module	presents	an	overview	of	the	basic	concepts	of
Information	and	Communication	Technology	(ICT).	This	section	of	the
course	will	familiarise	novice	eHealth	professionals	with	the	basic
components	of	ICT	along	with	its	application	in	different	sectors.	This
module	will	prepare	professionals	to	embrace	ICT	to	excel	in	this
technology-driven	world.
Module	Timeline:	May	15,	2017	-	Jun	04,	2017
Go	to	the	Module
 Module	3:	Introduction	to	eHealth
The	field	of	eHealth	comes	at	the	intersection	of	health	and	technology.
This	fusion	of	information	technology	and	health	has	opened	new	ways
of	health	care	delivery	beyond	geographical	boundaries.	This	module
presents	an	overview	of	the	field	of	eHealth.	This	section	of	the	course
will	familiarise	professionals	from	both	IT	and	non-IT	backgrounds
with	the	basic	concepts	of	eHealth.
Module	Timeline:	Jun	05,	2017	-	Jun	25,	2017
Go	to	the	Module
 Module	4:	Understanding	Technology
This	module	is	an	extension	of	Module	2	on	'Introduction	to
Technology'.	It	provides	learners	with	an	in-depth	understanding	of	the
concepts	of	ICT	along	with	its	integration	in	health	care.	Moreover,	it
helps	participants	learn	about	the	significance	of	health	care
information	-	its	storage,	sharing,	and	retrieval	in	health	information
systems.	One	of	the	main	focuses	of	this	module	is	to	explain	various
health	care	interoperability	standards	used	in	the	health	care	industry.
Module	Timeline:	Jul	17,	2017	-	Aug	06,	2017
Go	to	the	Module
 Module	5:	Understanding	Telemedicine
This	module	offers	an	overview	of	telemedicine.	It	explores	potentials
and	opportunities	in	the	field	of	telemedicine	and	provides	insight	on
how	to	implement	and	set-up	telemedicine	services.	The	module
highlights	some	of	the	best	practices	as	well	as	challenges	faced	by
telemedicine	implementers	and	explicates	the	outcomes	of	telemedicine
and	its	impact	on	people's	lives.	
Module	Timeline:	Aug	7,	2017	-	Aug	27,	2017
Go	to	the	Module
 Module	6:	Understanding	mHealth
This	module	provides	an	in-depth	understanding	of	mobile	technologies
in	the	field	of	health	care.	It	describes	the	basic	components	of	mobile
health	(mHealth),	its	application	in	health	care	systems,	and	the
benefits,	potentials	and	challenges	of	mHealth	within	health	care
organizations.
Module	Timeline:	Sep	4,	2017	-	Sep	24,	2017
Go	to	the	Module
 Module	7:	Understanding	eLearning
This	module	provides	an	overview	of	eLearning	in	health	care.	It
describes	the	benefits	and	challenges	of	adopting	eLearning	for	the
education	of	health	care	providers.	Various	aspects	of	eLearning	are
explored	through	a	series	of	activities.		Participants	are	provided	with
the	essential	terminology	and	processes	required	to	set-up	an	eLearning
programme	for	their	organisations.	
Module	Timeline:	Oct	2,	2017	-	Oct	22,	2017
		
Go	to	the	Module
 Module	8:	Understanding	Health	Information	Systems
With	exponential	growth	in	medical	knowledge,	there	is	an	inherent
need	to	share	health	care	information.	This	module	gives	participants	an
in-depth	understanding	of	various	Health	Information	Systems	(HIS),
while	focusing	on	the	applications,	scope,	potentials	and	challenges	of
HIS.
Module	Timeline:	Oct	30,	2017	-	Nov	19,	2017
		
Go	to	the	Module
 Module	9:	eHealth	Management
This	module	presents	an	overview	of	eHealth	management.	It	focuses
on	project	management	and	its	processes	that	can	be	applied	to	eHealth
projects.	It	determines	the	need	to	integrate	eHealth	into	the	health	care
service	delivery	system.	This	module	provides	knowledge	and
understanding	about	eHealth	policy	implications	and	gaps.	It	also
highlights	common	challenges	faced	during	eHealth	implementation
and	proposes	ways	to	address	them.	Lastly,	it	deals	with	quality	and
change	management	process	that	can	be	applied	during	eHealth
adoption.	
Module	Timeline:	Nov	27,	2017	-	Dec	17,	2017
		
Go	to	the	Module
 Module	10:	Monitoring	and	Evaluation
This	module	focuses	on	various	aspects	of	monitoring	and	evaluation	in
eHealth.	Opportunities	to	improve	the	quality	of	eHealth	projects	or
programmes	by	enhancing	systematic	monitoring	and	evaluation
systems	are	explored.	
Module	Timeline:	Jan	1,	2018	-	Jan	21,	2018
Go	to	the	Module
 Module	11:Capstone
This	is	the	last	module	of	the	course.	It	elaborates	upon	the	need,
importance,	and	components	of	developing	a	proposal	for	eHealth
service	delivery	projects.	Since	this	module	integrates	learning	from	all
the	previous	modules,	it	will	enable	participants	to	analyse	various
aspects	of	the	core	components	of	eHealth	(mHealth,	eLearning,
telehealth,	and	health	informatics).	On	the	basis	of	this,	participants	will
develop	a	service-based	proposal	for	an	eHealth	project.
Module	Timeline:	Feb	5,	2018	-	Apr	1,	2018
Go	to	the	Module
 Online	Certificate	Course	in	eHealth
 Course	Objectives	
 Who	Should	Attend	
 Course	Structure	
 Passing	Criteria
 How	to	Apply
 Course	Fee
 Eligibility	criteria
 Scholarship
 Academic	Policy
 FAQ
 Acknowledgement	
 Contact	Us
																																																																																																										AKDN	eHealth
Resource	Centre
