  
  
i CycleBeads™ Smartphone Apps 
 
B rief Overview 
 
iCycleBeads smartphone applications enable women to use the Standard 
Days Method® (SDM) of family planning through their iPhone or Android 
devices. The SDM is a fertility awareness-based family planning method that 
was developed by Georgetown University’s Institute for Reproductive 
Health (IRH). The method identifies which days during a woman’s 
menstrual cycle she is most likely to become pregnant if she has cycles 
within a certain range.  The SDM has been proven more than 95 percent 
effective. iCycleBeads iPhone and Android apps were developed by Cycle 
Technologies under license. 
Cycle Technologies launched the iCycleBeads iPhone app in December 
2010 and the iCycleBeads Android app in July 2011. Currently, the 
smartphone apps are available to anyone with an iPhone or Android device. 
They are available in iTunes and the Android Marketplace for one time 
purchase at $2.99. They are available in English and Spanish. Other 
languages can be made available. 
Cycle Technologies is exploring opportunities to make iCycleBeads 
smartphone apps more readily available to users worldwide, and in 
particular, throughout the developing world. 
 
 
 
 Geographic Coverage: 
Worldwide 
 
 Implementation Partners: 
Cycle Technologies developed and manages the applications. The Institute for 
Reproductive Health at Georgetown University provided consulting support. 
 
 Funder: 
Cycle Technologies 
 
 For More Information Contact: 
Cycle Technologies  
 Leslie Heyer, Founder & President, Cycle Technologies: 
5505 Connecticut Ave NW Washington, DC 20015;  
Tel: +1-202-237-0662; email: lheyer@cycletechnologies.com 
 
 13 
 
Behavior Change Communication 
 
 
iCycleBeads™ Smartphone Apps 
About iCycleBeads™  • Women also liked the visual quality of the app, 
iCycleBeads Smartphone apps are available to anyone which they found easy to understand.  As with 
with an iPhone, iPod Touch, iPad, or Android device. women who use the SDM through any tool or 
The iCycleBeads Smartphone Apps use a CycleBeads device, they also like it because the method has 
visual, as well as a calendar, to help a woman track her no side effects. 
cycles and know which day pregnancy is likely.   
 • Feedback from users has inspired development 
To use the iCycleBeads smartphone apps, a user enters of additional features in the app such as the 
the date that her period starts. The app will calculate ability to take notes for each day of a user’s 
which days during her upcoming cycle she is potentially cycle, and to email cycle data so it can be 
fertile or not based on her cycle start date and the readily shared with a health provider or 
methodology of the SDM. Color-coded visuals help a partner.  
user readily identify her fertile days, non-fertile days, and  
when her next cycle is likely to start. A user will also • iCycleBeads smartphone apps are highly 
receive pop-up alerts on her phone for key days such as sustainable in that the product exists and is 
when her fertile days are about to start, when they are already available via widely used marketplaces 
ending, when she can expect her next period to begin, (i.e.,  iTunes and the Android Marketplace). 
and to remind her to enter her next period start date. Investments needed would be specific to 
The apps immediately notify a user if she has a cycle that localized marketing and potentially translation.   
is outside the 26-32 day recommended range for  
effective use of the SDM. • At this point, iPhone and Android phones have 
 the most highly evolved application 
Evaluation and Results marketplaces. Apps for other types of phones 
Since the launch in 2010, the apps have been could be considered on a case by case basis in 
downloaded by approximately 8,000 users (as of the future. 
October 2012). A majority of users are in the U.S., U.K.,  
Canada, Australia, and other English speaking countries. Conclusion 
However, users from all regions and more than 75 iCycleBeads smartphone apps can have a significant 
countries have downloaded the apps. impact in areas where smartphones, and in particular 
 iPhones and Android devices, are being used. These 
iCycleBeads smartphone apps have yet to be introduced apps are attractive to women and programs because 
in low-resource settings, although a handful of users in they enable a woman to use a family planning method 
developing countries are already using the apps. Given that has no side effects, is easy to use, and requires only 
the rapidly expanding use of smartphones in many a one-time, low-cost purchase by the end-user. There 
countries, there is significant potential for impact. are issues related to specific country contexts that may 
 need to be examined more closely in determining the 
Lessons Learned potential impact in a given area.   
• Interviews with women who have used 
iCycleBeads smartphone apps indicate that 
users like these family planning apps because 
they are easy to use and convenient.  
 
 
 
Information was excerpted from: 
14 http://www.cyclebeads.com/  
