HEALTH 
INFORMATION 
AS HEALTH CARE
THE ROLE OF MOBILES IN UNLOCKING HEALTH DATA AND WELLNESS
DISCUSSION 
PAPER
mHealth
AUTHORS
This discussion paper was written by Jody Ranck, DrPH, with input by and collaboration 
from Ramesh Krishnamurthy, PhD, Dykki Settle and David Lubinski, and edited by Adele 
Waugaman.
RECOMMENDED CITATION
Jody Ranck, Health Information and Health Care: The Role of Technology in Unlocking Data 
and Wellness – A Discussion Paper, (Washington, D.C.: United Nations Foundation & Voda-
fone Foundation Technology Partnership), February 2011.
COVER PHOTOS
UN/Farran
The views expressed in the report are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect 
those of the United Nations Foundation, The Vodafone Foundation or the mHealth Alliance.
CONTACT
United Nations Foundation
1800 Massachusetts Ave., NW
Suite 400
Washington, D.C. 20036
USA 
ABOUT THE UNITED NATIONS FOUNDATION & VODAFONE FOUNDATION 
TECHNOLOGY PARTNERSHIP 
The United Nations Foundation and Vodafone Foundation Technology Partnership is a lead-
ing public-private alliance using technology programs to strengthen the UN’s humanitarian 
efforts worldwide. Created in October 2005 with a £10 million commitment from The Vodafone 
Foundation matched by £5 million from the UN Foundation, the Technology Partnership has 
three core areas of focus: (1) to strengthen communications in humanitarian emergencies; 
(2) to support the development of mobile health (mHealth) programs to improve public health 
systems, decision-making and, ultimately, patient outcomes; and (3) to promote research 
and innovation using technology as a tool for international development. The UN Foundation 
and The Vodafone Foundation are among the founding partners of the mHealth Alliance. 
More information is available at: www.unfoundation.org/vodafone.
ABOUT THE MHEALTH ALLIANCE
The mHealth Alliance (mHA) mobilizes innovation to deliver quality health at the farthest 
reaches of wireless networks and mobile devices. Working with diverse partners, the 
mHA advances mHealth through research, advocacy, and support for the development 
of interoperable solutions and sustainable deployment models. The mHA sponsors inno-
vation challenges and conferences, leads cross-sector mHealth initiatives, and hosts 
HUB (www.HealthUnBound.org), a global online community for resource sharing and 
collaborative solution generation. Founding partners include the Rockefeller Foundation, 
the United Nations Foundation and the Vodafone Foundation, the U.S. President’s Emer-
gency Plan For AIDS Relief, the GSM Association and Hewlett-Packard. More information 
is available at www.mHealthAlliance.org.
A DISCUSSION PAPER COMMISSIONED BY THE UNITED NATIONS FOUNDATION  
& VODAFONE FOUNDATION TECHNOLOGY PARTNERSHIP IN COLLABORATION  
WITH THE MHEALTH ALLIANCE.
Prepared by Jody Ranck, DrPH, Ramesh Krishnamurthy, PhD, Dykki Settle, David Lubinski

TABLE OF CONTENTS
 ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS 07
 EXECUTIVE SUMMARY  09
 GLOSSARY 11
 INTRODUCTION 13
 PUBLIC HEALTH SURVEILLANCE SYSTEMS 21
 HUMAN RESOURCES ECOSYSTEMS 33
 SUPPLY CHAIN 39
 RECOMMENDATIONS 45
 REFERENCES & ENDNOTES 48
6  |  HEALTH INFORMATION AS HEALTH CARE CREDIT: UN/ESKINDER DEBEBE
ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS 
The United Nations Foundation and The Vodafone Foundation are thankful to the numerous 
individuals who have shared their ideas and experiences to inform this report. In particular, 
we would like to thank lead author Jody Ranck, and contributing authors Ramesh Krish-
namurthy, David Lubinski and Dykki Settle. We are furthermore grateful to Manish Kumar and 
Catharine Taylor of PATH, Neeru Gupta, Pamela Riley and Shalu Umapathy of Abt Associates, 
Joel Selanikio of Datadyne and S. Yunkap Kwankam for their insights and feedback during 
the editing of this report. We would like to acknowledge Dalberg Global Development Advisors 
for their work on the Senegal case study cited within this discussion paper.
We also are indebted to those who shared the rich photos and graphics found in this report. 
Thanks go to Dalberg Global Development Advisors , Global Health Council, Health Metrics 
Network, ITU World Telecommunication and ICT Indicators database, Steve Kinzett of John 
Snow, Inc., Ramesh Krishnamurthy, Logistics Management Information System, David 
Lubinski, Dykki Settle, The Internet Journal of Gynecology and Obstetrics, UNICEF, United 
Nations, and the World Health Organization (WHO). 
Lastly, we would like to thank the team that worked on creating and producing this report. 
This includes, copy editor Active Voice llc, designer Eighty2degrees LLC, and Hal Kowenski 
and Andre Temoney at Linemark Printing. 
 HEALTH INFORMATION AS HEALTH CARE  |  7
8  |  HEALTH INFORMATION AS HEALTH CARE CREDIT: UN/SOPHIA PARIS
EXECUTIVE SUMMARY
Around the world, countless lives are lost due to insufficient access 
to quality health information. The availability of accurate, timely, and 
analyzed data is directly relevant to the quality of an individual’s health 
and the healthcare system in general, the delivery of individual care, 
and the understanding and management of overall health systems. 
This discussion paper will: 
  
¾ Examine the role information and com-  flows that technology-based solutions
 munication technologies (ICTs), and   could address. In the case of each of 
 mobile technology in particular, can play   these three domains, we use maternal 
  in improving access to quality health   health as an example to show how 
 information.   technology-backed inter ventions can 
 improve health information flows.
¾ Review the ecosystem of health infor- 
 mation related to patients, tracing the ¾ Identify barriers, choke points, and 
 data throughout the continuum of care.  other inefficiencies to guide the discus- 
 sion of how modern ICTs can improve 
¾ Examine health information flows from  health information flows and health 
 patients in villages to international health  outcomes in the developing world. 
 organizations and the most important 
 steps in between. ¾ Provide recommendations for using 
 mod ern ICTs to make health informa- 
¾ Identify common ground on which tech-  tion flow more efficiently and perhaps 
 nologists and public health professionals  even transform the process of care 
 can develop innovative strategies and  delivery itself. 
 tools to strengthen health care systems 
 by supporting health data flows, working This discussion will continue online thr-
 from the premise that better data col- ough the ‘Data Flows’ workspace on 
 lection will lead to better health policies www.HealthUnbound.org (HUB). HUB pro-
 and health outcomes. v ides a new model to foster collaborative 
knowledge about global health. Check back 
¾ Focus on three healthcare domains – sur for new discussion and activity in this space. 
 veillance systems, supply chain, and 
 human resources – and through the per- 
 spectives of experts in these domains, 
 identify critical gaps in health information 
 HEALTH INFORMATION AS HEALTH CARE  |  9
10  |  HEALTH INFORMATION AS HEALTH CARE CREDIT: UN/MARTINE PERRET
GLOSSARY
The following terms are used frequently in this paper, and are defined 
as follows:
  
CONTINUUM OF CARE: An integrated GLOBAL STRATEGY FOR WOMEN AND 
system of care that guides and tracks a CHILDREN’S HEALTH: Developed under 
patient over time through a comprehensive the auspices of the UN Secretary-General, 
array of health services spanning all levels of a plan recognizing that the health of women 
intensity of care.1 and children is key to progress on all 
development goals and calling for cross-
COMMUNITY HEALTH WORKER (CHW): sector collaboration and the use of ICTs in 
Frontline health care workers who, in the improving the health of women and children 
developing world, are frequently the primary worldwide. 
source of health information and care in rural 
and low resource environments. The World HEALTH SYSTEMS: As defined by WHO, 
Health Organization (WHO) further defines a all the organizations, institutions, resources, 
health care worker as anyone whose focus and people whose primary purpose is to 
or activity is to improve health, including pro- improve health. 
viders (e.g., doctors, nurses, and midwives) 
as well as technicians and managers.2 INTEROPERABILITY: The ability to share 
data quickly, accurately, and efficiently 
DATA FLOWS: The pathways of health between different applications across and 
information as it moves from local to regional throughout a health system. 
to national to international levels and from 
patients and community health workers to MHEALTH: Using wireless communications 
public and private health care facilities. devices, such as mobile phones, netbooks, 
and remote sensors, for health services and 
ENTERPRISE ARCHITECTURE: The sub- information. 
field of information technology (IT) or infor-
mation and communication technologies MILLENNIUM DEVELOPMENT GOALS 
(ICT) that takes the interdependent resources, (MDGS): Eight goals for international dev-
such as people, capital, information, and elopment agreed to by the UN General 
knowledge amassed in support of a com- Assembly in 2000 and recognized around 
mon mission, and maps them into a unified the world.
and efficient technology system.
EHEALTH: Use of ICTs , such as computers, 
mobile phones, and satellite communica-
tions, for health services and information. 
 HEALTH INFORMATION AS HEALTH CARE  |  11
12  |  HEALTH INFORMATION AS HEALTH CARE CREDIT: UN/FARRAN
INTRODUCTION
THE ROLE OF INFORMATION IN HEALTH 
SYSTEMS STRENGTHENING 
Strengthening health systems is emerging as a cornerstone of global 
health policy. The poor state of health systems in many parts of the 
developing world is keeping individuals from accessing essential 
health care and slowing progress toward health-related UN Millen-
nium Development Goals. 
  
Improving health systems requires enhance- A SEA CHANGE IN COMMUNICATIONS 
ments to health worker capacity and levels Until recently, discussions about apply-
of staffing, service delivery, infrastructure, ing information technologies to health care 
commodities (such as equipment and in the developing world revolved around 
medicines), logistics, progress-tracking, and replacing ubiquitous paper-based systems 
financing.3 When applied to health systems with computers. Yet, in the past decade 
in all these areas, information and commu- a mobile communications revolution has 
nication technologies can transform health swept the globe and is beginning to reshape 
systems globally, improve quality of care, how health information and services are 
and save lives. shared. An increasingly networked world 
has changed the way businesses, gov-
ernments, and individuals organize and 
FIG 1: HEALTH SYSTEMS ARE MORE THAN BUILDING BLOCKS
communicate. This is especially true in 
developing countries, where the proliferation 
of mobile devices, which now far outnumber 
fixed phones, outpaces the telecommunica-
tions technology infrastructure. 
Particularly in the developing world, the rise 
of mobile communications holds tremen-
dous potential to help ease the flow of health 
information, whether through simple voice 
calls, SMS messaging, wireless data, or the 
burgeoning mobile internet. The International 
Telecommunications Union (ITU) estimates 
that 2011 opened with over 5.3 billion mobile 
SOURCE: UNICEF 2010 subscriptions worldwide, of which over 3.5 
billion are found in low and middle income 
 HEALTH INFORMATION AS HEALTH CARE  |  13
end of 2010 nearly 70% of the population 
FIG 2: GLOBAL ICT DEVELOPMENT, 2000–2010
in the developing world had access to a 
mobile phone – a trend driven largely by the 
rapid penetration mobile technology in the 
Asia and Pacific region. 6 Mobile services 
have the most room for growth in Africa, 
where an estimated 41% of the population 
had a mobile subscription at the end of 
2010. Analysts estimate this percentage will 
rise to 65% by 2013.7 
With more than five billion subscribers con-
necting through mobile technology around 
* ESTIMATES
the world, new channels of communication 
SOURCE: ITU World Telecommunication / ICT Indicators database are opening between patients, commu-
nity health workers, nurses, doctors, and 
specialists, irrespective of their location. 
countries.4 Indeed, mobile markets are grow- The flexibility of mobile communications 
ing fastest in the developing world, which also enables new forms of communication, 
increased its share of mobile subscriptions whether one-to-one, one-to-many, or many-
from 53% of total mobile subscriptions at to-many.8 This is shifting the landscape of 
the end of 2005 to 73% at the end of 2010.5 health information sharing, making it possible 
An astonishing 90% of the world’s population to monitor and diagnose patients remotely, 
now has access to a mobile signal, including center treatment and support on the patient, 
80% of people in rural areas. While access sound alerts to disease outbreaks, and edu-
to mobile services is still not universal, by the cate community health workers and others 
from a distance.9 
CORRELATION OF HEALTH INFRA-
FIG 3: GLOBAL CELLULAR SUBSCRIPTIONS
STRUCTURE TO WELLNESS
While cost and access to medical care pres-
ent challenges to health care around the 
world, these barriers are particularly acute 
in low and middle income countries. The 
World Health Organization (WHO) estimates 
there is a shortage of 2.4 million health ser-
vice providers globally.
 
While there are 28 doctors and 87 nurses 
SOURCE: ITU and midwifery personnel per 10,000 people 
in high income regions of the world, there 
14  |  HEALTH INFORMATION AS HEALTH CARE
and neglected tropical diseases endemic in 
FIG 4: COUNTRIES WITH A CRITICAL SHORTAGE OF HEALTH  
SERVICE PROVIDERS (PHYSICIANS, NURSES, AND MIDWIVES) many parts of the Global South further strain 
under-resourced health systems. As glo-
balization brings the challenges of obesity, 
diabetes, and hypertension into emerging 
market economies, health challenges only 
continue to grow. Leveraging the growing 
connectivity enabled by the rise of ICTs is 
critical to meeting and overcoming these 
challenges.
MATERNAL CARE
Maternal health is a fundamental building 
block of public health, and maternal health 
SOURCE: World Health Organization (WHO) outcomes are a leading indicator of how well 
the system performs. Countries with weak 
health systems and poor health infrastruc-
are only 5 doctors and 11 nurses and mid- ture struggle to provide sufficient services 
wifery personnel per 10,000 people in low to pregnant women. Maternal health is dou-
income regions.10 These resource shortages bly important and determines whether the 
are compounded by the burden of global mother delivers safely and whether the new-
diseases, which disproportionately falls on born is healthy. One study in Bangladesh 
the developing world. found that a child whose mother dies has 
only a 24% chance of living to age 10, while 
a child whose mother survives has an 89% 
FIG 5: GLOBAL DISEASE BURDEN AND HEALTH CARE WORKFORCE chance of remaining alive. 11 
Indeed, neonatal conditions are by far the 
leading cause of death for children under 
five years old. There is a direct correlation 
between country infrastructure and maternal 
mortality rates. Nearly all maternal deaths 
(99%) occur in developing countries, 87% 
occur in sub-Saharan Africa and South Asia12,
SOURCE: Global Health Council and 65% occur in 11 countries – Afghanistan, 
Bangladesh, the Democratic Republic of the 
 Congo, Ethiopia, India, Indonesia, Kenya, 
Diseases like polio and measles have been Nigeria, Pakistan, Sudan, and Tanzania. 13 
eradicated in Europe and the Americas These figures do not account for the women 
but still present significant challenges in who are injured, sometimes for life, in 
Africa and Asia. The HIV/AIDS epidemic childbirth; for every woman who dies, 
 HEALTH INFORMATION AS HEALTH CARE  |  15
at least 20 others suffer injury, infection, health. One of the MDGs establishes tar-
or disability. 14 gets to lower maternal mortality rates by 
reducing deaths in childbirth and increasing 
universal access to reproductive health. In 
FIG 6: CAUSES OF UNDER-FIVE DEATHS 
PERCENT – 2008 2010, the UN Secretary-General redoubled 
these efforts, launching the Global Strategy 
for Women and Children’s Health, which for 
the first time identified the role ICTs can play 
in accelerating progress toward safer preg-
nancies and births. 
As in other areas of global health, maternal 
health relies heavily on access to timely and 
reliable data. Technology can help open 
bottlenecks in data on maternal health and 
improve the delivery of service. Systemic 
eHealth and mHealth interventions are 
SOURCE: United Nations MDG Report 2010 capable of closing existing gaps in care 
across the maternal health continuum. 
 
It is critical to keep in mind that almost all HEALTH INFORMATION FLOWS
maternal deaths are preventable. By adopt- Improving data collection is a good first step 
ing the 2000 UN Millennium Development in creating health systems with data that 
Goals (MDGs), the international commu- flows to appropriate points in the network 
nity supported the drive to improve maternal and informs effective decision-making. Peter 
Byass argues that better data collection will 
lead to better health policies and health 
15
FIG 7: IMPACT OF HEALTH CARE WORKERS ON  outcomes.  In particular, the use of ICTs 
MATERNAL, CHILD AND INFANT SURVIVAL creates efficiencies in data collection as well 
as improves health information flows and 
data quality. This allows timely and accurate 
depictions of disease burdens and resource 
flows, enabling policy makers to effectively 
allocate limited resources. 
Focusing on maternal health care, our paper 
highlights the implications of data flow issues 
and discusses a broad range of possible 
ICT interventions.16 We hope to encourage 
SOURCE: Global Health Council ongoing discussions to clarify what health 
systems need so that the future information 
16  |  HEALTH INFORMATION AS HEALTH CARE
technology backbones of these systems The advent of mobile devices presents an 
can facilitate that. We must identify what the opportunity to break through silo walls and 
users and systems require before we can increase the production of and access to 
develop the overall enterprise architecture health information. Addressing bottlenecks 
development, framework, or process.17 in data collection and sharing also holds 
great potential for strengthening maternal 
Fragmentation of health data collection and care and health service delivery gaps. ICT-
reporting methods challenges efforts to enabled data collection and sharing holds 
transform the health care system. A number great potential for closing the health care 
of trends and forces are at work here. The service delivery gaps affecting maternal 
advent of the World Health Organization in health care in areas including19: 
the 1940s led to a hierarchical model for 
sharing global health information. The intro- ¾ family planning, counseling, services, 
duction of computers and the subsequent  and supplies
expansion of the Internet increased the ¾ antenatal care 
number and complexity of actors working in ¾ communication with providers 
information and global health development.18 ¾ lab results
Concurrently, private donors began to con- ¾ proper maternal nutrition
tribute more to reaching global health goals, 
and each donor group instituted its own ICT can support limited health care systems 
systems for collecting and sharing informa- by allowing them to transmit critical data 
tion. Much good came from the introduction to the right people when needed, such as 
of these new, dedicated players, but the connecting a remote health worker with an 
many discrete information networks that urban OB/GYN specialist or enabling a preg-
they brought with them, both horizontal nant woman to call in advance to ensure she 
and bottom-up, fragmented the universe of can receive appropriate medical attention at 
health data. a clinic where she plans to deliver. 
As a multitude of donors emerged to combat As Peter Byass has argued, “Poverty in 
a variety of diseases, they carried with them material terms is inextricably linked with pov-
stove-piped reporting systems. These frag- erty of data.”20 Policy makers too often base 
mented data flows have led to duplication of their understanding of health data on an 
efforts, competition, and poor coordination incomplete grasp of reality on the ground. 
of health planning. To strengthen the health To understand the key drivers of poor health 
care system, we will have to put into place outcomes, it is necessary to distinguish 
enterprise architecture that enables interop- between real gaps in health system coverage 
erability of devices and open standards; and those generated by lack of data. This 
those in turn will help health care data to allows health planners and technologists to 
move across these silos. prioritize innovations and policies impacting 
health data and will let us effectively address 
 HEALTH INFORMATION AS HEALTH CARE  |  17
critical pressure points in, for example, the 
maternal health value chain. 
 
Efficient data flows are an integral part 
of an effective health information system. 
U.S. health policy expert Don Berwick is 
well-known for the quote, “information is 
care.21” A strong health information system 
enables health workers to respond rapidly 
and with the appropriate measures. When 
data flows readily from the village level to 
central systems, it makes the jobs of health 
professionals much easier and increases 
the likelihood that health workers will deliver 
high quality services. Conversely, uncoordi-
nated systems with data roadblocks amplify 
the challenge of delivering essential health 
services. Health systems that are highly 
fragmented and plagued by gaps in data 
flows also play a role in high turnover rates 
for frustrated health workers who spend a 
great deal of time completing forms by hand. 
Currently, lack of organized description and 
research on the end-to-end flow of health 
information and data, particularly in the 
developing world, impedes progress toward 
these global health goals. 22 These bottle-
necks directly result in material effects such 
as insufficient supplies of contraceptives, 
vaccines, and drugs. In other words, health 
data flows, while largely invisible, are criti-
cally important to achieving greater health 
access and equity. 
18  |  HEALTH INFORMATION AS HEALTH CARE
19  |  HEALTH INFORMATION AS HEALTH CARE
20  |  HEALTH INFORMATION AS HEALTH CARE CREDIT: UN/FRED NOY
PUBLIC HEALTH 
SURVEILLANCE SYSTEMS
DATA FLOWS WITHIN PUBLIC HEALTH 
SURVEILLANCE SYSTEMS
Written in collaboration with Ramesh Krishnamurthy of the Health Metrics Network 23
Dr. Ramesh Krishnamurthy is the Health Metrics Network’s Chief of 
Information Systems and Frameworks’ team leader. Previously he 
was the senior informatics advisor and scientist at the Centers for 
Disease Control and Prevention. The Health Metrics Network (HMN) 
is a WHO entity responsible for strengthening health information 
systems in the developing world.
DATA FLOWS IN SURVEILLANCE 6. Inadequate ICT infrastructure
SYSTEMS 7. Jurisdictional barriers to sharing 
This section examines data flows in the  information
context of disease surveillance systems. 
We define “data” to include distinct fac- ORGANIZATION OF DATA FLOWS IN 
tual measurements or items represented SURVEILLANCE SYSTEMS
as numbers, words, images, and biological Public health professionals, including epi-
samples, and “information” as analyzed and demiologists, informatics specialists, and 
interpreted data. Disease surveillance sys- information systems managers, need a com-
tems serve as the backbone of public health prehensive understanding of the flow of data 
systems and represent a major portion of the pertaining to their areas of interest. This is 
data that feed into country health informa- true whether they are embarking on design-
tion systems. Effective surveillance systems ing new information systems to collect and 
monitor disease trends in a population and manage surveillance data or administering 
help identify and control epidemics through existing surveillance information systems. 
the allocation of necessary resources. There 
are seven major bottlenecks to the flow of At the broadest level, the process of public 
health data flows in this environment: surveillance data activity can be broken into 
three main categories: 
1. Fragmentation of health information 
2. Lack of unique health identifiers 1. Data collection 
3. Poor data quality 2. Data storage and analysis
4. Lack of standards and interoperability 3. Data interpretation, dissemination, and use
5. Limited human resources
 HEALTH INFORMATION AS HEALTH CARE  |  21
 been slow, as it is collected and transmitted 
FIG 8: PUBLIC HEALTH SURVEILLANCE AT A GLANCE on paper. In recent years, the increased use 
of ICTs in disease surveillance data collec-
tion has influenced the ways public health 
data is collected and managed. In more 
advanced surveillance systems, data flow 
occurs within the context of an intertwined 
process (Figure 8) under a common data 
architecture involving standardized vocabu-
laries, messaging, data transportation pro- 
tocols, and interoperable data collection and 
SOURCE: “Health Metrics Network Framework 2007” management tools. 
 The data flow activity levels vary substantially 
In most countries, national or sub-national based on the complexity of the surveillance 
public health surveillance systems fall system. 24 Table 1 provides observations on 
under the jurisdiction of the ministries of data collection activities and implies that 
health or departments of public health, passive surveillance systems have more 
where surveillance data is generally man- complex data activities. 
aged for dissemination and public health 
action. Key consumers of data include There can be substantial variability in data 
governments (national and sub-national collection methods at the level of data cap-
public health agencies), patients, hospitals, ture across the primary data sources. In 
practitioners, the research community, addition, as shown below, the quality of data 
donors, philanthropists, and businesses. may vary substantially at different levels of 
 health facilities.
Data flow can occur in unstructured and 
structured forms. Traditionally, data flow has 
TABLE 1: LEVELS OF COMPLEXITY AND DATA FLOW
LOWER COMPLEXITY DATA ACTIVITIES HIGHER COMPLEXITY DATA ACTIVITIES
Active Surveillance Passive Surveillance
Individual patient observations Geographic or organizational unit observations
Single disease or issue Integrated surveillance systems
Surveillance only Surveillance plus case management
Confirmed cases only Situational awareness and early warning
Universal data collection Sampling of the population under study
Primary data collection Using existing data collected for other purposes
22  |  HEALTH INFORMATION AS HEALTH CARE
SOURCES OF DATA distinct pathways within any surveillance 
The primary source of surveillance data may system. Figure 9 captures a simplified yet 
include direct observations of cases as well rich view of the critical transactions that 
as secondary extractions from unstructured occur from the point of original data capture 
or structured diaries of auxiliary health work- all the way through to the dissemination of 
ers, ailment registries, state surveillance findings to inform public health actions. Dur-
registries, or electronic medical records ing the course of routine data management, 
(EMRs), among other sources. These pri- surveillance flow pathway diagrams can 
mary data sources are usually paper-based serve as a quick reference manual to iden-
records and forms. However, event-based tify the critical areas that require monitoring 
surveillance can also utilize automated and intervention to assure data quality and 
scanning of mass media and internet data data integrity. Periodic updating of these 
sources.25 Other primary sources of health diagrams can guide complex and long-term 
data include censuses, civil registrations, data management activities. 
population surveys, individual records, ser-
vice records, and resource records.26 “Data Public health data is generally collected on 
capture” is a term we use to understand paper and then re-entered on a computer 
which signals first enter a surveillance sys- for storage and analysis. However, more 
tem.27 Structured surveillance systems use and more, original electronic data is cap-
explicit, predefined data capture modalities. tured at the point of origin using hand-held 
Unstructured surveillance systems, or event- devices or direct input to desktop applica-
based surveillance, utilize a wider range tions. Entities such as the U.S. Centers for 
of data capture methods. These methods Disease Control and Prevention (CDC), 
include informal and structured reports WHO, DataDyne, InSTEDD, and Voxiva have 
from local clinicians, traditional healers, civil developed numerous electronic applications 
authorities, the general public, etc. to collect surveillance data. Some are open 
source applications and some are propri-
Raw, unstructured data flows, workflow, etary. DataDyne created the free and open 
and structured information flows are three source EpiSurveyor health data collection 
FIG 9: DATA FLOW IN THE CONTEXT OF DATA
DATA CAPTURE DATA STORAGE DATA ANALYSIS
Use paper forms  Organized storage  Use of statistical  
or electronic data  of paper forms or  approach to  
capture tool electronic data interpret data
 HEALTH INFORMATION AS HEALTH CARE  |  23
tool with funding from the United Nations health sub-center to the state, the following 
Foundation and Vodafone Foundation Tech- figure provides an overview of the National 
nology Partnership and in 2006 deployed it ICT infrastructure for a country. Note that 
in sub-Saharan Africa in coordination with this diagram does not incorporate mHealth 
WHO and participating ministries of health. capabilities. Figures 10 and 11 assume man- 
Other software and software kits that are ual, paper data capture at the front line levels 
now being used to capture and/or use data with data entry only at the district level: 
to support health in the developing world 
include EpiInfo, OpenXdata, Open Data Kit, 
FIG 10: SIMPLIFIED ILLUSTRATION OF A NON-MOBILE  
Open Dream, Open MRS, OpeneLIS, Open- ICT INFRASTRUCTURE IN THE CONTEXT OF NATIONAL  
Clinica, District Health Information System SURVEILLANCE DATA COLLECTION AND REPORTING
(DHIS), Managing News, Sahana, Geo-
Chat, Riff/Evolve, Mesh4x, Ushahidi, and 
Epidefender. 
A well-designed electronic information sys-
tem allows: 
1. A streamlined data entry process
2. The direct digital capture of laboratory 
 test results or clinical diagnoses
3. Efficient data merge capabilities from 
 multiple data sources
4. Automated data quality checks SOURCE: Ramesh Krishnamurthy
5. Rapid search, retrieval, and visualization 
 capabilities FIG 11: SIMPLIFIED ILLUSTRATION OF GENERAL NATIONAL  
6. Early warning alerts for potential disease SURVEILLANCE DATA COLLECTION AND REPORTING
 threats and disease outbreaks. 
After data is captured, data flows must move 
among the various health care providers and 
surveillance officers and be translated into 
data formats (i.e., from hardcopy to digital 
formats or from a computer drive or wireless 
handset to a database). The data can then 
be sent to the different levels of the health 
system (Figure 10) where there are data 
feedback mechanisms to ensure quality, 
manage corrections, and supply analysis. To 
provide an idea of the potential magnitude SOURCE: Ramesh Krishnamurthy
of the layers in the system moving from a 
24  |  HEALTH INFORMATION AS HEALTH CARE
HAND  DELIVER HAND  DELIVER
A generalized model, as shown above in Fig- Therefore, the impact on the information 
ure 11, used database programs at various system is uncoordinated and may lead to 
levels of the public health system to collect fragmentation of data. 
and aggregate paper based forms. 
 
FIG 12: ILLUSTRATION OF SURVEILLANCE DATA  FIG 13: EXAMPLE OF COUNTRY HEALTH INFORMATION SYSTEMS
COLLECTION USING MOBILE COMPUTING DEVICES
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
SOURCE: Ramesh Krishnamurthy SOURCE: Ramesh Krishnamurthy
 In the example above, we see a series of 
MAJOR BOTTLENECKS IN DATA FLOW different donors with their respective pro-
grams. When a donor funds a country and 
ISSUE 1: Fragmentation of Information requests a report of indicators on diseases 
Systems such as TB or HIV, the country will typically 
The legacy of paper-based records com- create a vertical program to comply. When 
bined with donors’ requests for disease- multiple donors in the same country make 
specific indicators for use in their programs similar requests, the country ends up put-
have fragmented data, i.e., created data ting up silos that prohibit systematic data 
silos. Such approaches have reporting sys- exchange between the silos themselves and 
tems that feed vertically from community across a common national health informa-
level programs to national reporting systems tion system. 
and donors.
ISSUE 2: Lack of Unique Health Identi-
A vast array of donor and technical agen- fiers for Persons
cies now work in public health. They provide Vertically driven systems typically do not 
much needed financial support to countries share data horizontally. This causes prob-
with limited resources. They also typically lems because individuals are not uniquely 
require separate indicators to measure the identified within national health information 
public health impact of their programs. systems. Standards for data are also lacking. 
 HEALTH INFORMATION AS HEALTH CARE  |  25
For example, an HIV-positive patient travels Aggregate data – often tallied by hand and 
from a village to visit a relative in a neighbor- then recorded in an electronic database or 
ing city. If the patient contracts and is treated carried to the next level via paper formats – 
for an opportunistic disease while visiting, is also fertile ground for mistakes. 
the HIV status may be counted twice due 
to the lack of unique identification numbers. Maternal health and labor records or par-
Over-counting can lead to an inefficient allo- tographs used by midwives and clinicians 
cation of resources. involved in child delivery provide an excellent 
example of poor data quality. A partograph 
Similar conundrums are found in the field records cervical dilation, descent of fetal head 
of maternal health. A woman who receives and uterine contractions. Partographs can 
antenatal care in a city but returns to her also monitor fetal conditions with the follow-
village for childbirth will likely have uncoordi- ing parameters: fetal heart rate, membranes 
nated and fragmented health records. Such and liquor (amniotic fluid), and molding of 
records can result in sub-optimal clinical care. fetal skull. Additionally the partograph moni-
tors the mother’s condition including pulse, 
A number of countries, such as India, have blood pressure, temperature, urine, drugs, 
launched major efforts to assign a unique IV fluids and administration of oxytocin.
identification number to each citizen. 
 
FIG 15: EXAMPLE OF A PARTOGRAPH USED TO MONITOR LABOR
ISSUE 3: Poor Data Quality
Errors in data can occur in numerous forms. 
There can be substantial human error in 
data collected and compiled on paper. 
FIG 14: EXAMPLE OF A PUBLIC HEALTH HOSPITAL  
DATA RECORDED IN OPD REGISTER
SOURCE: “The Internet Journal of Gynecology and Obstetrics”
 
Health care practitioners in the United States 
and Europe have used the partograph to 
improve maternal and neonatal health out-
SOURCE: Ramesh Krishnamurthy comes. Unfortunately it is rarely used in 
developing country health care contexts, and 
26  |  HEALTH INFORMATION AS HEALTH CARE
the warning signs the partograph reveals are 
often missed. Maternal health practitioners 
do not know why the form has not had the 
same success in developing countries. The 
material effect can be seen in the number 
of obstructed or distressed labor cases in 
the developing world. Furthermore, the lack 
of reporting or misreporting of problematic 
childbirths makes it difficult to discern the 
true extent of these problems. As we con-
template redesigning forms and process 
to work in new electronic health data sys-
tems, we need to integrate the partograph 
into developing countries’ data collection 
practices.
In a related issue, an initial use of the Epi-
Surveyor application on mobile handsets 
to support a supply chain was shown to 
increase the availability of partographs in 
Senegal. This is further explored in the case 
study on the next page.
 HEALTH INFORMATION AS HEALTH CARE  |  27
TECHNOLOGY’S ANSWER TO AGE OLD QUESTIONS:
A CASE STUDY OF HEALTH SURVEYS USING  
EPISURVEYOR IN SENEGAL
In 2009, the United Nations Foundation and increase of 10,000 Vitamin A tablets ordered 
The Vodafone Foundation commissioned an after data gathered by the survey indicated 
evaluation of mHealth activities undertaken a shortage. 
by the World Health Organization in collabo-
ration with the Ministry of Health in Senegal The study also found that the survey data 
using EpiSurveyor to collect and analyze alerted medical authorities to the insuf-
health data. EpiSurveyor is an open source ficient use of the basic birthing tool called 
software tool for mobile devices (including the partograph. The partograph is used by 
PDAs and mobile phones), that makes data midwives to monitor the process of labor. 
collection more efficient and accurate. This effective, inexpensive, and simple 
system helps medical officers identify devia-
In early 2008, the Senegalese Ministry of tions from the expected trajectory of labor 
Health (MOH), in partnership with WHO, that might require intervention. Despite 
asked its field officers to begin collect- the fact that Senegalese midwives believe 
ing data for multiple health departments the partograph reduces labor and deliv-
using EpiSurveyor. The Ministry piloted the ery complications, around 310,000 babies 
tool in ten districts, providing officers with were delivered in Senegal in 2008 without a 
PDAs running EpiSurveyor loaded with an partograph.
integrated health data gathering survey. 
The EpiSurveyor mobile health data collec- The survey revealed that only 55% of dis-
tion trial marked the first time in more than tricts were systematically monitoring labor 
two decades that the health ministry had using the partograph. Based on this newly-
taken an integrated approach to health data collected information, the Senegalese health 
collection.  ministry recommended that field officers 
encourage the use of the partograph. Using 
The evaluation, produced by Dalberg Global EpiSurveyor, health workers then were able 
Development Advisors, found that the Epi- to verify usage, provide training, and ensure 
Surveyor-backed survey enabled faster subsequent distribution as needed of the 
data-gathering and improved decision mak- forms. From March to August 2008, usage 
ing. In the six months of the program, pilot of the partograph in clinics involved in the 
clinics using PDAs were able to show an pilot survey increased from 55% to 69%. To 
improvement of 67% in health indicators place this figure in context, the Senegalese 
(out of 79, 53 showed improvement). In one Reproductive Health Program’s biannual 
district, data that had previously taken a day survey conducted at the end of 2008 
to compile was gathered in one hour. Fur- showed that the number of births involving 
thermore, this district’s health budget was partographs in the districts covered by the 
reprioritized based on the needs identified pilot EpiSurveyor program rose by 28% in 
by the survey. As a result, the district saw a 2008, compared to an increase of just 1% in 
500% increase in infant vaccinations, and an the rest of the country.
28  |  HEALTH INFORMATION AS HEALTH CARE
Data flow in surveillance systems (and for 
all other purposes) requires standards to 
enable interoperability. A technical standard 
is an established norm or requirement that 
describes data format and rules governing 
the formats. Standards are usually reflected 
in a formal document that establishes 
uniform engineering or technical criteria, 
definitions, methods, processes and prac-
tices. Most voluntary standards are used by 
people, professional societies, regulators, 
or industry. When a published standard 
achieves widespread acceptance and dom-
inance, it can become a broader de facto 
standard for an industry. 
Combined with the complexity of informa-
tion silos, the lack of interoperability and 
CREDIT: DALBER GLOBAL 
DEVELOPMENT ADVISORS data standards present some of the biggest 
stumbling blocks to public health systems. 
ISSUE 4: Standards and interoperability While there has been a great deal of atten-
of data and systems tion focused in the developed world on 
Interoperability allows data to be shared health information exchange standards, this 
quickly and be linked from multiple sources. has not occurred in the developing world. 
Moreover, the standards that have been 
developed and deployed for the developed 
FIG 16: ILLUSTRATION OF MANY DATA  world are often inappropriate as they tend to 
STANDARDS REQUIRED FOR INTEROPERABILITY
focus on hospitals, rather than primary care.
ISSUE 5: Inadequate Technical and Human 
Capacity and Resources
Human error and lack of capacity to train 
sufficient numbers of technologically-literate 
health workers is a major problem. To date there 
has been little research conducted to ade- 
quately capture the extent of the health work-
force technological literacy problem.28 In the
U.S. alone there is a shortfall of 50,000 health 
SOURCE: Ramesh Krishnamurthy informatics professionals.29 We expect the num-
bers to be far greater in developing countries.30
 HEALTH INFORMATION AS HEALTH CARE  |  29
Health workers, patients and decision- ISSUE 7: Jurisdictional Boundaries 
makers need a better understanding of Often Dictate the Flow of Data Within 
basic health technology literacy levels to and Between Health Sub-Sectors 
assess capacity and critical needs. From Data captured within jurisdictional bou-  
senior policy makers and managers to ndaries can leave important gaps or mis-
frontline care providers, health professionals repr esentations of disease realities on the 
need to understand how ICT capabilities ground. Standards enabling interoperability 
can enhance the delivery of health informa- across jurisdictional boundaries are critical. 
tion and services. Most health ministries in Equally important are policy agreements to 
developing countries are short on expertise share the data across boundaries.
in health ICT.
SUMMARY OF DATA FLOWS IN 
Overall, a shift in health data ownership may SURVEILLANCE SYSTEMS
be required. The change should involve mov- ¾ ICT-backed interventions have the 
ing from the idea that health data is owned  potential to address the most important 
by various providers within the health sys-  barriers facing health information flows 
tem to the view that health data is produced  in disease surveillance systems. 
and held by the patient as well. The growth 
of smartphones and related applications will ¾ In siloed and fragmented health systems, 
allow patients to see, understand, manipu-   the adoption of data standards and 
late and share their own health data. This  interoperable platforms can ease the 
may accelerate a trend toward more per-  flow of health information to all required 
sonal control of health data. The trend may  data points. Legacy systems, however, 
be reinforced by data produced and stored  will continue to pose a challenge. 
outside of the formal health care system.  Technology is not enough; technical 
 interoperability needs to be supplemented 
ISSUE 6: ICT Infrastructure Failure   with information-sharing policies that 
Interruption of data flow can occur through  take advantage of it.
ICT infrastructure failure such as: IT commu-
nication and network errors; interruptions in ¾ Where patients are not currently tracked 
electrical supply; and ICT devices infected  at the national level, the adoption of 
with malware or viruses. Currently, little infor-  unique health identifiers monitored by 
mation exist to determine the magnitude of  electronic devices can ensure better 
this problem. It is clear that all devices gath-  coordination across health systems and 
ering or using electronic data need to have  enable improved epidemiological profiles. 
store and forward capabilities, rather than 
assume constant connectivity. ¾ Where data were previously collected 
 and analyzed on paper, electronic capture 
  and synthesis can eliminate human error 
 and increase the speed of analysis and 
 use by policy makers. 
30  |  HEALTH INFORMATION AS HEALTH CARE
¾ Data standards developed to support 
 interoperability are critical to enable 
 health information flows. The rapid prolif- 
 eration of mHealth and eHealth appli- 
 cations and tools require those con- 
 cerned about public health to work 
 actively to develop methods for various 
 tools to ‘plug in’ to one another. 
¾ Where health staff is limited, electronic 
 collection can speed data capture and 
 compensate, to some extent, for lack of 
 training. Yet the lack of sufficient numbers 
  and training for health informatics pro- 
 fessionals will retard this growth. 
 
 HEALTH INFORMATION AS HEALTH CARE  |  31
32  |  HEALTH INFORMATION AS HEALTH CARE CREDIT: UN/MARTINE PERRET
DATA FLOWS IN HEALTH HUMAN 
RESOURCES ECOSYSTEMS
Written in collaboration with Dykki Settle of IntraHealth 31
Dykki Settle leads IntraHealth and CapacityPlus efforts in health 
worker informatics, bringing a health worker-centered approach to 
the availability and use of high quality information for better health. 
Settle’s areas of leadership include developing and implementing 
Open Source human resources for health information solutions; 
helping countries build capacity to absorb new health technologies; 
and supporting regional and country health organizations as they 
realize the power of Open Source for global health. 
Human resources are another central A snapshot of the five main areas where 
domain of health systems where improved public health planners use data about 
information can provide significant benefits. human resources underscores the impor-
Better data on health worker supply and tance of this domain. 
demand can help allocate human resources 
appropriately across geographies and spe- ¾ EDUCATION AND TRAINING: data
cialties. This is particularly critical where  used to make sound decisions about the 
there is a shortage of healthcare workers  number and type of health workers 
and where health managers may face issues  needed to meet health system goals
of absenteeism, lack of certification and 
proper qualification and training of work- ¾ REGULATION: data used to ensure
ers. Meeting MDG 5 depends on deploying  patient safety and the quality of health 
healthcare human resources effectively  information and services
because childbirths do not stick to normal 
office hours and require, in addition to skilled ¾ DEPLOYMENT: data used to meet ser-
staff, that medications be available.  vice provision needs and ensure efficiency
Currently many countries’ health systems ¾ MANAGEMENT: data used to track
have projections or mandates for where  number and location of personnel and 
their employees should be located, but few  their movements
have measures in place to show where 
their health human resources are actu- ¾ PLANNING: data used to deploy the
ally deployed. Health systems also need to  appropriate number of personnel to the 
track personnel skills and resources to serve  right place
community needs. 
 HEALTH INFORMATION AS HEALTH CARE  |  33
The diagram below provides an over- to pay public sector health workers. The 
view of the role of human resources in the professional councils oversee the licensing 
nationwide organization of health services, of all regulated health professions. In most 
showing national and local government as systems this is where one can find data 
well as the public and private sectors. On on each qualified worker. However there 
the left, the figure depicts the public sector are significant gaps in data requirements 
with the public service Human Resource between the local and national levels: Local 
Information System (HRIS) and the Min- systems focus on everyday practice and 
istry of Health. The government uses the management while national systems require 
Health Medical Information Service (HMIS) broader system wide planning. 
and HRIS to manage activities at the local 
government level. On the right is the range GOVERNMENT HUMAN RESOURCE 
of private stakeholders that use HRIS, DATA CHOKEPOINTS
including faith-based organizations (FBOs), The most critical chokepoints in the system 
non-governmental organizations (NGOs) occur between both local facilities, such 
and for-profit entities. those managed by villages, and those man-
aged by the central government. Frequently 
there are separate systems for tracking and 
FIG 17: ORGANIZATION OF HEALTH HUMAN RESOURCES  
IN THE PUBLIC AND PRIVATE SECTORS recording human resources information, 
e.g., one for payroll, one for staffing, and one 
for training. Only if these systems have the 
same standards can data be extracted from 
one system and cross-referenced for fur-
ther examination with another, for instance 
to check where workers with a particular 
skill set are currently assigned, or to identify 
potential absentee workers. Central gov-
ernments typically review data from health 
workers in the HMIS on a quarterly basis. 
In many countries, a major source of health 
worker data is the payroll office, managed 
SOURCE: Dykki Settle by the Ministry of Finance, but this data is 
rarely used in making decisions about health 
 human resources. 
Between the public and private sectors are 
the training institutions for the health work The most critical bottlenecks occur within 
force. The facilities and service providers human resource information systems as we 
are the doctors, nurses, midwives, commu- move away from a country’s capital. Human 
nity health workers and other providers of resource systems are less likely to reach 
health services to families and communities. the hinterlands and data is not entered 
Within the public sector the HRIS is used as frequently. Yet current and accurate 
34  |  HEALTH INFORMATION AS HEALTH CARE
community-level health data is vital to any and lack strong direct ties to the Ministry of 
attempt to strengthen health systems. Health. This results in planning in the educa-
tion sector that does not adequately reflect 
mHealth offers major opportunities for healthcare workforce needs. IntraHealth, a 
improving human resources management, U.S. based nonprofit dedicated to strength-
particularly of remote staff. Real time mea- ening health workers and the systems that 
suring and reporting of activity can reduce support them, has addressed this gap. It 
absenteeism, for example, by showing developed “iHRIS” software, an open source 
whether community health workers are human resources information system for 
actually visiting patients or simply entering managing health worker data. The system 
data. In the same way, electronic payments builds necessary links so accurate data from 
can be tied to work and the accuracy of work. training institutions can converge with better 
data on existing health worker resources at 
PRIVATE AND THIRD SECTOR HUMAN the village level. The diagram below demon-
RESOURCE DATA CHOKEPOINTS strates how training institutions sit relative to 
In the private sector and the so-called third HRIS and HMIS systems. 
sector, that is, nonprofits, the same bottle-
necks exist and are often exacerbated. In  
FIG 18: DATA SYSTEMS THAT LINK HMIS AND  
most countries, private entities do not have  HRIS FOR HEALTH WORKER DATA
the national infrastructure that ministries 
of health enjoy. One exception is Ghana, 
where faith-based organizations have much 
more sophisticated administrative capac-
ity.) Health workers frequently move back  
and forth between government and private  
sector/NGOs, but most countries do not  
have standardized electronic registries to  
track them. It is important to build trust and 
a spirit of collaboration between the public 
and private sectors and to develop policy  
frameworks that incentivize truthful report-  
ing. One way would be for the private sector  SOURCE: Ramesh Krishnamurthy
to provide more information on its health 
workforce to the Ministry of Health.
There is a final bottleneck at the level of 
Training institutions, or the associations and the professional councils, which maintain 
professional organizations responsible for records of trained health professionals. All 
accrediting health professionals, also can be health workers in the system must register 
a chokepoint for health human resource data with the councils, in most cases annually. 
flows. In most countries the training institu- Obtaining or updating one’s license often 
tions report to the Ministry of Education requires a long trip to the capital city. The 
 HEALTH INFORMATION AS HEALTH CARE  |  35
relicensing procedure, however, offers a  about the supply of and demand for health 
rich opportunity for ICT-based interven-   workers. There must be closer colla- 
tion, which could turn the bottleneck into  boration between the ministries of health 
an asset. Licensing paperwork and fees   and education through integrated HRIS.
could be filed electronically. And a coun-
try’s electronic payment system (including  
mPayments, or payments via mobile device) 
could be integrated with the online certifica-
tion infrastructure through human resource 
electronic management software applica-
tions such as iHRIS. The result: bottleneck 
unclogged and the health system improved. 
SUMMARY OF CRITICAL DATA FLOW 
ISSUES IN HUMAN RESOURCE SYSTEMS
The discussion of human resource systems 
has emphasized the following bottlenecks:
¾ Data does not flow smoothly or regularly 
 between local clinics and regional and 
 national entities. This makes it difficult to 
 determine how or even if human res- 
 ources are deployed within the system 
  (ghost workers). Greater investments are 
 needed to extend the reach of HR systems 
  beyond the center to the periphery.
¾ Private sector organizations must collect 
 more data on their human resources and 
 share it with government systems to create 
  an accurate picture of the actual human 
 resources issues within countries. 
¾ Training and certification processes must 
  be strengthened and tracked via infor- 
 mation systems so that accurate data on 
 supply and demand area available.
¾ Gaps between training institutions and 
 the health system lead to inaccurate data 
 and misinformed policy decision-making 
36  |  HEALTH INFORMATION AS HEALTH CARE
37  |  HEALTH INFORMATION AS HEALTH CARE
38  |  HEALTH INFORMATION AS HEALTH CARE CREDIT: UN/ESKINDER DEBEBE
DATA FLOWS IN HEALTH 
SUPPLY CHAINS
Written in collaboration with David Lubinski of PATH 32
As a senior technical advisor at PAT, David Lubinski, M.B.A., M.A., 
leads the development of the technical framework for strengthening 
country health information systems. Previously he was chief technol-
ogy officer to the Health Metrics Network (HMN), a Geneva-based 
partnership with the World Health Organization that seeks to increase 
the availability, quality, value, and use of timely and accurate health 
information by catalyzing the joint funding and development of country 
health information systems. David brings more than 30 years of 
experience in commercial, government, and non-governmental 
organizations focused on health information systems. 
Health supply chains are a third critical development of pharmaceutical products 
component of effective health systems. for developing country markets. 
Managers are tasked with providing medical 
goods such as vaccines, drugs and equip- Like other health systems domains, supply 
ment to clinics, hospitals and community chains are adversely affected by the fact that 
health workers at various service delivery drugs and supplies for global health have 
points. Underperforming health systems been funded in disease-specific verticals. 
frequently are traced back to broken supply For example, there have been major efforts 
chains, which often result from poor data devoted to distributing AIDS and polio medi-
flows. According to one study the availability cines but little effort devoted to increasing 
of essential medicines in public sector access to contraceptives. Consequently, 
facilities is roughly 38%, and under 60% the supplies of drugs needed for maternal 
in nongovernmental facilities.33 When data health are frequently unavailable in clinics, 
does not flow freely within the supply chain, forcing a pregnant woman or her relatives 
the result can be stock outages of essential to procure essential drugs from the private 
drugs and scarceness of up-to-date infor- sector or to go without them. 
mation. In the context of maternal health, 
disrupted supply chains can mean that In most developing countries, local levels 
patients do not have access to family plan- of the supply chains are managed through 
ning tools or drugs required for safe births. paper records. Missing data at the lowest 
Broken supply chains negatively impact rungs of the chain create significant chal-
patients and health care providers and lenges at the ministry level. This can lead to 
create barriers to incentives for research and a system of irrational allocation of resources 
 HEALTH INFORMATION AS HEALTH CARE  |  39
proving costly to health infrastructure and the data needs of frontline health workers. 
outcomes. Paper-based data collection Considering the complexity of the system 
makes it difficult for local governments and the few incentives in place to drive col-
to capture a timely picture of their health lection and transmission of accurate data, 
needs and it becomes virtually impossible it is easy to see how many supply chains 
for health ministries to build supply chains struggle to deliver the right commodities to 
based on supply and demand. As a result, the right points in the system at the right 
health supplies, including those for maternal time. Before examining supply chain data 
health, are allocated on the basis of legacy flows in more detail, it is useful to look at 
distribution systems and experiences that concepts and constructs that are funda-
do not account for shifting demographics mental to understanding the supply chain 
and needs. One of the reasons for this type ecosystem. 
of legacy system is that supply 
chains have historically been  FIG 19: KENYAN COMMODITY LOGISTICS SYSTEM
designed from the top down.  
Technology-enabled enterprise 
architectures can bridge the 
needs of both top-down and 
bottom-up systems, creat-
ing workaround systems that 
make supply chains perform 
better at the local level. Local  
data can then be merged into 
a broader system.
COMPLEXITY OF SUPPLY 
CHAIN SYSTEMS
Supply chains have grown inc-
redibly complex over the past 
SOURCE: John Snow, Inc.
several decades as the systems 
for procurement, financing and  
distribution of health commodities have A service delivery point is the point in the 
become inserted within vertically-driven supply chain where the drug, vaccine or 
donor and disease portfolios. To illustrate medical supply is administered to a patient. 
the complexity of the supply chains for It is the goal of supply chain administration 
health commodities, below is a diagram of to ensure service delivery points are stocked 
the system for Kenya that was developed as with the right product, in the proper condi-
a case study several years ago. tion, and at the right time to meet demand 
at that precise point. The primary delivery 
As David Lubinski points out, this is a system points are community health workers, clinics, 
built from the top down with little focus on and hospitals.
40  |  HEALTH INFORMATION AS HEALTH CARE
The following diagram depicts the multiple be unavailable from neighboring centers or 
levels of a typical supply chain ecosystem. intermediaries. 
It shows how supplies enter into the health 
system, move through a series of inventory A second challenge concerns supply chain 
intermediaries in national supply warehouses, communications between local clinics, 
and then reach final delivery points. inventory intermediaries, and the health 
ministry. Many countries have automated 
 inventory systems. Yet managers at the 
FIG 20: NATIONAL LEVEL SUPPLY CHAIN ECOSYSTEM
intermediary level (between national clearing 
houses and local clinics and pharmacies) 
cannot see what is available at the local 
level. Managers or storekeepers often have 
little access to online information about what 
is available. Lack of communication can also 
compromise the ability to respond to out-
breaks. Taking the supply chain as a whole, 
we see the information asymmetries or data 
flow blockages at the lowest level cascading 
upward through the district and intermedi-
ate levels until the entire health system is 
SOURCE: David Lubinski compromised. 
 The power, infrastructure and training to 
KEY CHALLENGES FACING SUPPLY adequately address the needs of the entire 
CHAINS system exist only at the national level. 
Understanding inventory data, or what There, supply chain information typically is 
supplies are available, is key to a properly automated via a warehouse management 
working chain. In general, the service deliv- system. The challenge is to move beyond 
ery points have immediate access to the the walls of the warehouse and see inven-
information on their inventory. But in some tory and usage at local levels. The data 
contexts this can be difficult. The big- flow blockages rising from below create a 
gest challenge is getting reliable data from scenario where inventory is determined by 
frontline workers and clinics. Most frontline forecasts based on consumption histories 
service delivery points lack data on available from the past that contain inaccuracies and 
inventory in nearby clinics or service deliv- dated information. Adequately forecasting 
ery points, much less data at the inventory demand becomes a serious challenge and 
intermediaries. It is difficult to make deci- compromises the ability to meet health out-
sions without reliable inventory data. It can come targets. 
result in district-level managers not knowing 
whether it is even worth ordering supplies A third challenge is posed by the lack of 
because they believe the product(s) may proper monitoring and evaluation in the 
 HEALTH INFORMATION AS HEALTH CARE  |  41
supply chain data flows, thereby hindering Typically, given current systems, little data 
efforts to analyze improvements in those exists on the temperature and other quali-
flows. Take as an example donors who want tative indicators of the vaccine’s lifespan 
to assess the economic impact of health throughout the supply chain. However, as 
interventions. They may look at vaccines, the price of sensors and RFID begin to fall 
which are seen as a public good. However, we should expect this situation to gradually 
countries typically do not bear the expense change. At the present time the high price of 
of vaccines as they might for other health remote sensors has kept them from being 
and medical commodities. Therefore, accu- widely adopted in low-income markets.
rate financial data on the improvement of 
the system will likely be difficult to come by Many mHealth and eHealth tools have been 
since national governments do not track this used within supply chains to remedy some 
data. This challenge raises an interesting of the challenges addressed above. The 
question: how we can encourage adopting National Malaria Control Programme and 
eHealth/mHealth solutions when it may be Rollback Malaria Partnership employed 
difficult to structure incentives around eco- SMS for Life to track anti-malarial medica-
nomic gains? tions and serve as an alert for stock outages. 
Stop the Stockouts deployed FrontlineSMS 
The illustration below provides an overview in a number of partnerships to map drug 
of the supply chain process for a typical availability. And UNICEF uses RapidSMS for 
medical commodity such as a vaccine. Here inventory management.34 
we can see the types of data that must flow 
through the system to ensure proper deci- We have learned some important things 
sion making. from enterprise architecture work on supply 
chain management. The primary 
 FIG 21: SUPPLY CHAIN DECISION MAKING focus on users and their needs 
 has caused a lack of focus on 
 overall system requirements. For 
 example, many current pilots in 
mHealth have demonstrated anec-
dotal success stories on a small 
GENERAL PROCESS NOTES
Objective: Ensure timely ordering of the right vac- 3. Commodities Required scale. In Zambia, SMS has been 
cine/drug/supply in the right quantity  Are additional commodities required to meet  
The store may operate under a push or pull system.  estimated need used to communicate better about 
The requisition business process should facilitate 
inventory control and provide a tracing mechanism 4. Issue Requisition
for goods.   Create requisition based on estimated needs the supply chain for malaria drugs 
 Consider minimum safety levels 
1. Estimate Ne ed  Consider lead time for stock receipt Consult order history and current outstanding  and supplies in one part of the 
 orders to esti mate need 
5. Transmit Requisition 
 Determine average consumption of goods  Submit the requisition to the appropriate store  country. However, no study has yet 
 Calculate required quantities based on guide  for fulfillment
 lines and rules
6. Validate Requisition reviewed the entire drug and sup-
2. Determine Current/Projected Available  This step in the process allows for an approval  
 Determine quantity of goods currently available   mechanism at higher levels and the ability to  plies system. Consequently, we 
 in the store  edit the quantities requested and/or approve  
 Compute quantity to requisition based on esti-  the requisition as is.
 mated need and current available stock do not know if this initial success 
can scale up to cover all needs. 
SOURCE: Logistics Management Information System
 One recent relevant example is the 
42  |  HEALTH INFORMATION AS HEALTH CARE
STORE
ACTIVITY DETAILS / NARRATIVE
PROGRAM MANAGER
case of EpiSurveyor in Malawi (MSH 2010)  This makes it difficult to address gaps 
for data collection for End Use Verification as   in supply and demand. Most of the 
part of the President’s malaria initiative. This  records collected at the local level are 
system is relatively inexpensive and easier to  paper-based. Moving from paper-based 
scale up. It could readily play a role in supply  records to electronic systems will make 
chain management as a system moves from  data more transparent both horizontally 
paper to electronic records.  and vertically.
Lubinski points out that we must be able to ¾ The lack of transparency at the most 
demonstrate scope (beyond malaria), scale  local level means that intermediaries 
(across districts), and financial sustainability.  are unable to make decisions based 
It is no longer simply a question of whether  on real supply and demand. Once 
the ICT-backed health interventions can be  systems move to electronic formats it 
introduced to demonstrate impact. Instead,  will be necessary to instill a “culture of 
the question now is whether the design of  data” that encourages making decisions 
an application is sufficient to enable scalable  on real inventories.
and sustainable interventions when the total 
cost of ownership – across a country and ¾ The cascade of data flow blockages 
across all relevant uses – is factored in.  beginning at the local level means that 
 national level warehouses make deci- 
SUMMARY OF KEY ISSUES IN SUPPLY  sions based on sketchy forecasts rather 
CHAIN DATA FLOWS  than actual inventories and actual 
Strong health systems rely on a functioning  demand. Mobiles and electronic systems 
supply chain. Improvements in this domain   are needed. 
can vastly improve the availability and quality 
of care at the local level and bolster supply We must design systems that are built on 
chain systems nationally. Across health ver- and scaled for local needs. One model to 
ticals, and for maternal health in particular, consider is that of Belize, where the Belize 
data flows that provide reliable and valid Health Information System integrates vari-
indications of supply and demand of drugs ous health ecosystem domains. Belize is, 
and other supplies will be central to produc- however, a relatively small country. It over-
ing better health outcomes. came many of its challenges by employing 
a single IT system. While it is unlikely that 
Some key findings in the supply chain area Belize’s particular solution would work in 
include: much larger countries, we should study it for 
ideas that might be relevant in other settings.
¾ There are critical chokepoints across 
 the system. But much of the problem  
 begins at the local level where data on 
 inventories are neither electronically 
 recorded nor available across localities. 
 HEALTH INFORMATION AS HEALTH CARE  |  43
44  |  HEALTH INFORMATION AS HEALTH CARE CREDIT: DATADYNE GROUP
RECOMMENDATIONS
This discussion paper has analyzed the three major domains of the 
eHealth ecosystems and has identified several ways to strengthen 
health data flows. Our recommendations address a continuum of 
issues that range from technological to organizational to building 
health workforce capacity.
DEVELOP A CULTURE OF DATA AND at the regional level and who can respond 
INFORMATION: Hozumi et al (2002) define to the needs of frontline workers. Having a 
“culture of information” as “the capacity and well-trained cadre of midlevel hybrid profes-
control to promote values and beliefs among sionals who understand both health systems 
members of an organization by collecting, and eHealth technologies will be important 
analyzing and using information to accom- for making sure that data flows both across 
plish the organization’s goals and mission.” and up vertically driven programs. 
The question of data flows is not purely a 
technological matter but an organizational DESIGN THINKING FOR DATA COLLEC-
challenge where decision-making needs to TION: Designers are playing an increasingly 
be shaped around obtaining and using the important role in global health and develop-
best available data. Leadership in health ment. Insights taken from the design field 
organizations must commit resources for could be useful in the context of eHealth 
planning, training (capacity-building), financ- systems. For example, the partogram expe-
ing, and supervising in order to strengthen rience described in the report addresses the 
ehealth systems. manner in which vital data forms are often 
left incomplete in developing countries and 
DEVELOP TOOLS FOR CAPACITY BUILD- demonstrates deleterious effects when prob-
ING IN EHEALTH ACROSS THE PUBLIC lematic pregnancies occur. Designers might 
HEALTH PROFESSIONS: Information and be able to develop creative “work arounds” 
communications technologies are playing an or forms more friendly to health workers or 
increasingly important role in making health platforms that are more clearly integrated 
systems stronger. They have the potential into workflows and clinical contexts. 
ability to scale up or down and to cut across 
the vertical silos that have plagued those BUILDING SYSTEMS FROM THE GRO- 
systems in recent years. The fundamental UND UP: A sound design approach begins 
building blocks must be in place to allow with the end users and then structures 
a system to interoperate. Then the health incentives and rewards for collecting and 
workforce must maintain and build that sys- transmitting accurate data – and the right 
tem for future use.. This requires a layer of data – for making good decisions at all lev-
supervisory technology professionals who els. The supply chain case study is a good 
can manage health information systems illustration in this respect. Systems have 
 HEALTH INFORMATION AS HEALTH CARE  |  45
been created to push data up the supply 
chain without giving consideration to the 
uses of data and priorities at the local level. 
We must pay attention to the multiple direc-
tions data can flow as well as how senior 
management will use it if we are to develop 
better systems. 
OPPORTUNITY OR INNOVATION MAP-
PING FOR DATA FLOWS: We have provided 
an overview of the typical scenarios for data 
flow challenges in the domains. The next 
step in addressing these challenges would 
be to crowd source an inventory of tools and 
approaches that have dealt with bottlenecks 
in diverse geographic contexts and find out 
how these tools were deployed and scaled. 
Ministries of health could then turn to a list 
of “best in class” tools and deployments as 
they seek to build robust eHealth systems.
MATERNAL HEALTH CONTINUUM OF 
CARE AND OVERALL HEALTH SYSTEM 
STRENGTHENING MUST WORK HAND 
IN HAND: Throughout this paper we have 
used maternal health as a particular focal 
point where possible. We believe this is 
important because there is a growing inter-
est in maternal health as an indicator of how 
effective an entire health system is. How-
ever, we must avoid creating another silo 
for maternal care and focus instead on it as 
an eHealth model for transforming an entire 
system. Systems and platforms designed 
for this domain must be scalable to other 
problem spaces as well as being capable 
of engaging with sectors outside of health. 
This is a point that is often neglected in the 
current eHealth discussions.
 
46  |  HEALTH INFORMATION AS HEALTH CARE
47  |  HEALTH INFORMATION AS HEALTH CARE
REFERENCES
Anwer Aqil, Theo Lippeveld, Dairiku Hozumi, “PRISM framework: a paradigm shift for 
designing, strengthening and evaluation routine health information systems,” Health Policy
and Planning 24 (2009): 217-228.
Peter Byass, “The unequal world of health data,” PLoS medicine 6:11, 
http://dx.plos.org/10.1371/journal.pmed.1000155 (2009).
William Hersh, Alvaro Margolis, Fernán Quirós, Paula Otero, “Building a health informatics 
workforce in developing countries,” Health Affairs (Project Hope) 29:2 (2010), p. 274-277.
D. Hozumi, Anwer Aqil, Theo Lippeveld, “Pakistan situation analysis,” MEASURE
Evaluation Project, USAID, (2002).
Krishnamurthy, Ramesh; St. Louis, Michael “Informatics and the Management of Surveillance 
Data,”in LM Lee, SM Teutsch, SB Thacker, ME St. Louis,eds., Principles and Practice of
Public Health Surveillance, 3rd Edition, (Oxford University Press, 2010). 
Leslie Lenert, “Levels of complexity in surveillance data management,” Personal
Communication (2009). 
Management Sciences for Health (2010). Applying or Integrating Mobile-based Episurveyor 
Technology into Malawi Malaria Supervision. Strengthening Pharmaceutical Systems. 
Accessed on January 24, 2010 at http://www.datadyne.org/blog/msh-malawi
Sally Stansfield, Nosa Orobaton, David Lubinski Steven Uggowitzer, Henry Mwanyika, 
“The Case for a National Health Information System Enterprise Architecture: the Missing 
Link to Guiding Global Development and Implementation.” 
48  |  HEALTH INFORMATION AS HEALTH CARE
ENDNOTES
 1 C. Evashwick, “Creating the Continuum of Care,” Health Matrix 7:1 (Spring 1989), 30-39.
 2  http://www.globalhealth.org/health_systems/health_care_workers/ 
 3 WHO, About Health Systems, http://www.who.int/healthsystems/about/en/ 
 (December 20, 2010). 
  
4  World Telecommunication/ICT Development Report 2010 (ITU, 2010), 1.
5  World Telecommunication/ICT Development Report 2010, 2. 
6  World Telecommunication/ICT Development Report 2010, 2.
7 “Ericsson: Benefits of mobile communication in rural and developing areas” Reuters, Sep.  
 20, 2010, (http://www.reuters.com/article/idUS91685+20-Sep-2010+HUG20100920). 
8  Diane Coyle, Patrick Meier, New Technologies in Emergencies and Conflicts: The Role of
 Information and Social Networks, (Washington, D.C. and London, UK: UN Foundation- 
 Vodafone Foundation Partnership, 2009) 6.
9  Vital Wave Consulting, mHealth for Development: The Opportunity of Mobile Technology
 for Healthcare in the Developing World, (Washington, D.C. and Berkshire, UK: UN 
 Foundation-Vodafone Foundation Partnership, 2009), 9.
10 S Naicker, JB Eastwood, J Plange-Rhule, RC Tutt, “Shortage of healthcare works in  
 sub-Saharan Africa: a nephrological perspective,” Clin Nephrol Sup 74:S1: 129-133.
11 Save the Children. A Fair Chance At Life: Why Equity Matters for Child Mortality. A
  Report for the 2010 Summit on the Millennium Development Goals. London, UK: 2010, 
 p. 5. (References study by H. Yusuf and H. Atrash, ‘Parents’ death and survival of their 
  children’ in The Lancet, 375, 9730, 2010, pp 1944–1946.) Online at http://www.  
 savethechildren.org.uk/en/docs/A_Fair_Chance_at_Life.pdf (last accessed on 
  February 1, 2011).  
12  http://whqlibdoc.who.int/publications/2010/9789241500265_eng.pdf 
13  Ibid. 
 HEALTH INFORMATION AS HEALTH CARE  |  49
14  http://www.countdown2015mnch.org/documents/2010report/CountdownReportOnly.pdf
  
15  Peter Byass, “The unequal world of health data,” PLoS medicine 6:11,
 http://dx.plos.org/10.1371/journal.pmed.1000155 (2009).
16  A future version of this project may attempt to track data flows across the continuum   
 of care for maternal health. Astute readers of this paper may recognize that surveillance   
 systems are not necessarily an aspect of the maternal continuum of care. Data flows for  
 maternal care would most certainly include health care facilities and clinical data flows.
17 Sally Stansfield, Nosa Orobaton, David Lubinski, Steven Uggowitzer, Henry Mwanyika,   
 “Remarks of Theo Lippeveld on the paper: The Case for a National Health Information 
  System Enterprise Architecture: the Missing Link to Guiding Global Development and 
  Implementation,” http://www.who.int/healthmetrics/tools/1HMN_Architecture_for_National 
 _HIS_20080620.pdf One should note that data architectures are several steps downstream 
  from the core or initial enterprise architecture systems requirements process. 
18 Yochai Benkler, The Wealth of Networks. 2006, Yale University Press, New Haven.
19 MV Kinney, KJ Kerber, RE Black, B Cohen, F Nkrumah, et al., “Sub-Saharan Africa’s
  Mothers,Newborns, and Children: Where and Why Do They Die?,” PLoS Med 7:6, 
  e1000294. doi:10.1371/journal.pmed.1000294, (2010) and Fabiano Teixeira da Cruz, 
 “How Mobile Phone Technology can Fight Maternal Mortality,” UN Dispatch, 
 http://www.undispatch.com/node/9952, (June 8, 2010).
20 Peter Byass 
21 Donald Berwick (2003). Escape Fire: Lessons for the Future of Health Care. Jossey Bass.
22 For further information, see Patrician Mechel, Barriers and Gaps Affecting mHealth Policy
  and Research in the Developing World, (Washington, D.C.: mHealth Alliance, 2010).
23 The following section was written in collaboration with Ramesh Krishnamurthy, June 2010.
24 Lennert and Krishnamurthy, 2009.
25 Krishnamurthy and St. Louis, 2010.
26 HMN Framework, 2007. http://www.who.int/healthmetrics/documents/framework/en/  
 index.html 
 
50  |  HEALTH INFORMATION AS HEALTH CARE
27 Ibid. 
28 According to William Hersch et al, 2010. Hersh WR, Margolis A, Quirós F, Otero P, Building
  a health informatics workforce in developing countries, Health Affairs, 2010, 29: 274-277.
29 David Blumenthal, National Coordinator for Health IT, quoted in 2009: 
 http://www.healthcareitnews.com/news/health-it-effort-create-thousands-new-jobs-says 
 -blumenthal
30 We are essentially at the beginning of the movement to build ehealth capacity with
  initiatives, such as the American Medical Informatics Association’s 10 x 10 program that 
 aims to train 10,000 health workers in health informatics by the end of 2010, and several 
 other nascent partnerships. 
31 The following section is written in collaboration with Dykki Settle, June 2010.
32 The following section is written in collaboration with David Lubinski, June 2010.
33 Center for Global Development (2007). Global Health Forecasting Working Group. A
 Risky Business: Saving Money and Improving Global Health Through Better Demand 
 Forecasts. Washington, DC.
34 See study by Ali Bloch for mHealth Alliance (forthcoming).
 HEALTH INFORMATION AS HEALTH CARE  |  51

