MUTUAL VALUE, MUTUAL GAIN 
Best practices from successful social sector 
partnerships with mobile network operators
Mutual value, mutual gain: best practices from successful social sector partnerships with mobile network operators 
Executive Summary 
For operators endeavoring to increase their revenues, resource poor women are one of the last untapped markets: the 
estimated 300 million fewer women subscribers than men in low and middle-income countries represent a $13B 
missed market opportunity.1  Developing countries are driving the growth in mobile as mature markets become 
saturated, and even in developing markets the divide between urban and rural active mobile subscriber penetration 
can be large.  Ghana, for example, has 63% urban mobile penetration versus 30% in rural areas. 2  Mobile operators 
are increasingly aware of the importance of investing in rural markets: in 2012, Vodacom noted that future growth in 
Tanzania will come from rural areas that currently have low connection penetration rates (25% compared to 80% in 
some urban areas). 3  Additionally, rural populations in emerging markets often have disproportionate numbers of 
women due to male migration to urban centers. For example, between 1970 and 1990, Malawi’s rural male population 
declined by 21.8%, while the female population fell by only 5.4%.4  To take advantage of the revenue potential found in 
these untapped communities, the formation of efficient and effective partnerships between operators and social sector 
organizations that have long-standing networks and expertise in serving rural and marginalized populations is crucial.5   
Partnerships are also vital to achieving scale, sustainability and success in the M4D sector.  A 2014 GSMA Mobile for 
Development Impact survey of representatives from mobile operator Value Added Service (VAS) departments from 38 
countries found that operators recognize that they cannot work alone and successful partnerships with third party 
providers are crucial to deliver successful content and other services.6  Social sector organizations that seek a 
partnership with an operator usually seek these partnerships in order to leverage operator capabilities to deliver at 
scale.  The content or services some social sector organizations offer to operators, such as health or educational 
content or agricultural advisory services, would generally be considered mobile value added services by the mobile 
industry. 7  Additional services or expertise social sector organizations bring to operators, such as existing distribution 
networks, consumer insights or market sizing data, can help operators along other parts of the VAS value chain such 
as product development or market opportunity assessment.  This research paper focuses specifically on lessons 
learned in successful social sector/operator partnerships to bring value-added services to rural or marginalized 
populations, especially women. 
 
                                                                   
1 See Women and Mobile: A Global Opportunity, GSMA mWomen 2010 
2 See Mobile for Development Intelligence: A Diverse Stakeholder Mix, GSMA Mobile for Development Intelligence 2013 
3 See Sub-Saharan Africa Mobile Economy 2013, GSMA Intelligence 2013 
4 See Valuing Women’s Work in Agriculture, World Watch Institute, 2012 
5 The term “social sector organization” is being used in this report to represent both non-governmental organizations (NGOs) and for-profit social 
enterprises. 
6 See The importance of partnerships to mobile operators’ value added services, GSMA Mobile for Development Intelligence 2014 
7 Ibid, 2014 
1 
Mutual value, mutual gain: best practices from successful social sector partnerships with mobile network operators 
Methodology and audience 
This Insights paper analyses qualitative research findings based on in-depth interviews with six social sector 
organizations who have established successful partnerships with operators.  The purpose of these interviews was to 
better understand common norms and tactics for successful social sector/operator partnerships and inform a set of 
best practices to increase the social sector’s understanding of how to successfully work with operator partners for 
mutual benefit.  These partnership examples are not meant to be representative but rather focus on deep learnings 
from a small sample of social sector organizations and concentrate on partnerships in Africa and the Middle East.   The 
primary audience for this report is organizations in the social sector who either currently or plan to operate or contribute 
to M4D services.  We also hope this paper will be helpful for operators who seek to engage social sector partners as 
part of their strategic targeting of resource-poor women or other untapped market segments.   
The interviews used to develop the content of this paper are structured around the typical value chain of a partnership 
formation process: the initial approach and negotiation, structuring and implementation of the partnership, and exit from 
the partnership.   Common themes found in the research analysis are discussed alongside best practice implications 
for social sector organizations.  Snapshots of a selection of the partnerships analyzed in this paper are found in the 
Appendix.  We also encourage you to stay tuned for case studies and insights papers which will be made available on 
www.gsma.com/mwomen as the GSMA mWomen Innovation grant offerings from operator/social sector partnerships 
are tested and launched. 
Why Partner? 
Partnerships yield benefits for both the operator and the social sector organization.  In addition to the diverse skillsets 
and expertise areas of commercial and social organizations that create synergies through partnership, there are often 
‘perception’ benefits and other externalized benefits that form attractive value propositions to both the operator and 
social sector entity as they engage in a partner relationship. 
The Unexpected Expert: Social Sector Value-Add to Operators 
Partnerships with social sector organizations are of particular importance to mobile network operators in emerging 
markets who are targeting resource-poor market segments.  For operators without visibility into these communities, or 
experience developing services for them, partnerships with social sector organizations yield a myriad of benefits such 
as increased consumer insights, proven content for products and services, and access to existing marketing and 
distribution channels.  Social sector/operator partnerships are especially crucial to serve low and middle-income 
women in emerging markets – the persistent barriers that inhibit women’s access to mobile services are among the 
most complex to solve in the M4D sector and prevent both the individual and community benefits that women’s access 
to mobile services enables.8   
                                                                   
8 See Women and Mobile: A Global Opportunity, GSMA mWomen 2010 
2 
Mutual value, mutual gain: best practices from successful social sector partnerships with mobile network operators 
Social sector organizations have deep expertise in serving resource-poor women, as well as the community trust and 
offline network access necessary to successfully reach marginalized women in these markets.  Operators can partner 
with social sector organizations at multiple points in developing their product offering.  For example, social sector 
organizations can bring their unique experience and knowledge to inform the following product life-cycle steps: 
Figure A 
• Market opportunity:  Social sector organizations can help the operator size their market opportunity based on the 
specialized knowledge they have such as research, data, tools and publications, as well as their geographic reach 
in underserved areas. 
• Consumer Insights: Social sector organizations often have deeper and more recent market research on hard-to-
reach populations than their operator partners.  They also can reach potential customers through their services in 
communities and access to offline community networks. 
• Product Development: Social sector organizations are experts in serving base of the pyramid customers, 
including in localizing content and in designing products and services that provide value to these customers’ lives. 
• Marketing and Branding: To access hard to reach populations such as women in traditional societies, working 
with social sector organizations that are trusted in the community and have the relationships necessary to engage 
target consumers is crucial to a successful, scalable service launch.  Additionally, social sector organizations are 
able to leverage relationships with government agencies that operators wouldn’t normally engage with to promote 
services and build trust with customers.   
• Sales and Distribution:  For operators who rarely develop value-added services in house and don’t have core 
competencies in the operation of complex value-added services such as educational programming, engaging a 
social sector partner with proven abilities to deliver such services yields both operational and economic 
efficiencies.  Social sector organizations often also have access to existing distribution channels to be leveraged in 
such operational deployments.   
• Monitoring and Evaluation:  Operators generally don’t have systems in place to conduct monitoring and 
evaluation of socially-oriented services beyond standard key performance indicator metrics. They also lack internal 
3 
Mutual value, mutual gain: best practices from successful social sector partnerships with mobile network operators 
capacity and bandwidth to undergo the type of monitoring and evaluation that the social sector has expertise in and 
can bring as an additional value-add to any type of partnership along the product lifecycle. 
Please see the Appendix of this document for detailed examples of successful operator-social sector partnerships 
along the value chain, including key pieces of advice for social sector organizations looking to partner with operators. 
Savvy at Scale: Operator Value-Add to the Social Sector 
The scale, visibility and commercial service expertise accessible through an operator partnership are extraordinarily 
attractive value propositions to social sector players in the M4D space. Operators have strong in-house capabilities 
and dedicated teams to conduct scaled above the line and below the line marketing campaigns that are often far more 
extensive than the outreach tactics available to and employed by social sector organizations.  Additionally, the potential 
for sustainable, unrestricted revenue streams from revenue-share services and reduced risk and investment through 
an early-stage partnership are some of the unique benefits to social sector organizations found in mobile operator 
partnerships.   
Why are Operator/Social Sector Partnerships so Hard? 
Despite the clear benefits to social sector/operator partnerships and the rapid maturation of the M4D sector that 
catalyzes them, successful examples of such partnerships are difficult to come by and the lack of right business 
models is the biggest barrier to successful commercial value-added services in the M4D space.9  Additionally, 
significant knowledge gaps in the social sector talent pool on how operators are structured, what motivates them, and 
how to successfully ‘pitch’ a partnership are persistent challenges to social sector organizations looking to efficiently 
staff an operator-facing partnerships role.  Lack of success in the design, negotiation and implementation of social 
sector/operator partnerships continues to be a significant challenge to scale in the M4D sector, and are rich topics for 
learning and guidance as the sector evolves.   
Embarking on an operator/social sector partnership 
Before we begin: a note on motivation 
Amongst the interviewees, the decision to approach an operator partner was either an internally-motivated decision – 
i.e., the organization made the decision to try to engage an operator partner as part of their organizational strategy, or 
an externally motivated decision – i.e., the organization was pursuing donor funding that required an operator partner.  
Private sector partnerships are very attractive to donors and provide potential for both individual project funding and 
increased general funding flows due to the visibility and prestige of private sector partnerships.  Either way, externally 
or internally motivated, operator partnerships need to be carefully approached and resourced to ensure success.   
                                                                   
9 See The importance of partnerships to mobile operators’ value added services, GSMA Mobile for Development Intelligence 2014 
4 
Mutual value, mutual gain: best practices from successful social sector partnerships with mobile network operators 
How do you decide if you want to approach a mobile operator for partnership? 
• Assess your available resources: Organizations who made the internally-motivated decision to approach an 
operator for partnership often made internal budget decisions early on, allocating C-level and other staff time for 
operator market research and partnership design to ensure their approach for the initial operator meeting would be 
as successful as possible, as well as intentionally hiring or allocating staff with private sector experience.  After the 
initial meeting and throughout the negotiation phase, interviewed organizations often created dedicated teams 
within their organizations to ensure continued success and momentum, such as TechnoServe, who created an 
internal working group after their first operator meeting to drive the project concept forward according to the vision 
and needs they heard described in that meeting.  Gathering the right mix of internal staff – business, technical and 
programmatic – ensures that the negotiation process moves forward in service of all aspects of the organization 
and keeps internal buy-in over the often long period of negotiation.  Make sure your organization has the financial 
and personnel capacity to allot the necessary time to pursue the partnership in an informed and strategic manner. 
• Know your boundaries: In the interviews, there was often an expressed consensus within the organization that 
an operator partnership was worth pursuing, despite the recognition of some common tensions facing operator 
partnerships within the social sector.  Common pain points include exclusivity in the terms to a partnership and 
disagreement on marketing/public relations norms. 
 
o Working with an operator exclusively: Exclusivity means that the social sector partner works 
exclusively with that operator partner in the select country of operation, for the benefit of that 
operator’s subscriber base only, on either a time-limited (i.e., the service operates exclusively with 
a given network for six months) or feature-based contract (i.e., all operator subscribers can access 
the general service, but only the operator’s subscribers can access the premium version of the 
service).  While this type of partnership is challenging for the social sector partner as it puts bounds 
on who can access their services and thus potentially compromises an organization’s social 
mission, our interviewees with exclusive partnerships assessed the trade-offs and saw exclusivity 
as a necessary step towards scale of their services.  In particular, partnerships often enable access 
to a large percentage of the population even with exclusivity in place, due to the large market 
shares of some operators. The need for exclusivity on the operator-side to push through project 
internally also often made negotiation unlikely or even impossible.  If exclusivity is a non-starter for 
an organization, best to re-think the approach and consider partnership with an aggregator or other 
mobile service provider.  For a discussion of exclusivity, see the HNI snapshot in the Appendix. 
o  
Deciding on marketing/public relations norms: In some of the interviews with social sector 
organizations who chose to partner with the corporate social responsibility (CSR) departments 
within operators, there was tension during implementation around the marketing and public 
relations (PR) tactics employed by the operator.  The social sector partner sometimes felt 
uncomfortable with some of the PR campaigns by operators that included social impact claims they 
5 
Mutual value, mutual gain: best practices from successful social sector partnerships with mobile network operators 
might not have made themselves to their donors about the same project, or were blind-sided by 
large-scale media campaigns around the partnership that they had not been made aware of in 
advance. For social sector organizations considering partnerships, it is best to clarify the marketing 
and PR norms early in the relationship. 
 
Explore options to work with other mobile service stakeholders: One important point for social 
sector organizations to consider is whether direct engagement with operators is the most effective 
means of accessing the mobile assets that they need.  Depending on the geography in question, 
there are aggregators who make a business out of interfacing with all the mobile operators in that 
country (see ‘what is an aggregator’ side bar).  The benefits of using intermediaries or aggregators 
are that the social sector organization is able to access subscribers of all the mobile operators in 
that country through a single technical interface point, without having to negotiate common short 
codes.  These aggregators can also provide reporting across different mobile operators, and have a 
certain amount of technical capability to provide custom solutions.  However, these aggregators 
tend to be limited to core connectivity services, and will charge a markup above the operators’ base 
tariffs.   
There is also the potential to partner with a commercial VAS provider who has expertise 
in delivering a broad range of commercial VAS services to operators and often has strong 
relationships with VAS Managers and other operator in-house decision makers on new VAS 
services.  Depending on the maturity of the market, VAS providers will either have exclusive or 
non-exclusive relationships with operators – in less mature markets, such as Afghanistan, VAS 
providers often have exclusive relationships with operators who invest heavily in ‘bringing’ that VAS 
provider into the market; in more mature markets, like Kenya, the same VAS provider works with 
different operators, usually differentiating on the content, type of application, pricing bundle, etc.  
For social sector organizations looking to push content out or leverage distribution networks for a 
commercial service, a VAS provider partnership can be a more efficient pathway for partnership 
with mobile operators: for organizations with low internal staff capacity to begin or manage an 
operator partnership negotiation, the commercial VAS partner can play that intermediary role 
through their existing staff and channels, without the social sector organization having to allocate 
significant budget or time to staff up an operator partnership. However, there will often need to be 
compromises on the social sector’s side around revenue-share agreements and content ownership 
rights, as well as the need to bear the risk that the mobile operator won’t contract the VAS 
provider’s services.   
6 
Mutual value, mutual gain: best practices from successful social sector partnerships with mobile network operators 
• Discuss the issue of subsidization of the private sector: Another concern to grapple with is the subsidization of 
the private sector – for some of the NGOs we interviewed, they feared that partnering with an operator to use 
donor funds to develop a service for that commercial entity would be akin to subsidization, or using donor dollars to 
give an operator a commercial advantage.  Along with subsidization, some organizations feared they would crowd 
out the local private sector due to their partnerships with large operators, preventing the natural ecosystem of local 
private sector players and startups meant to serve operator clients.  These are all valid concerns to discuss 
internally before approaching an operator for partnership to ensure there’s no time wasted for either party. 
Lessons learned in making the decision to approach an operator for partnership 
• Allocate resources to ensure coverage for necessary staff time to pursue operator 
partnership. 
• Know your boundaries and your options for how you want to engage the operator around 
key issues such as exclusivity and partnership public relations/marketing. 
• Educate yourself on the pluses and minuses of direct operator partnerships vs. aggregators 
and make an informed decision on which path you’re taking. 
• Agree internally and with donors on exclusivity and boundaries when working with the 
private sector before approaching potential operator partners. 
 
How do you get a first meeting with a mobile operator? 
• Assess your geographic footprint: A key theme seen across interviewees in approaching an operator for 
partnership was the size of the geography in question.  If your organization works in multiple markets, look across 
geographies to see which country might offer the easiest ‘entry point’ to the operator partner.  For smaller 
organizations trying to get in the door for a 
Figure B first meeting in a smaller country or market, 
it was easier to build connections with the 
one or two dominant operators, as well as 
easier to get the final deal signed as 
smaller markets face less red tape and 
scrutiny at the group level.  For large, multi-
national social sector organizations, getting 
traction in a small market with the local 
opco (operating company) of a large group 
like Vodafone or Ooredoo was seen as a 
strategic step towards further partnerships 
Source: GSMA Intelligence, 2014 
7 
Mutual value, mutual gain: best practices from successful social sector partnerships with mobile network operators 
within the group in other countries of mutual operation (for a sample mobile operator structure, see Figure B, 
above).  Additionally, markets with strong competition between operators give social sector organizations the 
potential to leverage an exclusive relationship to gain traction as a partnership of competitive advantage for their 
operator partner. 
 
• Leverage your personal and professional network: Across all organizations interviewed, a robust networking 
effort was crucial to getting the initial meeting at the operator.  The majority of the time, cold calls yielded little 
traction – initial meetings were always achieved by leveraging either personal network connections or strategic 
networking at events like conferences and summits.  While this strategy of smart networking was crucial for getting 
the first meeting, it did not guarantee success, and often made for a higher stakes first encounter as a certain level 
of knowledge and/or importance was assumed by operator representatives tasked with taking the meeting. 
How do you ensure a successful first meeting with an operator partner? 
• Prepare thoroughly: Robust preparation prior to the initial meeting was undertaken by all of the interviewees.  
Commercially-focused staff at operators may not have a clear understanding of how a social sector organization 
brings value to their business, and internal operator confusion around where the initial meeting should take place – 
on the commercial or foundation/corporate social responsibility side of the business – can often lead to a rapid loss 
of momentum around any potential 
partnership as internal accountability gets FFigiguurere C C  
passed around; early clarity on where the 
relationship ‘sits’ in the organization is key 
through a clear demonstration of the 
partnership’s value proposition to the targeted 
unit with the operator, commercial or 
otherwise.  The ‘cast of characters’ as 
described in Figure C  should be understood 
based on the unique structure of the group or 
country-level operator you are meeting with, 
as well.  
Additionally, understanding the private sector mindset and the operator’s commercial goals, norms and language is 
crucial to making a successful first pitch, and takes both intentional staff capacity building on the part of the social 
sector organization as well as research into the corporate strategy, successes and challenges of the target 
operator partner.  CSR and/or Foundation internal reporting and strategy structures and norms differ highly from 
one operator to another, and even within groups there is sometimes both a CSR team and a separate Foundation 
entity that have very different mandates and KPIs within the organization.  Also, keep in mind that group strategy 
may not be fully aligned with the priorities of the opco, and vice-versa: the two entities typically behave very 
differently, and have different objectives.  Ensure that your pitch also recognizes that different opcos may have 
8 
Mutual value, mutual gain: best practices from successful social sector partnerships with mobile network operators 
different leverage within a group depending on how important and how much revenue that opco contributes, which 
in turn drives how much a group executive can dictate terms. 
• Understand when in the project lifecycle to approach the operator: The question of when in the programmatic 
lifecycle to approach an operator for partnership is also important.  Because the majority of our interviewees had C-
level relationships with their Figure D 
prospective operator partners 
before engaging in the first 
meeting, they engaged the 
operator in the design phase of 
the program.  This is an atypical 
process, as it is generally 
recommended to approach the 
operator with a full service 
offering, as described in the 
Souktel/Ooredoo snapshot. 10  
Even when entering into the 
conversation with the operator 
at the design phase, interviewees asserted that coming to the first meeting prepared with a ‘menu of options’ and 
having a clear pitch around the value proposition of each option was crucial to getting early traction.  The costs and 
benefits to different timings of “the pitch” are laid out in Figure D. 
 
• Clearly articulate the value proposition of the partnership: By framing the partnership pitch within a value 
proposition to the operator on either a commercial or CSR basis, a social sector organization is able to clearly 
demonstrate the value of the partnership in a way the operator will understand.  The core of what the mobile 
operator is looking for here is the ability of the M4D service to provide a competitive advantage to: (1) improve 
usage of its current services  (2) convert new customers (3) reduce customer churn (4) improve brand reputation.   
In addition to the framework laid out in the “social sector value-add” section of the report (page 2) the following 
value drivers can be helpful in constructing a clear pitch for the first meeting: 
 
o Diversification of revenue streams: For many operators, the ultimate measure of true 
commercialization of M4D is the extent to which the proposed service creates new revenue 
streams and converts new customer segments.   
                                                                   
10See The importance of partnerships to mobile operators’ value added services, GSMA Intelligence 2014 
9 
Mutual value, mutual gain: best practices from successful social sector partnerships with mobile network operators 
o Leveraging existing infrastructure and ICT capabilities: Operators invest heavily in large 
infrastructure products such as rural towers and are eager to find ways to boost returns on these 
investments 
o Impact on social outcomes: The degree to which the service meets a clear and present social 
need will help mobile operators with the following: enhance their brand, improve government 
relations, improve employee satisfaction 
o  
• Demonstrate expertise immediately: Coming to the first meeting with strong data around customer insights or 
market intelligence that the operator doesn’t already have access to, such as information gleaned from rural 
community research the social sector organization conducted, gives an early ‘win’ to the partnership and 
demonstrates strong value to incentivize the operator to take the meeting, and partnership, seriously.  
• Speak operator language: Using common social sector terms such as ‘beneficiaries’, ‘logframe’ or ‘M&E’ will 
likely confuse or even alienate operator representatives in the room who are not familiar with such language.  Make 
a conscious effort to switch to commercial language such as ‘market segment’ instead of ‘beneficiaries’ and spend 
time understanding common operator terms they are likely to use in conversation such as ARPU, MO:MT and 
churn so you can address them clearly.  GSMA M4D Impact’s glossary of M4D terms can be found here.  
Lessons learned in getting a first meeting and making it successful: 
• Assess your geographic footprint if your organization works in multiple geographies to find the best ‘entry point’ 
for an operator partnership, keeping in mind that smaller markets often have easier-to-reach operators. 
• Leverage both personal and professional networks to find a connection at the target operator, and if possible, 
have an initial informal meeting with that contact to gain insight into key insights that can help inform your initial 
pitch. 
• Do your homework – research the target operator’s structure, corporate strategy, in-country services and key 
existing partnerships.  GSMA M4D Impact’s database is a good research starting point. 
• Understand when in the project lifecycle to make the approach to ensure you’re picking a strategic time in the 
program to make the operator pitch. 
• Articulate the value proposition of the partnership and where it sits within the operator (commercial or 
foundation/CSR). 
• Demonstrate immediate value in the first meeting by presenting the operator with consumer insights and market 
intelligence gained through your organization’s existing work with target communities 
• Speak the same language as the operator representatives and don’t alienate them with social sector terms they 
may not understand – e.g., use the term ‘market segment’, not ‘beneficiaries’.  
What are some tactics to ensure a strong negotiation and successful deal closure? 
• Prepare to take a different path from the initial pitch’s vision: Flexibility is key; keeping an open mind about 
the terms of the partnership both programmatically and financially/operationally leaves open the negotiation space 
necessary for the operator to modify terms as needed for internal buy-in. 
10 
Mutual value, mutual gain: best practices from successful social sector partnerships with mobile network operators 
 
• Communicate early, communicate often: A key theme seen across organizations interviewed is the emphasis 
on early, clear and continued communication that includes all key stakeholders to the partnership.  Many of the 
interviewees learned a hard lesson when they assumed that once the group-level relationship was strong, 
operationalizing the partnership on a country level would be easy.  What they found out was that buy-in from the C-
level of the operator group doesn’t mean the country-level team is similarly bought in and/or even aware of the 
partnership, and often the ‘sales’ process needs to start all over at the opco level. Facilitated internal operator 
communications need to be structured into the general partnership communications during the negotiation phase, 
and led by the social sector organization with an emphasis on creating partnership ‘champions’ at both the group 
and opco levels early on in the negotiation process. 
 
• Set timeline expectations accordingly:  In general, operator partnership negotiations took far longer than the 
social sector organizations interviewed expected – up to a full year in some cases.  Being prepared financially to 
invest in the staff-time necessary for this process – including not just direct operator-facing roles but also support 
teams and financial, legal and technical staff – is crucial to sustain the long-tail of negotiation time needed to close 
the deal.  Additionally to the financial cost, programmatic and donor/other stakeholder timing and needs need to be 
aligned accordingly, with expectations set that deployment timelines may be longer than usual. 
Lessons learned in negotiating and closing the deal: 
• Prepare for a need for flexibility when negotiating the final vision for the partnership, as it 
might be different than the initial pitch due to internal needs and wants at the operator. 
• Catalyze buy-in from both the group and opco levels by facilitating communication 
between all stakeholders early on in the negotiation process to ensure efficient service launch 
once the negotiation process is completed. 
• Understand the possibility of a long negotiation timeline and set expectations both 
internally and with external stakeholders like donors accordingly. 
• Balance trade-offs by practicing open and transparent communication around social ROI 
metrics and mission-driven programmatic norms; in parallel, recognize and respect the 
operator’s need for profitability. 
 
You got the signature – now how do you actually get moving? 
• Focus on country-level relationships:  Confronted with high operator staff turnover and limited internal 
communication, interviewees faced the need to constantly champion the partnership and repeatedly lose progress 
on service launch.  Additionally, technical or programmatic divisions within local opcos were understandably 
hesitant about adding more work to their already heavily burdened teams, creating an environment of resistance 
11 
Mutual value, mutual gain: best practices from successful social sector partnerships with mobile network operators 
and distrust that made vital steps such as technical back-end integrations more time-consuming than initially 
expected.  Lack of clarity and direction on where the project sat at the local level – commercial or CSR – meant 
risking getting passed back and forth between the two divisions at a local level and gaining little traction on actual 
implementation as internal operator accountability for partnership activities was not clearly defined.   
• Hit the ground running: Timelines for social sector organizations and operators are completely different. Social 
sector organizations generally count in years, while a project in which payback period is longer than six months will 
hardly ever make it to the market on the operator side.  Once you have the relationship investments made, it is 
crucial to begin service delivery as quickly as possible.  Do all the prep work in advance to make sure that delivery 
can happen in the operator’s normal timeframe. 
 
• Practice smart stakeholder management: Key to partnerships involving multiple stakeholders is a management 
plan that shields the operator partner from management burden.  Some partnership stakeholder models include: 
 
 
“Hub and spoke’ model: The ‘hub and spoke’ stakeholder management model positions the lead 
social sector organization as 
Figure E the “hub” for all the 
stakeholder “spokes” to 
ensure streamlined 
implementation of partnership 
activities (see Figure E).  
Often times local 
organizations providing 
content or distribution 
networks for the partnership 
need weekly coordination 
meetings or committees to 
keep activities running 
smoothly – the operator 
partner generally won’t have the time to participate at this level, but can be kept up to date with a 
monthly steering committee call, for example.  This can be an opportunity for the social sector 
organization to serve as matchmaker, as well – for example, strategically engaging governmental 
partners along with the operator partner to facilitate coordination between those two entities and 
add value both partners by catalyzing a relationship.  This is especially useful when delivering 
content that has ethical implications (e.g., health).  For details on a successful ‘hub and spoke’ 
stakeholder management model, see the HNI/Airtel snapshot. 
12 
Mutual value, mutual gain: best practices from successful social sector partnerships with mobile network operators 
o Turn-key model: In a ‘turn-key’ model, the social sector organization plays the role of the project 
manager and comes to the operator with a ready-to-launch solution, after having already done all 
the content development and mobile optimization work.  Often time social sector organizations that 
successfully run a turn-key model have strong in-house technical teams who have experience in 
mobile software development, or a partner who has those capabilities.  For details on this model, 
see the Souktel/Ooredoo snapshot. 
Expert consultant model: In an ‘expert consultant’ model, the social sector organization positions 
themselves as the external consultant to the operator, offering expertise and advice to the 
operator’s dedicated project team as they launch and scale an M4D service.  These types of 
models are often times utilized when the social sector organization has expertise in both content or 
product design as well as client insights and market knowledge, thus enabling the social sector 
organization to ‘coach’ the operator as they enter a new market.  By treating the operator like their 
client, social sector organizations can provide advisory and consumer insights throughout the 
partnership to ensure they’re making informed decisions about their services and offerings.  
 
• Invest in making it work: Learning how to work together with operators was key to the success of the social 
sector organizations interviewed.  Operators have deep internal tensions between expediency and quality, and 
project managers on the operator side may feel intense pressure to get the content or VAS to market far earlier 
than social sector organizations feel comfortable with – the level of tolerance for learning as you go is much higher 
in businesses than in the social sector, generally.  Social sector organizations who were able to balance their own 
norms around quality with the market needs of operators and who were aware that this tension would be felt in the 
partnership were able to plan accordingly early on and strategically message the process accordingly to donors 
and other key stakeholders. 
 
• Set expectations and establish norms around data ownership and sharing: For social sector organizations  
 
Lessons learned: partnership implementation 
• Plan for a time investment after contract signing to conduct country-level relationship 
building at the local, technical and programmatic levels. 
• Begin service delivery as quickly as possible to ensure services meet the tighter 
timeframe expectations of operator partners. 
• Manage partnerships efficiently, while trying to shield the operator from as much 
management burden as possible. 
• Invest in and commit to a strong communications process such as the formation of a 
Steering Committee and/or monthly all-stakeholder meetings to create a forum for consistent 
feedback and provide a venue for internal operator communication around the partnership to 
ensure all key stakeholders are bought-in throughout the partnership. 
• Establish clear guidelines about data ownership/data sharing norms and commitments, 
especially when it comes to data gathering for project monitoring and evaluation necessary 
for program feedback and iteration, and ensure that technical teams have clarity on what is 
expected of them for efficient data sharing on a scheduled basis.  13 
Mutual value, mutual gain: best practices from successful social sector partnerships with mobile network operators 
that have social impact KPIs they need to meet and donor-obligated monitoring and evaluation studies that require 
data to preform, there is generally the expectation that the operator will share their data from the back-end of the 
service so that such analysis can be undertaken.  Operators, on the other hand, are not used to sharing their data 
with external parties and often will push back on that idea from both senior and technical levels.  Confidentiality is a 
concern for operators, especially in competitive markets.  Even if you have the agreement from senior 
management on data sharing, the technical team may be hesitant to share it.  By establishing both guidelines and 
norms around data ownership and sharing early on, with a schedule and, if possible, technical integration that 
allows data to flow without the need to for operator teams to download it themselves and hand off to the social 
sector partner, social sector organizations can mitigate a recurrent uphill battle each time a data request is 
submitted. 
 
A note on partnership exits 
In many of the interviews conducted for this research, the conversation around an exit strategy for partnerships was a 
short one – often times social sector organizations are so focused on getting the partnership deal and successfully 
implementing it that what happens at the end simply isn’t a priority focus area.  However, a strong exit strategy is 
crucial to ensure the sustainability of the service for both the operator partner for whom it forms a revenue stream or 
key CSR initiative, and, importantly, for the clients it serves with crucial information and services.   
Those organizations who did have exit strategies articulated them early on in the process, as part of the core value 
proposition to the operator partner and its clients.  For partnerships of limited duration based on a specific period of 
performance or time-limited exclusivity clause, an exit strategy becomes especially important to the program design to 
ensure it includes the necessary steps for transferal or shut-down of the service.  For international social sector 
organizations approaching operators with time-limited partnerships based on donor funding for a specific period, the 
question of ‘what happens next?’ should drive both the program design and the local partner selection, to ensure there 
is a capable, committed partner on the ground who can step in to play the international organization’s role once their 
donor funding runs out. 
Some best practices cited in interviews were: 
• Build multi-usage potential into the program’s investments such as agent networks or technical platforms that 
can be used for other services upon project completion.  For a discussion of this model, see the D-Tree/Etisalat 
snapshot. 
• Have an articulated end goal and plan accordingly once you get near the end of the project – for example, if the 
end goal is to embed the service within the operator, plan for and execute the necessary staffing, training and 
business development to ensure it happens. 
• Include third party service providers who can offer value added products on a commercial basis that are in line 
with the objectives of the program and cultivate an ecosystem around its operation. 
14 
Mutual value, mutual gain: best practices from successful social sector partnerships with mobile network operators 
GSMA mWomen also encourages social sector organizations who have successfully partnered with mobile operators 
to share your experiences!  Please contact GSMA mWomen (www.mwomen.org) to be included in our deployment 
tracker and have your work amplified through a snapshot, case study or other Insight publication.  
15 
Mutual value, mutual gain: best practices from successful social sector partnerships with mobile network operators 
Appendix 
Partnership Snapshots 
Snapshot 1: TechnoServe and Vodafone Group 
Connected Farmer Alliance 
Implementation dates: 2013 - 2016 
Geographic Coverage: Tanzania, Kenya and Mozambique 
Partners: TechnoServe, USAID and Vodafone Group 
 The Connected Farmer Alliance (CFA), a three-year US$10m partnership between Vodafone, USAID and 
TechnoServe, designs, develops and deploys gender-inclusive, commercially-viable mobile solutions for the 
agriculture sector.  Across three markets (Kenya, Tanzania, Mozambique), the partnership will enable 500,000 
smallholder farmers to increase their productivity and income, and will offer agribusinesses the ability to increase their 
revenues.  CFA works with farming communities and supply chain business partners across the three countries to 
develop and scale mobile applications that will enable rural households to make and receive payments securely, 
access other financial services such as micro-insurance, and connect to local and multinational agribusinesses.  
 The CFA is currently facilitating communications and transactions for approximately 7,900 smallholder farmers and 
four agribusiness clients. In Tanzania, the program is working with a flower seed exporter and a rice processor to 
facilitate management and disbursement of loans to farmers and outgrowers. In Kenya, the CFA is working with a 
multinational beverage firm and a dairy cooperative to manage information and communications with approximately 
7,000 farmers. 
• Motivation and initial approach:  TechnoServe’s belief, derived from previous work in mAgri, is that projects or 
services embedded in a private sector firm, like a local opco, are more likely to be sustainable and to continue 
delivering impact after donor funding ends.  This focus on sustainability led them to approach the Vodafone Group 
after an initial encounter at a conference that established a mutual interest around the development of mAgri 
services.  TechnoServe listened carefully in their first meeting with Vodafone and created an internal working group 
that developed the first draft of the project concept. 
 
• Operator value proposition: TechnoServe knew Vodafone was looking to engage in the mAgri space, and put 
together a commercial value proposition around an agriculture-focused holistic mobile service that included 
content, mobile money integration and business-to-business services, run exclusively on the Vodafone network.  
TechnoServe positioned Vodafone as an innovator and market leader in the mAgri space in their pitch, focusing on 
both the reputational and commercial benefits of the service. 
 
17 
Mutual value, mutual gain: best practices from successful social sector partnerships with mobile network operators 
• Implementation: While the initial engagement with USAID and Vodafone Group was effective and quickly 
achieved with an aligned vision at the leadership level, engagement with the country-level counterparts in USAID 
and Vodafone moved more slowly.  In retrospect, a comprehensive plan for engaging the local partners, including 
clear senior contacts at the organization and an MOU defining explicit roles and responsibilities might have 
accelerated the initial phases of execution.  The full negotiation timeline took just over a year.  High-touch 
relationship management, including weekly meetings at the group level, biweekly meetings with the local opcos, 
and monthly meetings with all local stakeholders, smoothed the implementation process.  Additionally, clear, early 
alignment with Vodafone, including explicit articulation of the workplan and rollout strategy and goals, facilitated a 
successful ongoing partnership.   
 
• Exit: TechnoServe’s articulated goal is to embed the products within the operator. When the time comes to close-
down the project, they will facilitate that process via extensive training/capacity building of the opco staff and 
support their near-term business development activities.  In addition, they aspire to crowd-in third party service 
providers who can offer value added products on a commercial basis that are in line with the objectives of the 
program. 
 
Snapshot 2: HNI  and Airtel 
321 Service 
Implementation dates: 2010 - Present 
Geographic Coverage: Madagascar, Malawi 
Partners: HNI & Airtel 
 In 2010, HNI launched a free, on-demand Interactive Voice Response (IVR) and SMS information service 
in Madagascar in collaboration with Airtel and the Government. A caller using an Airtel mobile phone dials 
“3-2-1” and follows a directory of choices to choose from over 350 messages on 6 broad topic areas (agriculture, public 
health, micro-finance, water and sanitation, land title and family planning). HNI has developed the message content in 
collaboration with local and international experts, with partners such as the Government of Madagascar, USAID, Better 
U Foundation, Catholic Relief Services, Population Services International, and the Merck Foundation. Since 2010, 
more than 2 million unique users have placed 7,100,000 calls and requested 25,800,000 SMS (the service now 
averages 200,000 calls and 700,000 SMS per month). In March 2014, HNI signed a contract with Airtel Malawi to 
provide the same service in Malawi.   
• Motivation and initial approach: HNI’s mission is to provide organizations and individuals the opportunity to use 
ICT in innovative, productive, and sustainable ways.  HNI sought a partnership that traded content for access to an 
operator’s subscriber base. They decided to approach all the operators in Madagascar, since it is a small market 
and thus easier to get access than in a larger market.  To prepare for the first meeting, HNI put together a financial 
18 
Mutual value, mutual gain: best practices from successful social sector partnerships with mobile network operators 
pitch and conducted a financial modeling exercise to show the partnership was in the business interest of the 
operator. 
 
• Operator Value Proposition:  Airtel was more focused on the VAS HNI offered as a solution for churn rather than 
for any of the financials HNI put together in the pitch.  Airtel also wanted to partner on an exclusive basis.  Airtel is 
the market leader with the largest rural subscriber base and most rural network coverage in Madagascar.   
Internally, HNI struggled with the exclusivity demand and the potential compromise of their social mission.  In the 
end, they viewed exclusivity as a necessary trade-off and were able to time-limit the exclusivity and negotiate other 
concessions around marketing and the addition of access to other network channels like USSD for content sharing 
and service marketing to the project’s benefit.  
 
• Implementation: HNI organizes “content committees” that meet on a regular basis which are comprised of 15+ 
local content-delivering organizations.  Government officials are often present and help craft the content and 
approve it for distribution.  This streamlines the project for the operator, so Airtel doesn’t have to manage the local 
organizations or committees themselves and benefits from HNI’s process management with a constant supply of 
relevant, fresh and localized content.  HNI curates the content and crafts it to the channel, then provides the 
hardware and software to enable service delivery.  While HNI faced unexpected initial technical and logistics 
challenges to get the right server shipped and installed, and also continues to spend more time than expected 
coordinating the organizations providing content, dealing with disagreement around content and managing key 
content-oriented relationships, this process is undoubtedly a successful model for content-oriented, multi-
stakeholder partnerships. 
 
• Exit: HNI hopes that Airtel will hopefully operate the service indefinitely.  Their exit strategy is to get Airtel to feel 
like and act like the project is 100% their service and take full ownership of its operation in the long-term. 
 
Note: HNI is a current GSMA mWomen Innovation Grantee for the creation of new content module focused on women 
for their 321 service in Madagascar. More information on the HNI grant can be found here. 
  
19 
Mutual value, mutual gain: best practices from successful social sector partnerships with mobile network operators 
 
Snapshot 3: Souktel and Wataniya (Ooredoo) 
English Language VAS Services 
Implementation date: March 2014 - indefinite 
Geographic Coverage: Palestine 
Partners: Souktel International Inc.; Wataniya Telecom; British Council 
 Souktel, Wataniya Telecom, and British Council have agreed to work together on the delivery of mobile 
learning (mLearning) services to offer Palestinian mobile users a cost-effective channel to access resources for 
improving their professional English language and work-readiness skills. The mobile service offered through Wataniya 
Telecom mobile network in the Palestinian Territories includes the following components: 
• A weekly SMS subscription service for English vocabulary and work-readiness advice, priced at low-premium11 
subscription rates, and 
• An on-demand mobile quiz service on the topics of English vocabulary and work readiness, priced at low-premium 
SMS rates and offering a chance to win weekly and/or monthly prizes. 
 The aim of this mobile service is to provide high-quality educational content that is directly relevant to the needs and 
interests of a major population segment -- youth. By offering the content in the form of two differentiated sub-services 
(push subscription and on-demand quizzes), the users have the opportunity not only to learn but also to test their 
knowledge interactively.  
• Motivation and initial approach: Souktel ran a survey of their mobile service user base in Palestine that found 
that youth users desired training on social media and business English.  Souktel sought an operator partner to run 
the new services as they recognized a need for marketing and outreach they couldn’t do on their own to fully scale 
the services.  Internally, there was initial debate around the trade-off between exclusivity and the ability for their 
userbase to access the content service equitably, but Souktel finally decided that an operator partner would be 
able to deliver content to far more youth than any other partner, even on an exclusive basis.  In deciding to align 
with an operator, they also looked at the potential to scale to bigger markets beyond Palestine through the 
partnership.  Because Palestine is a small market, it is easier to approach an operator there, and Souktel had 
contacts at Wataniya through an investor, so they used those contacts to get a first meeting. 
 
                                                                   
11 Low-premium subscription rates indicate a premium SMS rate slightly above standard SMS charges. 
20 
Mutual value, mutual gain: best practices from successful social sector partnerships with mobile network operators 
• Operator Value Proposition: Souktel brought both content and product development as their value proposition to 
the operator partnership, making a hard business case around churn reduction and premium VAS revenue.  In a 
‘hub and spoke’ partnership management model, the British Council, Souktel’s content provider, provides the 
educational content in an SMS-ready format to Souktel.  Souktel’s role is to design, develop, and operate the 
technical platform that enables the mobile service to function successfully on the mobile operator’s network, 
shielding the operator from the burden of having to run the service themselves and manage content provision. 
 
• Implementation: n/a (launching in Q3 2014) 
 
• Exit: Souktel has an option to continue beyond the contract period, using a standard VAS agreement template. 
 
 
Snapshot 4: D-tree International & Etisalat 
Safer Deliveries - Mobile money transfer service for traditional birth attendants 
Implementation dates: October 2011 – October 2014 
Geographic Coverage: Unguja and Pemba, Zanzibar, United Republic of Tanzania 
Partners: D-tree International, Etisalat, Ministry of Health, Zanzibar 
Funder: The Bill & Melinda Gates Foundation, USAID (through Jhpiego) 
 
In Zanzibar, half of all pregnant women deliver from home and only one third of mothers and newborns receive timely 
postnatal checkups. Home deliveries can, in part, be made safer by assuring the provision of adequate care.  D-tree 
International, in collaboration with Etisalat Group and their local mobile service provider, Zantel, is utilizing mobile 
technology to meet this challenge through the combination of mobile decision support, data storage, on-line banking 
and communications on a single device at the point of care. Safer Deliveries is a complete suite of services enabling 
traditional birth attendants (TBAs) and midwives to ensure safer pregnancies and deliveries. This service not only 
enables health workers to quickly and accurately identify obstetric emergencies, but allows them to contact pre-
screeneded taxi drivers and also features Ezy Pesa, a mobile banking service, which allows them to pay for the 
emergency transportation for the pregnant woman to a health facility where she can receive appropriate care. 
• Motivation and Initial approach: D-tree knew they needed operator support for a number of grant applications, so 
they made calls to operators and were fortunate – the VP for VAS at Etisalat was visiting in Dar es Salaam and 
they secured a short meeting with him, along with the head of Mobile Commerce for Zantel.  In the geographies D-
21 
Mutual value, mutual gain: best practices from successful social sector partnerships with mobile network operators 
tree sought to work in, Zantel was the majority mobile operator and thus their involvement was crucial for D-tree’s 
program vision.  D-tree constructed their initial pitch to work from two angles: first, a publicity component, including 
the global visibility of the partners, the prominent funders, and interaction with the Ministry of Health, and second, a 
commercial component, including a mobile money and national health system integration.  Zantel was interested in 
the D-tree value proposition and their vision of how mobile money could complement mHealth and saw an 
additional benefit in providing crucial health services to their consumer base. 
 
• Operator Value Proposition: This partnership is more of a mixed CSR/commercial play compared with some of 
the other profiled partnerships.  D-tree did not pitch a revenue-based value proposition for the partnership. Instead, 
they focused on a strong business case in terms of marketing and visibility in rural, hard to reach areas, as well as 
with key governmental agencies.  The VP from headquarters was specifically interested in a ‘bottom line’ analysis, 
so D-tree structured their value proposition around Zantel being at the core of the national health system in the 
country. If you have a smartphone in each health clinic running on their network, Zantel could then envision the 
entire public health system running on their network.  The partnership was signed within two months, though actual 
implementation took longer due to shipping all equipment from the Dubai-based headquarters. 
 
• Implementation: One of the assumptions D-tree made was that there was clear communication within 
Etisalat, both between group headquarters in Dubai and the country-level headquarters in Dar es Salaam and 
between Dar es Salaam and the local office in Zanzibar.  However, they quickly realized they were dealing with 
three different organizations and needed to lead communications between the three groups, particularly at the 
frontline level.  Additionally, D-tree found aligning and coordinating with Etisalat on external messaging and events 
was sometimes challenging – the two partners often had varying needs and visions when it came to the public 
relations role of other stakeholders like the Ministry of Health (MoH).  D-tree managed key stakeholder 
relationships by strategically positioning the partners in relation to each other – i.e., being very positive about the 
partnership with Etisalat when meeting with the Ministry of Health and vice-versa, praising their cooperation and 
dedication to the project and working hard to find other ways for Etisalat and the MoH to partner. D-tree also 
approached their stakeholder management with an agenda to build an ecosystem around mHealth in Zanzibar with 
D-tree as a key player in it. Field visits also enabled local partners to share their expertise in dealing with logistical 
problems and built buy-in for stakeholders at the community level. 
 
• Exit: D-tree specifically designed the project so Etisalat can continue to use the mobile money agents they 
established for the project for other services.  Additionally, the robust relationship D-tree facilitated between the 
MoH and Etisalat, as well as the community of practice developed around mHealth and other mHealth projects, 
have fostered larger interest in the sector with more donor money and projects following the D-tree model. 
22 
Mutual value, mutual gain: best practices from successful social sector partnerships with mobile network operators 
Key pieces of advice for social sector organizations from the interviewees: 
1. Communicate clearly your willingness to be flexible in accommodating the commercial needs of the partner; 
acknowledge that there will be tensions and identify forums and processes to successfully work through 
them. 
2. Identify upfront the potential commercial benefits for the operator and social benefits for external 
participants/service users and quantify where possible to ensure that the level of investment in terms of 
human and financial resources is in proportion to the respective benefits for all. 
3. Leverage staff that has private sector experience to ensure smooth interactions with the operator. 
4. Make it very clear you’re going to work with the first operator that says yes in order to create a sense of 
urgency around the project. 
5. Communicate concisely – in the corporate world, time is very constrained. 
6. If pursuing CSR dollars, present the operator with a menu of options for how they can engage with you. 
7. Don’t assume that because you’ve gotten one person’s buy-in at the C-level that everyone else at the 
operator understands the vision and can provide the same level of support – you’ll still need to do a lot of 
internal championing and dot connecting within the operator to get to where you need to be for a successful 
launch.  
23 
Mutual value, mutual gain: best practices from successful social sector partnerships with mobile network operators 
 
 
About the GSMA 
The GSMA represents the interests of mobile operators worldwide. Spanning more than 220 countries, the GSMA unites 
nearly 800 of the world’s mobile operators with 250 companies in the broader mobile ecosystem, including handset and 
device makers, software companies, equipment providers and Internet companies, as well as organisations in industry 
sectors such as financial services, healthcare, media, transport and utilities. The GSMA also produces industry-leading 
events such as Mobile World Congress and Mobile Asia Expo.   
  
For more information, please visit the GSMA corporate website at www.gsma.com.  
Follow the GSMA on Twitter: @GSMA. 
 
About Mobile for Development - Serving the underserved through mobile 
Mobile for Development brings together our mobile operator members, the wider mobile industry and the development 
community to drive commercial mobile services for underserved people in emerging markets. We identify opportunities for 
social and economic impact and stimulate the development of scalable, life-enhancing mobile services. 
 
For more information, please visit the GSMA M4D website at: www.gsma.com/mobilefordevelopment 
Follow GSMA M4D on Twitter: @GSMAm4d 
 
About the GSMA mWomen Programme 
The GSMA mWomen Programme aims to increase women’s access to and use of mobile phones and life-enhancing 
mobile services in low- and middle-income countries.  The programme objectives are to encourage the mobile industry to 
serve resource-poor women, increase the availability of relevant mobile services, and promote innovation. The GSMA 
mWomen Programme aims to increase women’s access to and use of mobile phones and life-enhancing mobile services 
in low- and middle-income countries.   
 
Visit www.gsma.com/mwomen to learn more about how to participate. 
Follow GSMA mWomen on Twitter: @GSMAmWomen     |    Email: mwomen@gsma.com 
 
 
The GSMA mWomen Global Development Alliance is a programme in partnership with: 
 
 
24 
