 
CHILD PROFILING SURVEY 
Providing critical MNCH services to women at the bottom of the pyramid  
less prone to data entry errors 
than traditional methods of data 
collection, entry and analysis. The 
country’s mobile phone network 
coverage of over 80% and 73% 
penetration would allow these 
technologies to reach even the 
most marginalized and rural 
beneficiaries. Pact Swaziland, 
therefore, began building the 
capacity of six civil society 
organizations to use mHealth to 
enhance service delivery and data 
collection procedures as a way to 
improve their monitoring and 
evaluation systems and strengthen 
the evidence behind their program 
implementation. They supported 
these organizations in developing 
concept notes around six 
strategies for mobile phones usage 
in specific programs. This was 
followed by tailored technical 
Civil society groups play a critical role in the fight assistance to implement each strategy, including assisting 
against HIV and AIDS, especially in countries such as organizations in selecting appropriate mobile platforms, 
Swaziland where the HIV prevalence is 31% among developing cost-analyses comparing paper-based surveys 
adults 18 to 49 years old. However, weaknesses and mobile phone data collection, conducting training on 
among these groups, including challenges with time, platforms, helping to troubleshoot any issues that arose 
staff, funds, knowledge and systems to effectively during implementation, and supporting use of data for 
collect and report data, have led to a critical need for decision making. The focus of this case study is on two 
capacity building. One of the key capacity challenges of the six organizations, Save the Children Swaziland 
Pact Swaziland identified in local organizations is their (SCSWD) and the Coordinating Assembly of NGOs 
limited ability to use their data for effective program (CANGO).  
planning and budgeting. Since 2010, Pact Swaziland has 
been implementing the Community REACH program Implementation date: May 2013 
to provide capacity building services to civil society 
organizations to help them deliver effective HIV 
prevention, care, treatment and impact mitigation About Child Profiling Survey 
services. Additionally, they are focusing on In May 2013, Pact Swaziland began piloting mobile data 
capacitating local organizations to use improved collection technologies in partnership with SCSWD and 
monitoring and evaluation strategies for evidence- CANGO. The Mobenzi platform was selected for use in 
based service delivery  a child profiling exercise of 10,244 orphans and 
vulnerable children (OVC). The survey looked at four 
In reviewing a variety of mHealth platforms, Pact key service needs: child protection, education, child 
Swaziland noted that the costs of mHealth technologies abuse and psychosocial support needs. Through this 
were generally less expensive, less time consuming and survey, SCSWD, with support from Pact Swaziland and 
22 mHEALTH COMPENDIUM   |   VOLUME 3 
 
CHILD PROFILING SURVEY 
Providing critical MNCH services to women at the bottom of the pyramid   DATA COLLECTION 
CANGO, gathered data for key programmatic and trends are not available until several months later 
budgetary decisions to improve and provide targeted, 
 Most mHealth platforms have built in data security 
quality services to OVCs throughout Swaziland. The 
systems to ensure that lost mobile phones do not 
pilot project used Android phones to collect data. GPS 
compromise confidentiality of the data  
coordinates were also collected to map service 
coverage and target areas with the highest needs.  
Conclusion 
Evaluation and Results Civil society organizations often do not have systems in 
place to track data that will demonstrate the outcomes 
Of the 10,244 children surveyed, nearly 3,000 children 
of their community and household level interventions. 
were orphans, while 7,284 were determined to be 
These organizations can be capacitated to use innovative 
vulnerable. Additionally, 2,993 children did not have 
mHealth technologies to solve their data collection, 
birth certificates or national IDs. The survey also 
reporting, and usage challenges in such a way that 
assessed school attendance, showing 331 children had 
program evaluation becomes integrated with program 
dropped out of school primarily because they could not 
delivery. As a result, the body of evidence supporting 
pay school fees or became pregnant or ill. The survey 
the important and unique role that civil society 
also found that 386 children had been abused, of which 
organizations play in the HIV response will grow and 
224 had not yet reported the abuse.  
become better understood.  
As a result of these data, SCSWD realigned its budget 
-------------------------------------------------------- 
to cover the programmatic and administrative costs of 
providing targeted services to the children identified in Geographic Coverage: Swaziland 
the survey. Having GPS data at the household level 
allowed for budgeting of staff time and fuel costs for Implementation Partners: Pact Swaziland, Save the 
providing the services, as well as key programmatic Children Swaziland, Coordinating Assembly of NGOs 
costs such as assisting children to obtain their necessary 
Funder: USAID 
national documents. SCSWD was also able to redesign 
its program to provide specialized support for school re Contact Information:  
-entry of children who dropped out due to lack of Pact Swaziland: Nicole Miller, Country Director 
school fees or pregnancy. Lastly, they developed a plan (+26824045579, nmiller@pactworld.org) 
to provide health care linkages and home visit support Save the Children Swaziland: Dumisani Mnisi, 
for children who reported dropping out of school due Executive Director (+26824047731, 
to illness. dmnisi@savethechildren.org.sz) 
CANGO: Emmanuel Ndlangamandla, Executive Director 
(+26824044721, director@cango.org.sz) 
Lessons Learned USAID: Natalie Kruse-Levy, Country Director, USAID 
 Training and on-going mentorship of civil society Swaziland (+26824043100, nkruse-levy@usaid.gov) 
organizations during the start-up phase is essential 
to ensure that staff are fully capacitated to integrate References: 
the mHealth technologies into their routine data 1. Skovdal et al: Community Groups as Critical Enablers of the HIV 
collection and monitoring activities Response in Zimbabwe. BMC Health Services Research 2013, 
13: 195. 
 Real time data allows civil society organizations to 2. Swaziland HIV Incidence Measurement Survey (SHIMS) First 
make quick, evidence-based programmatic Findings Report, November 2012.  
adjustments without having to wait for the end of a 
long data collection period where summary data and 
  mHEALTH COMPENDIUM   |   VOLUME 3 23 
