Enhancing event-based disease surveillance 
and response efforts in Kenya through SMS 
reporting and web portal dashboards
Photo by Takeshi Kuno
54  n  MSOS 
mSOS
Mobile SMS-based disease outbreak alert system (mSOS) 
enhanced timely notification—and the technology can be used to 
enhance disease survellance in resource-limited settings. 
Disease outbreaks pose serious public health risks worldwide as seen in the recent SARS, Ebola, and Zika epidemics. 
Resource-limited settings lack strong disease surveillance mechanisms to quickly detect, diagnose, and contain 
outbreaks.1 This hinders a nation’s ability to fully comply with the World Health Organization (WHO)’s International 
Health Regulations (IHR 2005) and the Integrated Disease Surveillance and Response (IDSR) strategies.2-4
In Kenya, as in other African countries, paper-based reports or ad hoc information from the health facilities reach the 
authorities at the national and sub-national levels late, which in turn limits abilities to respond in a timely manner 
to control the outbreaks.4 To overcome these challenges, the Ministry of Health (MOH) and the Japan International 
Cooperation Agency, Japan Agency for Medical Research and Development, Science and Technology Research 
Partnership for Sustainable Development (JICA-AMED SATREPS) project piloted the mSOS (mobile SMS-based disease 
outbreak alert system) in 2012–2014.5-7 
A randomized controlled trial was implemented, which showed that mSOS enhanced timely notification and that the 
technology can be used to enhance disease surveillance in resource-limited settings.8,9 Based on recommendations from 
the stakeholders, a technical working group was formed at MOH, and the system is currently undertaking a series of 
modifications before a nation-wide rollout.10-13
About mSOS
Mobile SMS-based disease outbreak alert system (mSOS) 1. mSOS (text messaging): The text messaging function is a formatted text-message system that allows real-time allows health facility workers to input formatted text 
communication between health facility workers and disease messaging with patient-level information of suspected 
surveillance coordinators at the sub-county, county, and disease outbreaks. A text message is immediately sent 
national levels in line with the IDSR guidelines.5-7 to relevant health authorities at the national and sub-
At the time of the pilot, the IDSR guidelines recommended national levels with information on the place, time, and 
health facility workers completing and submitting paper- details of a patient with suspected disease that needs to 
based forms to the sub-county-level disease surveillance  be reported within 24 hours.
coordinators, and sub-county-level disease surveillance 2. mSOS web portal (dashboard): mSOS web portal 
coordinators electronically transmitting information to displays a dashboard with patient-level information, bar 
higher-level managers at the county and national-levels. graphs with cumulative incidents, and hot spot maps 
Sub-county disease surveillance coordinators are the first- indicating the health facilities that reported the cases. 
level responders to the reporting facilities. mSOS tried to The relevant authorities at the national and sub-national 
eliminate redundancies of data entry at multiple levels, and levels can also enter the time and details of actions taken 
to make information-sharing instant at all levels.4 The system on the notifications sent.
consists of two components: text messaging function, and 
web portal (see Figure 1, next page).
mHEALTH COMPENDIUM  SPECIAL EDITION 2016  n  55
Figure 1.  
Structure of the mSOS Integrated Disease Surveillance and Response Mobile System 
Twelve diseases and conditions were picked for the pilot infectious, zoonotic, foodborne, chemical, radio nuclear, or 
from the immediately notifiable diseases list in IDSR. The caused by an unknown condition). The pilot was implement-
list included adverse events following immunization (AEFI), ed in two counties: Busia and Kajiado. Busia County borders 
anthrax, cholera, dengue fever, Guinea worm, measles, neo- Uganda by the Victoria Lake basin with 7 sub-counties, and 
natal tetanus, plague, Rift Valley fever, viral hemorrhagic fe- Kajiado County borders Tanzania with 5 sub-counties.8-14
ver, yellow fever, and any public health event of concern (e.g, 
Program Design Process
The design process took 1 year: 6 months in conceptual- circulated to all members.
ization, 3 months in programming, and 3 months in beta 3. Contracting: Strathmore University Faculty of 
testing. The implementation period was 6 months. information technology (IT) was identified as the 
1. Conceptualization: mSOS was conceptualized in institution to perform programming for mSOS because 
mid- to late-2012. The JICA expert conducted informal of past experience working with the MOH. One of the 
interviews with MOH employees and workers in health servers at the MOH was identified to host mSOS. Due 
facilities to objectively understand the practice and to strict regulations by the Kenyan telecommunication 
implementation of IDSR guidelines and bottlenecks of authorities, a contract for a toll-free number was signed 
disease surveillance activities on the ground. with a premium rate service provider (PRSP) and not 
directly with a telecommunication company. 
2. Technical working group: A technical working group 
was formed at the MOH Disease Surveillance and 4. Programming: Several students at Strathmore 
Response Unit (DSRU), and mSOS was developed University Faculty of IT undertook mSOS 
in early 2013. The technical working group consisted programming as part of their internship. Students and 
of the head of DSRU, managers in charge of national their supervisor regularly attended the technical working 
disease surveillance and data management, the JICA group meetings to understand user requirements, and 
expert, and experts from the WHO and Kenya Medical presented progress in the technical working group 
Research Institute (KEMRI). Minutes were written and meetings. 
56  n  MSOS 
5. Stabilizing the system: After repeated prototyping of 6. Pilot implementation: mSOS pilot was implemented 
the system, mSOS was pretested in a few health facilities for 6 months, October 2013–April 2014. A 1-day 
in Nairobi in early 2013, and several bugs and issues training or refresher course for IDSR guidelines and a 
with power outages were identified. A tracking system 1-day training on mSOS was conducted in September 
was programmed in order to monitor downtime, and and October 2013 for 67 health facility in-charges in 
redundant backup was created. Busia and Kajiado counties. All 12 sub-county disease 
surveillance coordinators were also trained on how to 
troubleshoot and use the mSOS web portal. 
Growth in Scale 
After the implementation of the pilot, and before the results 3. mSOS Ebola (KEMRI Laboratory module): Results 
were analyzed, DSRU recommended mSOS to be modified on the laboratory confirmation of the patient serum 
as mSOS Ebola.15-17 samples were updated using the mSOS Ebola web 
portal, and text messages were automatically delivered to 
1. mSOS Ebola (text messaging): When a patient senior management at DSRU and a few policy decision-
suspected of having Ebola was identified by the Ebola makers at the MOH. 
Rapid Response Team, patient-level information was After mSOS Ebola was implemented, the mSOS 
sent through formatted text-messaging using mSOS stakeholders’ meeting was held to disseminate the 
Ebola. The messages with the detailed information on preliminary results of the pilot.
the time, place, and nature of the suspected patient 
case were delivered to senior management at DSRU 4. mSOS pilot dissemination: At the stakeholders’ 
and a few policy decision-makers at the MOH. An meeting, mSOS was very well received. Health workers 
alert message was also sent to the designated KEMRI appreciated the ease of use of the system and rapid 
laboratory workers. feedback from their managers through mSOS.
11-12 
Health managers especially appreciated the real-time 
2. mSOS Ebola (web portal): Patient-level information information sharing. The system was unanimously 
on the suspected cases, response action conducted, recommended for integration into the national health 
and laboratory confirmation were displayed on the information and management system, specifically to the 
password-protected web portal dashboard. open-source District Health Information Software 2 
(DHIS2) platform.18 
Sample mSOS alert messaging (left) and web portal dashboard (right)
mHEALTH COMPENDIUM  SPECIAL EDITION 2016  n  57
5. Buy-in from the MOH: Due to the overwhelming 7. Establishment of mSOS/IDSR Weekly Mobile 
recommendations at the stakeholders’ meeting on the Reporting System: A new enhanced version of the 
ability of mSOS to quickly adapt to the needs on the mSOS pilot, mSOS/IDSR Weekly Mobile Reporting 
ground (as seen by mSOS Ebola), the scale-up of mSOS System was developed through the technical working 
was included in the Cabinet Secretary’s Performance group in late 2015. This new system combines 
Contract 2015/16, a contract between the MOH event-based and indicator-based disease surveillance 
Cabinet Secretary and the President of Kenya.19 information. Once a suspected disease outbreak or 
6. Technical working group for scale-up efforts: A public health event is detected at the health facility 
technical working group coordinated by DSRU includes level, information is sent through the system to a central 
multiple units within the MOH, such as the Health server at the MOH. The central server then sends alert 
Information System; Information, Communication, messages to multiple officers responsible for outbreak 
Technology; eHealth; Zoonotic Disease; and Disaster and disaster response. The list of diseases and conditions 
Response units. It also includes multiple international is expanded to not only suspected disease outbreaks of 
partners, such as the WHO [SIKIWIS], Centers for immediate concern, such as cholera and measles, but 
Disease Control and Prevention (CDC) [mHealth also public health events (event-based) and routine 
Kenya, I-TECH], JICA [JICA-AMED SATREPS disease information (indicator-based), including diseases 
20
project], and United States Agency for International such as malaria.  
Development (USAID) [AfyaInfo project].13 
Evaluation and Results
As part of the cluster randomized controlled trial to test stratifying health facilities by sub-counties and randomly 
the effectiveness of the system, the research study included selecting intervention facilities from each stratum by a 1:1 
quantitative and qualitative assessments of the current IDSR ratio. Sixty-eight facilities were in the control group and 67 
guidelines implementation, and the impact of mSOS imple- were in the intervention group. A total of 65 health facilities 
mentation.21 in the control group and 66 health facilities in the interven-
A baseline assessment was conducted in June 2013, includ- tion group were assessed during the follow-up survey. 
ing retrospective data for the six-months before the interven- The quantitative analysis included examining the reporting 
tion (December 2012–May 2013), reviewing all information rates comparing paper-based and mSOS reports. A retro-
from outpatient, inpatient, and maternal and child health spective review at the baseline survey showed that 36 cases 
registers for the 12 diseases and conditions selected for the (17 cases in the control group and 19 cases in the inter-
study. In addition, in-depth interviews with health facility vention group) required immediate notification. Only one 
in-charges and sub-county disease surveillance coordinators paper-based report in the control group was completed. 
were completed. A post-intervention survey, including doc- During the post-intervention survey, we found that 130 cases 
uments review, and in-depth interviews with health facility in the intervention group and 39 cases in the control group 
in-charges and sub-county disease surveillance coordinators required immediate notification. One paper-based report in 
were completed in May 2014. In addition, a focus group the control group was completed, and 25 cases were report-
discussion was conducted at the national level. ed through mSOS in the intervention group. The results 
A total of 153 health facilities were assessed for eligibility, showed that the health facilities that used mSOS achieved 
and 142 completed the baseline survey in the selected 12 more timely notifications than those that did not (+16.7%). 
sub-counties in Busia and Kajiado counties. Health facilities The results of the evaluation were published in Emerging 
8
included public, private, faith-based, and non-governmen- Infectious Diseases in April 2016.  
tal organization-owned facilities at all levels of care. A total Analyses are currently ongoing for qualitative data collected 
of 135 health facilities attended the IDSR training and the during field interviews and focus group discussions.
randomization was conducted during the IDSR training by 
58  n  MSOS 
Lessons Learned in Program Implementation and Scaling 
Lessons learned from mSOS pilot implementation were that  only pilot the system, but also to tie into current disease 
timing, leadership, and feedback are important components surveillance efforts within Kenya’s MOH.
of the implementation success.
2. Leadership: Strong leadership by the DSRU, which 
1. Timing: mSOS was conceptualized, piloted, and promoted buy-in from the national government, 
disseminated during a time when the MOH was county governments, and international partners, 
exploring ways to move from paper-based reporting to lead to mSOS being recommended for scale-up and 
electronic reporting. It was also a time when various integration into the national health information and 
outbreaks occurred within Kenya and around the management system. DSRU included mSOS in its 
world, most notably Ebola in West Africa. At the same work plans, and staff members from the unit helped 
time, mobile phone penetration skyrocketed within support the system. DSRU also worked with the Health 
the country, even in hard-to-reach areas. Compliance Information Systems (HIS), ICT, and eHealth units and 
with IHR 2005 was also a task that the MOH needed their partners to assure that the maintenance could be 
to address. Overall, there was an increased awareness conducted within the ministry through DHIS2. This in 
and willingness of the ministry to look at a mobile turn would help mSOS be a sustainable system. 
phone solution that could enhance disease surveillance 3. Feedback: Inclusion of the opinions from all aspects, 
and compliance with IHR 2005. The scale-up was also such as the end-user, programmers, and health managers 
suggested at a time when the MOH is addressing a were an important component of the development and 
number of related efforts including: trying to integrate implementation of mSOS pilot. Repeated pretesting 
all information systems within DHIS2, preparing an and informal feedback from users helped mitigate 
electronic nationwide master facility list, conducting system abruption and solve bugs in a timely manner. 
a review of event-based surveillance, proposing In addition, engagements with various stakeholders 
mobile phone-based indicator surveillance, holding through the technical working group helped mSOS 
various taskforce meetings for national outbreaks, and be programmed and evolve as a flexible tool to offer 
construction of an Emergency Operation Centre at the local solutions to local problems. The large stakeholder 
MOH. mSOS was able to leverage these timings to not meeting and users’ feedback helped move mSOS into 
the next stage. 
mHEALTH COMPENDIUM  SPECIAL EDITION 2016  n  59
Future Plans 
The MOH envisions that real-time reporting and response to notifications that need further investigation. The 
through the mSOS/IDSR Weekly Mobile Reporting System system will serve as an early warning mechanism, whereby 
will reduce lag time for notification and response to out- analysis on trends could inform potential outbreaks and 
breaks and disasters, and minimize morbidity and mortal- mitigate morbidity and mortality in the nation.
ity in Kenya. The system will continue to improve as the 
5. Expansion of users: In the future, the system will be 
MOH rolls it out to all levels, including all 47 counties, 
all sub-counties, and the 7,500 health facilities across the expanded to the community level and to the public 
nation. where suspected cases can be reported and filtered automatically by the system. 
1. Stakeholders meeting: A stakeholders meeting was 6. Paperless reporting: Once the system is rolled out to 
held in December 2015 and pretesting was completed the whole nation, it may also replace the current paper-
with the relevant MOH units and international based reporting guidelines in the future.   n
partners. 
2. Training: In early 2016, national-level officers in the 
MOH attended a training of trainers (TOT) workshop. Snapshot: mSOS
Since February 2016, a series of TOT workshops Geographic Kenya
including county and sub-county disease surveillance Coverage Pilot: 67 health facilities
coordinators (DSCs) and health records information Scale-up: 7,500 health facilities
officers (HRIOs) have been ongoing by the MOH Implementation 2013 to present
with funding support from international partners. The Dates
training materials, including manuals and slides, were Implementation Ministry of Health (multiple units), Kenya
drafted and printed. As of April 2016, approximately Partners SATREPS ProjectJapan International Cooperation Agency (JICA)
350 national, county, and sub-county DSCs and Japan Agency for Medical Research and 
HRIOs were trained in half of the regions in Kenya.13  Development (AMED)
A launch ceremony is scheduled in 2016 after TOT is Strathmore University Faculty of Information 
Technology
completed at the national, county, and sub-county levels.
Donor(s) World Health Organization
3. Expansion of modes: The system would be modified to Centers for Disease Control 
smartphone- and feature phone-based applications so that USAID
health workers could use their personal phones to report. JICAAMED
4. Emergency Operation Centre: The system will be Contact Dr. Daniel Langat, Disease Surveillance and 
linked to the national Emergency Operation Centre for Information Response Unit, Ministry of Health, Kenya,  
24/7 analysis of information and prompt response action langat4@yahoo.com
60  n  MSOS 
References & Additional Resources
1. Gates, B., The next epidemic—lessons from Ebola. N Engl J Med, 2015. 372(15): p. 1381-4.
2. World Health Organization, International Health Regulations (2005), 2008.
3. Kasolo, F., et al., IDSR as a platform for implementing IHR in African countries. Biosecur Bioterror, 2013. 11(3): p. 163-9.
4. Ministry of Public Health and Sanitation. Integrated Disease Surveillance and Response in Kenya: Technical Guidelines 2012, 2012.
5. Ministry of Health Disease Surveillance and Response Unit. Mobile SMS Based Disease Outbreak Alert System. 2015  [cited 2015 December 
15]; Available from: http://ddsr.or.ke/mSOS/about.
6. Mendoza, G., et al., mSOS: Using mHealth to strengthen real-time disease surveillance and response in Kenya, in mHealth Compendium 
2014,  African Strategies for Health (ASH), Management Sciences for Health (MSH); USAID: Arlington, VA.
7. Osamu, S., Feature Story: Using Mobile Phones to Prevent an Epidemic of Infectious Diseases, 2016, Japan Journal.
8. Toda, M., et al., Effectiveness of a Mobile Short-Message-Service-Based Disease Outbreak Alert System in Kenya. Emerg Infect Dis, 2016. 
22(4): p. 711-5.
9. Njeru, I., et al., mSOS (mobile SMS-based disease outbreak alert system) Preliminary Report, 2015, Disease Surveillance and Response Unit 
(DSRU) at the Ministry of Health: Nairobi, Kenya.
10. Njeru, I., et al., Meeting Highlights: mSOS Stakeholders’ Meeting: Dissemination of findings, 2015, JICA-AMED SATREPS project.
11. Japan International Cooperation Agency. mSOS Stakeholders’ Meeting (05 June 2015). 2015 [cited 2015 June 5]; Available from: http://www.
jica.go.jp/project/english/kenya/006/news/general/150605.html
12. Japan International Cooperation Agency. mSOS: A Versatile Tool for Disease Outbreak Alert. 2015 June 5, 2015 [cited 2015 June 5]; Available from: 
http://www.jica.go.jp/kenya/english/office/topics/150605.html
13. Japan International Cooperation Agency. Activities towards nationwide scale-up of mSOS. 2016  [cited 2016 April 4]; Available from: http://www.
jica.go.jp/project/english/kenya/006/news/general/160404.html
14. Toda, M., et al., mSOS User Manual, 2013, Disease Surveillance and Response (DDSR), Ministry of Health (MOH); Japan International 
Cooperation Agency (JICA): Nairobi, Kenya.
15. Japan International Cooperation Agency. One year after the declaration of an Ebola state of emergency. 2015 [cited 2015 July 31]; Available 
from: http://www.jica.go.jp/english/news/focus_on/ebolaphotos.html
16. Japan International Cooperation Agency. mSOS Ebola handover ceremony was held at the Ministry of Health in December 9, 2014. 2014  
[cited 2014 December 9]; Available from: http://www.jica.go.jp/project/english/kenya/006/news/general/141209.html
17. Japan Science and Techology Agency. Using Mobile Phones to Contain Infectious Diseases. 2015 April 27, 2015 [cited 2015 March]; Available 
from: http://www.jst.go.jp/report/2014/150313-2_e.html
18. Ministry of Medical Services. Ministries of Health Launch District Health information System. 21 Feb 2012 5 July 2012 [cited 2012 5 
July]; Available from: http://www.medical.go.ke/index.php?option=com_content&view=article&id=136:ministry-of-health-launch-dhis-
software&catid=34:news-and-events&Itemid=62
19. Japan International Cooperation Agency. Meeting with Mr. James Macharia, Cabinet Secretary, Ministry of Health. 2015  [cited 2015 
December]; Available from: http://www.jica.go.jp/project/english/kenya/006/news/general/150708.html
20. Wanjiru, R., et al., mSOS/IDSR Weekly Mobile Reporting: Training Manual, 2016, Ministry of Health Kenya; World Health Organization (WHO); 
Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC); Japan International Cooperation Agency (JICA); United States Agency for International 
Development (USAID): Nairobi, Kenya.
21. ISRCTN Registry. ISRCTN79529838: Evaluating the response to suspected disease outbreaks using a short message service (SMS) model. 
Available from: http://www.isrctn.com/ISRCTN79529838, http://apps.who.int/trialsearch/Trial2.aspx?TrialID=ISRCTN79529838
mHEALTH COMPENDIUM  SPECIAL EDITION 2016  n  61
