In the four months since 
the introduction of this 
system, CHW performance 
increased dramatically. 
On average, there was a 
522-percent increase in 
the number of monthly 
registrations comparing 
paper- and mobile-based 
registrations, and a 15-fold 
increase in the number of 
follow-up visits.
mHEALTH  
for Community-Based Family Planning Services
IMPLEMENTATION DATE:  November 2014 to September 2016 
Using a mobile application to guide community health workers to provide 
high-quality family planning services in Tanzania
Tanzania is faced with significant sexual and reproductive health challenges, including high fertility rates, 
low contraceptive prevalence, and elevated rates of HIV/AIDS. In 2010, the contraceptive prevalence 
rate (CPR) for modern methods among married women was 27 percent, and the unmet need for 
family planning was 25 percent.1 In Shinyanga region in northwest Tanzania, 12.5 percent of married 
women age 15 to 49 use a modern family planning method, less than half of the national average. The 
total fertility rate (TFR) is 7.1 compared with the national TFR of 5.4, and HIV prevalence is 7.4 percent 
compared to the national average of 5.1 percent. 
In order to improve access to family planning services, Pathfinder International and D-tree International 
are implementing a community-based family planning program using mobile technology to improve the 
quality of care. This program is being implemented with 230 community health workers (CHWs) and 
32 CHW supervisors in five districts of Shinyanga region. 
About mHealth for Community-Based Family Planning
In  this program, CHWs use a mobile application to provide and provide referrals to health facilities for clients wishing to counseling following the Balanced Counseling Strategy Plus.2 receive long-acting and permanent family planning methods 
Each CHW goes through a well-defined protocol to educate and for HIV and sexually transmitted infection services. The 
clients about all available methods and draws on their fertility mobile application includes reminders to CHWs to follow 
intentions and personal preferences to support the choice up with their clients for refills or to confirm if the referral was 
most appropriate for their needs. CHWs provide condoms, successful. In addition, the application includes an electronic 
pills, and Standard Days Method® to clients at their homes Citizen Report Card, which is administered by the CHW 
86  n  SERVICE DELIVERY 
Pathfinder International
Figure 1. Method mix among family planning clients using a method
in Shinyanga District Council, who had previously been 
delivering family planning services using a paper-based 
system, were trained to use the mobile application. The pay-
for-performance system, along with rigorous data monitoring 
and feedback to CHWs, was also introduced at this time. In 
the four months since the introduction of this system, CHW 
performance increased dramatically. On average, there was a 
522-percent increase in the number of monthly registrations 
comparing paper- and mobile-based registrations, and a 15-
fold increase in the number of follow-up visits, comparing 
the average number of follow-up visits with the paper system 
to those conducted in February 2015.
to all clients who complete a referral to assess the quality of Lessons Learned 
family planning services at health facilities. 
n Pay for performance, focusing on counseling and 
To develop a scalable training and follow-up model, Path- follow-up, can be an effective strategy to increase CHW 
finder and D-tree International are applying innovative performance while adhering to the Tiahrt Amendment. 
strategies to roll out training programs and provide ongoing Using the mobile system offers real-time tracking of 
support, including a: pay-for-performance targets for CHWs and the project 
n cadre of “champion” CHWs who mentor and support team to increase transparency of the system. 
newly trained CHWs through regular follow-up visits; n Training CHW champions to support trainings and 
n simple mobile application for project staff and the mentor newly trained CHWs in the field is an efficient 
champions to guide follow-up visits with newly trained and scalable model, allowing implementation teams to 
CHWs and alert the program team of issues in the field; roll out high-quality mHealth programs at scale. 
n pay-for-performance system with monthly performance n Communicating with CHWs on a regular basis is 
targets with real-time performance tracking on the very important as it provides a venue for both feedback 
CHW phone and program dashboard; and support and allows the program to identify and act 
system for the field team to monitor data and provide on issues in the field.n 
feedback to CHWs on a weekly basis; n Data quality has improved after introduction of the 
dashboard for reviewing individual providers, district mobile application. The system automatically flags suspi-n 
performance and regional performance. cious data entry for follow-up.
As of March 2015, 109 CHWs who were offering family 
planning services in two districts of Shinyanga region were Conclusion 
trained to use the mobile application. This program demonstrates that mobile tools can effectively 
be used to improve the quality of community-based family plan-
Evaluation and Results ning services and increase CHW performance. With the use of 
pay-for-performance and CHW champions, this model has the 
By March 2015, a total of 3,165 clients had been registered potential to be implemented at scale. The next phase of the pro-
and received family planning counseling. Among these, 93.5 gram will focus on training an additional 123 CHWs and the 
percent are using a family planning method (see Figure 1 development of supervisory tools to further transfer monitoring 
for the method mix). Of the 516 referrals given for a family and management of the project to the local government. n   
planning method at a health facility, 337 (65 percent) have 
been completed. During the program, 134 clients (4.2 
percent) discontinued a method, while 94 percent of clients Geographic Coverage:  Five Districts in Shinyanga Region, Tanzania
reported continued satisfaction with the current method. Implementation Partners: Pathfinder International, D-tree 
To measure the outcome of the mobile system on CHW International 
activity, the project team compared the number of Donors: USAID Tanzania, David & Lucile Packard Foundation
registrations and follow-up visits before and after the mobile Contact Information: Dolorosa Duncan, Regional Manager, Path-
system was introduced. In November 2014, 60 CHWs finder International, dduncan@pathfinder.org 
mHEALTH COMPENDIUM  VOLUME 5  n  87
