mHEALTH AND 
NEONATAL RESUSCITATION
Opportunities to Increase Adoption and Utilization of Neonatal 
Resuscitation Equipment, Using Mobile Health in Tanzania
Hima Batavia
March 2014
Prepared for the United Nations Commission 
on Life-Saving Commodities Neonatal  
Resuscitation Technical Reference Team
Acknowledgements
We would like to thank the United Nations Commission for Life Saving Commodities for Women 
and Children for their support in advancing the use of mobile technology to improve the adoption 
and utilization of neonatal resuscitation equipment to prevent perinatal deaths from complications 
of birth asphyxia. 
This work would not have been possible without the generous contributions and insights from 
key government, public health, and telecommunication stakeholders in Tanzania, including: Janita 
Ferentinos, CDC Foundation; Asia Kassim Hussein, UNICEF; Dunstan Bishanga, Erica Thomas, and 
Gaudiosa Tibaijuka, JHPIEGO; Christopher Awinia, PRAXIS Research; Dr. Mohammed Makame, 
PATH; Lucy Fulgence Silas, D-Tree International; Waziri Nyoni, John Hopkins University Center for 
Communication Programs; Roland Van de Ven and Chrispine Kimario, Elizabeth Glaser Pediatric 
AIDS Foundation; Marasi Mwencha, John Snow International; Colin Spurway, BBC Media Action; 
Mustafa Kudrati and Benjamin Mrema, Pathfinder International; Dr. Mwendwa Mwenesi, Tanzania 
Ministry of Health and Social Welfare; Dr. Augustine Massawe, Muhimbili University of Health and 
Allied Sciences; and Woinde Shisael, TIGO. 
Lastly, we would like to thank Nicolette Davis for her research support, and the mHealth Alliance 
for their strategic guidance and oversight in leading this analysis, specifically, Dr. Patricia Mechael, 
Madhu Deshmukh, William Philbrick, and Avrille Hanzel. 
We hope this report serves as a starting point for using mobile technology to advance existing gov-
ernment and partner efforts in reducing deaths from complications of birth asphyxia in Tanzania, 
and giving more newborns a chance at life.
The report was designed by Eighty2degrees, LLC. 
 
PHOTO CREDITS: 
David Isaak: 29; Kiwanja: page 13, 21; Josh Nesbit: page 18, 22; Chelsea Solmo: cover, 8, 10, 12, 15, 16, mHEALTH AND 
23, 25, 26, 30, 32, 33, and DataDyne: page 9, 11, 14, 17, 24. NEONATAL RESUSCITATION
Opportunities to Increase Adoption and Utilization of 
Neonatal Resuscitation Equipment, Using Mobile Health  
in Tanzania
Hima Batavia
March 2014
Executive Summary
The United Nations Life Saving Commodities Commission (UNCoLSC) for Women and Children Given the nature of birth asphyxia, and neonatal resuscitation, mHealth solutions during labor were 
was established in 2012 to support increased adoption and utilization of 13 commodities that have found to be inappropriate. However, significant opportunities to collaborate and leverage existing 
the potential to prevent a significant number of maternal, newborn and child deaths. As part of mHealth efforts that focus on antenatal and post-natal care were identified. This includes:
these efforts, the UNCoLSC has recognized the potential for mobile technology to support its goal, 
given the high penetration and utilization of mobile phones in low- and middle-income countries  A  Caregiver Messaging: Preparing caregivers of pregnant women, such as husbands, mothers 
(LMICs). The mHealth Alliance, in collaboration with the UNCoLSC, has undertaken select research and mothers-in-law, through existing SMS health education programs, to recognize key risk 
projects to explore the potential of mobile technology to improve the adoption and utilization of signs of birth asphyxia and to demand action from providers through existing SMS health 
the 13 commodities. education programs
Neonatal resuscitation equipment, used to prevent deaths from complications related to birth  B  Provider Refresher Training: Using mobile technology to send reminder and/or refresher 
asphyxia, is one of these commodities. In 2013, a global review of opportunities for mHealth to sup- training content to providers on neonatal resuscitation techniques and protocols 
port neonatal resuscitation was conducted. Following this review, Tanzania was selected as a focus 
country for deeper analysis.  C  Intelligent Referrals: Utilizing existing mHealth clinical decision support tools for CHWs to 
help them recognize risk signs and factors that would predispose a pregnant woman to deliver 
In February 2014, a literature review and country visit was led by Hima Batavia and Nicolette Davis to a newborn with birth asphyxia, in order to initiate more “intelligent referrals,” that trigger 
understand: the scope of birth asphyxia in Tanzania; the current adoption and utilization of neonatal providers at facilities to adequately prepare 
resuscitation equipment; government priorities and key stakeholders supporting the prevention 
of deaths from complications related to birth asphyxia; and opportunities for mHealth to improve  D  Supply Chain Management: Leveraging existing mHealth reporting tools to track the 
identified gaps and barriers in the system. availability and performance of neonatal resuscitation equipment, in addition to the status 
of order fulfillment 
The research found significant government support for improving the adoption and utilization of 
neonatal resuscitation equipment, specifically through the national rollout of the Helping Babies  E  Patient and Death Registration: Drawing from efforts utilizing mobile technology for birth 
Breathe (HBB) program. As of January 2014, the HBB program has achieved one-third of its goal of registration, including reports of whether a newborn required neonatal resuscitation or died 
training 14,000 health providers across regional hospitals, district hospitals, facilities and faith based from a lack of neonatal resuscitation, in order to better understand and respond to the utili-
organizations, in 18 of the 30 regions in the country. This roll-out has been made possible by donor zation of neonatal resuscitation equipment more critically
support from the Children’s Investment Fund Foundation (CIFF) and implementation support from 
non-governmental organizations (NGOs), including JHPIEGO and UNICEF. As a next step, the UNCoLSC should initiate efforts to collaborate with the mHealth coordinator at 
the MOHSW, and leading non-profit organizations in Tanzania, to ensure the interests of increasing 
Further, the review found an active and collaborative environment for utilizing mobile technology access to neonatal resuscitation equipment are integrated into existing mHealth programs. 
to strengthen Tanzania’s public health system. The government has appointed an mHealth coordi-
nator at the national level who leads a community of practice that invites international non-profit 
organizations to meet quarterly to present ideas for new mHealth solutions, share experiences and 
identify opportunities to collaborate. This forum contributes to reducing a duplication of efforts and 
maximizing impact. 
Acronyms and Abbreviations Table of Contents
AMBU Artificial mask and breathing unit Acknowledgements ............................................................................................................................................................. 2
CHW Community Health Worker Executive Summary .............................................................................................................................................................4 
EmOC Emergency Obstetric Care Acronyms and Abbreviations ..........................................................................................................................................6
mHealth Mobile health
HBB  Helping Babies Breathe 1 Context ...................................................................................................................... 9
HIV Human immunodeficiency virus
IMCI Integrated Management of Childhood Illness 2 Methodology ............................................................................................................11
IVR Interactive voice response 
JSI John Snow International 3 Background .............................................................................................................13
LMIC Low and middle income countries 
MDG Millennium Development Goal 
4 Current Situation of Enabling Environment .....................................................16MNCH  Maternal, Newborn, and Child Health
MOHSW  Ministry of Health and Social Welfare (Tanzania) Policy Environment ........................................................................................................................................ 16
NGO Non-governmental organization Service Delivery ............................................................................................................................................... 19
PMTCT Prevention of Mother to Child Transmission Product Portfolio ............................................................................................................................................ 20
SADC  Southern African Development Community Supply Chain Management ........................................................................................................................ 20
SMS Short messaging service Telecom Environment .....................................................................................................................................21
TCRA  Tanzanian Communications Regulatory Authority
UNCoLSC United Nations Life Saving Commodities Commission for Women and Children 5 mHealth Opportunities ........................................................................................24
UNICEF  United Nations Children’s Fund mHealth in Tanzania .......................................................................................................................................24
mHealth for Neonatal Resuscitation........................................................................................................27
6 Conclusions .............................................................................................................33
Appendix A. Interview Guide ....................................................................................................................................... 34
Appendix B. Stakeholder List  ...................................................................................................................................... 36
References .............................................................................................................................................................................37
9
1
The United Nations Commission for Life Saving Context
Commodities for Women and Children (UNCoLSC) 
was established in 2012 to increase access to life-saving medicines and health 
supplies for vulnerable populations in low- and middle-income countries (LMICs). 
A selection of 13 commodities were identified and analyzed to understand the 
gaps and barriers preventing widespread adoption and utilization. 
This analysis revealed an opportunity to leverage the ubiquity and utility of 
mobile technology in LMICs to support increased access to the 13 commodities, 
by improving patient knowledge, provider skills, care coordination, and supply 
chain management, among other applications. 
The mHealth Alliance has since undertaken a series of research efforts to identify 
opportunities for mobile technology to support the goals of the UNCoLSC. In 
December 2013, a global review of opportunities for mobile health (mHealth) 
to support the adoption and utilization of neonatal resuscitation equipment, to 
prevent deaths from birth asphyxia, was conducted (1). Based on initial findings 
of this review, Tanzania was selected as a focus country for a deeper analysis 
on the current landscape for neonatal resuscitation equipment. 
In February 2014, a literature review and field visit to Tanzania was conducted 
by Hima Batavia and Nicolette Davis to understand: the scope of birth asphyxia 
THE OPPORTUNITY EXISTS in Tanzania; the current adoption and utilization of neonatal resuscitation equipment; government priorities and key stakeholders supporting the 
TO LEVERAGE THE UBIQUITY prevention of deaths from complications related to birth asphyxia; and opportunities for mHealth to improve identified gaps and barriers in the system. 
AND UTILITY OF MOBILE This report outlines the findings from the research and aims to serve as a 
TECHNOLOGY TO IMPROVE foundation for informing the development of a country strategy.
POPULATION HEALTH.
11
2
To understand the current landscape of neonatal Methodology
resuscitation equipment in Tanzania and the barriers 
to adoption and utilization, a literature review, combined with semi-structured 
interviews with key stakeholders, was conducted in February 2014. 
The literature review included an analysis of peer-reviewed articles and grey 
literature published between 2009 and 2013. The analysis of peer-reviewed 
literature focused on birth asphyxia, neonatal resuscitation and mHealth 
in Tanzania, and it was conducted using two key databases: PubMed and 
Google Scholar. Established search terms for the literature review included 
“neonatal resuscitation in Tanzania,” “newborn resuscitation in Tanzania,” 
“birth asphyxia in Tanzania,” “neonatal resuscitation devices in Tanzania,” 
“neonatal resuscitation training in Tanzania,” “mobile health in Tanzania,” 
“mHealth in Tanzania,” “mHealth and neonatal resuscitation in Tanzania,” and 
“mHealth and maternal health in Tanzania”. Grey literature, including mHealth 
case studies in Tanzania and program descriptions, were reviewed from the 
following knowledge management portals: Mobile Development Intelligence, 
mHealth Working Group, Center for Market Innovations, and Health Unbound. 
Overall, 23 articles were identified and 16 were selected for further analysis.
A METHOD WAS DEVELOPED Interviews with stakeholders were conducted using a snowball methodology. 
Overall, 18 stakeholders from 14 organizations in the governmental, public and 
TO UNDERSTAND NEONATAL private sectors were interviewed. The interview guide and list of stakeholders can be found in the Appendix.
RESUSCITATION EQUIPMENT IN This report is both a synthesis and analysis of the findings from the literature 
TANZANIA AND THE BARRIERS review and stakeholder interviews.
TO ITS ADOPTION AND 
UTILIZATION.
12 mHEALTH AND NEONATAL RESUSCITATION 13
3
Over the last two decades, Tanzania has made signifi- Background
cant strides in reducing its child mortality rate. However, 
in contrast, its newborn mortality rate has remained almost constant over the 
same period of time. Nearly 30% of all child deaths under the age of five are 
attributed to newborn deaths (2), hindering efforts made to achieve Millennium 
Development Goal (MDG) 4 by 2015.
Additionally, the causes of neonatal deaths in Tanzania have not changed over 
the past decade, with the highest risks occurring within the first 24 hours of 
birth. Neonatal infections (approximately 30%), preterm births (approximately 
30%) (3), and complications related to birth asphyxia (between 27-30%) (4) still 
account for the top three causes of neonatal deaths.
Complications related to birth asphyxia and the failure to initiate spontaneous 
respirations account for approximately 15,000 neonatal deaths annually in 
Tanzania (5). Several interwoven reasons explain these sobering statistics, includ-
ing: birth asphyxiation not historically being a national priority; an insufficient 
number of skilled providers due to localized training and poor provider target-
ing; and a lack of available equipment to initiate resuscitation (6). Further, weak 
systems for qualifying and capturing the causes of perinatal deaths, combined 
BIRTH ASPHYXIA AND FAILURE with fears of job termination, indicate that the number of asphyxia-related 
deaths may be higher (7). For instance, the definition of “birth asphyxia” is often 
TO INITIATE SPONTANEOUS mired by the use of the Apgar score, which is the method used to identify birth asphyxia, but is oftentimes reported to be inaccurate (8). Additionally, low rates 
RESPIRATIONS ACCOUNT FOR of skilled birth attendants, coupled with high rates of home delivery, make new-born deaths and causes of death difficult to register (9). Since many neonatal 
APPROX. 15,000 NEONATAL deaths are not reported or are misclassified as fresh stillbirths, it is difficult to draw a true estimation of birth asphyxiation-related deaths (10). 
DEATHS ANNUALLY IN As a result, reducing birth-asphyxiation-related deaths requires a multi-faceted 
approach that includes enabling and encouraging facility-based deliveries, 
TANZANIA. the presence of skilled providers, the availability of appropriate equipment, 
14 mHEALTH AND NEONATAL RESUSCITATION METHODOLOGY 15
as well as the ability to register and The results of this program led the 
document deaths with ease. Studies government of Tanzania to support 
have shown that resuscitation is one of a national rollout of HBB, which is 
the most cost-effective interventions to currently underway in the country and 
reduce neonatal mortality (11). is the flagship program for addressing 
asphyxiation-related deaths (13). 
In 2009, the Tanzanian Ministry of Health 
piloted the Helping Babies Breathe Further, over the years, surveys have 
(HBB) program, which is an evidence- been conducted to assess the availabil-
based curriculum to teach neonatal ity of appropriate neonatal resuscitation 
resuscitation techniques in resource- equipment (14) in hospitals and health 
limited areas. The program places a centers across Tanzania. Studies taken 
strong emphasis on the “Golden Minute” place between 2007 and 2010 have 
following birth to restore spontaneous found high rates of available neona- MOBILE TELEPHONY HAS 
respirations, combined with a one-day tal resuscitation equipment at district 
program that utilizes simulation-based hospitals (90-100%) (15, 16, 17), whereas 
training to teach health providers health centers and dispensaries were BECOME THE FASTEST 
essential skills (12). The program was found to have lower rates of availabil-
implemented in eight hospitals between ity (57-69%) (18). In a six-district study GROWING MEDIA TECHNOLOGY 
September 2009 and March 2012, and conducted in 2009, drugs used for 
it resulted in a statistically significant resuscitation, such as adrenaline, were IN TANZANIA. APPROX.  
reduction in neonatal deaths, rates of available but not administered due to 
fresh stillbirths and use of facemask a lack of trained personnel (19). 90% OF HOUSEHOLDS HAVE 
ventilation, in addition to an increase 
in the use of stimulation and suctioning. ACCESS TO A MOBILE PHONE.
16 CURRENT SITUATION OF ENABLING ENVIRONMENT 17
4
Current 
Situation 
of Enabling hospitals due to a lack of space, funding conducting 40 master trainings at prom-
Environment and prioritization. To rectify this gap inent hospitals in the country
 (26). As of 
In order to identify both feasible and high impact and ease implementation, the MOHSW January 2014, the HBB program has 
mHealth opportunities in Tanzania, it is crucial to assess prioritized newborn health in the district achieved one-third of its goal of training 
1) the current status of the environment that is critical to enabling a reduction in health plan and outlined intentions to 14,000 health providers across regional 
asphyxiation-related deaths and 2) the usage of mobile technology to improve offer district hospitals lacking neonatal hospitals, district hospitals, facilities 
the adoption and utilization of preventative medical equipment. This section units the opportunity to consult with and faith based organizations, in 18 of 
outlines the key components of the enabling environment, including policy, those that already had such units. the 30 regions in the country. This has 
service delivery, product, supply chain management and telecommunications. been made possible by donor support 
Finally, the MOHSW also identified from the Children’s Investment Fund 
the poor condition of newborn health Foundation (CIFF) and implementation 
Policy Environment data as a barrier to reducing neonatal support from non-governmental orga-
mortality. The MOHSW reported that a nizations (NGOs), including JHPIEGO 
National Strategy weak recording system, lack of trained and UNICEF. These organizations are 
personnel, and unrecorded deaths leading the trainings, in addition to 
In April 2008, the Ministry of Health and Social Welfare (MOHSW) in Tanzania, during home deliveries were all key managing procurement and distribution 
launched the National Road Map Strategic Plan To Accelerate Reduction of contributing factors to the poor state of neonatal resuscitation equipment. 
Maternal, Newborn and Child Deaths in Tanzania (20), which is known as “one of newborn health data. To strengthen They also conduct follow-up visits 4-6 
plan” amongst partners. The seven-year plan calls for a system-wide approach the quantity and quality of newborn weeks after training to check skill levels 
to improving newborn health, including in-service training on essential new- health data, the MOHSW laid plans to and assess the readiness of a facility 
born care, availability of neonatal resuscitation equipment at all dispensaries, review and audit facility registers more to fully adopt the capacity to deliver 
facilities and hospitals, and a neonatal essential equipment and supplies list (21). frequently and institute verbal autop- neonatal resuscitation care (27). 
sies at the community level (24). 
At the time of the plan’s launch, the MOHSW reported a total lack of basic In spite of this large-scale effort, a 
essential newborn care with resuscitation equipment, like Artificial Manual Helping Babies Breathe Program 2010 study aimed at determining the 
Breathing Unit (AMBU) bags and oxygen, at primary and secondary facilities effect of the HBB training program on 
in the country. As a result, the stated goal was to equip all labor wards in the Following the situational analysis, the the skills and management strategies 
country with facilities to care for neonates by 2015 (22). MOHSW reinforced birth asphyxia as of trained providers found that seven 
a priority area for reducing neonatal months after the program, performance 
In 2009, the MOHSW conducted a situational analysis of newborn health in mortality and committed to launching improved when tested under a simu-
the country. This analysis identified poor procurement processes and a lack the HBB program nationally to train lated setting, but did not translate to 
of health care personnel trained in newborn care and resuscitation as the key and teach newborn resuscitation to delivery room management. The aver-
causes of limited adoption and utilization of neonatal resuscitation equipment(23). healthcare providers (25). The program age time it took a provider to initiate 
Further, the MOHSW recognized a deficiency of neonatal units within district launched in September 2009 as a pilot, facemask ventilation from birth actually 
18 mHEALTH AND NEONATAL RESUSCITATION CURRENT SITUATION OF ENABLING ENVIRONMENT 19
the COP is currently in the process of Maternal and child health aids and tradi-
harmonizing strategies and efforts to tional birth attendants have historically 
release a unified document. Establishing supported pregnant women in antena-
an mHealth technical working group to tal and post-natal care and coordinating 
drive the implementation of the strategy referrals to facilities during delivery. 
will follow. A key goal of the mHealth However, these groups are now largely 
strategy and guidelines will be to man- being phased out of the government 
date that the mHealth coordinator vet health system and being replaced with 
all new programs as part of the approval higher cadres (34). Further, Community 
process. Currently, many mHealth pro- Health Workers (CHWs), who also 
grams are still being solely approved support in taking a patient’s medical 
by relevant disease departments in the history, antenatal care, and post-natal 
MOHSW, leading to multiple programs care, are not considered government 
being implemented and phones being employees, but rather volunteers, who 
distributed at a single facility (30). in some cases receive salaries from 
NGO programs. The government has 
increased in the period after HBB train- established to improve coordination recently requested that NGOs hire 
ing. The authors of the study point to and knowledge sharing amongst global Service Delivery and train CHWs who have completed 
limited resources, high staff turnover, health partners leading mHealth pro- a secondary education, to ease the pro-
varying staff educational backgrounds, grams, and the MOHSW has adopted an According to the national standard cess of eventually absorbing the CHWs 
and limited ongoing training and local mHealth disease surveillance program guidelines, nursing officers and nurse into the government system (35). While 
mentoring as reasons for the decline in from the CDC Foundation. midwives are responsible for identify- these cadres are not directly involved in 
performance (28). ing and initiating basic resuscitation addressing birth asphyxiation, they may 
The mHealth COP meets quarterly and (suctioning, provision of supplementary have a role in identifying women at-risk 
This finding suggests that, while the provides a venue for existing and new oxygen) in the case of birth asphyxia of delivering an asphyxiated newborn 
national rollout of the HBB program partners to present mHealth program during delivery, while doctors are due to predisposing factors, and then 
is a significant achievement, consis- ideas to enable collaboration and reduce responsible for performing advanced sending appropriate information to 
tent monitoring, refresher training, and duplication of efforts. Further, partners neonatal resuscitation (such as insertion referral facilities during delivery. 
retraining for new staff may be required have an opportunity to share results on of an endotracheal tube) (31). However, 
to realize the desired results. mHealth programs in operation, as well in practice, especially in rural areas Training health cadres on neonatal 
as experiences with technologies and where there is a dearth of qualified resuscitation techniques remains a key 
Mobile Health Strategy technology providers (29). personnel, clinical officers and medi- intervention to improve the adoption 
cal attendants may also be involved in and utilization of preventative equip-
In 2011, the MOHSW appointed Dr. Last year, the COP developed a national delivery (32). Nevertheless, data from the ment. A 2008 study found that 60% 
Mwendwa Mwenesi as the national mHealth strategy to more systemati- HBB program, which is implemented as of nurse midwives had between 0 to 5 
mHealth coordinator, signaling that the cally guide the country’s activities and a “train-the-trainer” model (33), shows years of neonatal care training and only 
approach of using mobile technology processes for introducing new mHealth that to date nurses and nurse midwives 19% had training on the guidelines for 
to strengthen its public health system programs in Tanzania. However, in par- are the most common cadres trained neonatal care (36). 
is a significant priority for Tanzania. allel, a national eHealth strategy was on the protocol. 
Since then, a national mHealth strat- released, which sits under a separate 
egy has been developed, an mHealth government department. With the belief 
community of practice (COP) has been that mHealth is a subset of eHealth, 
20 mHEALTH AND NEONATAL RESUSCITATION CURRENT SITUATION OF ENABLING ENVIRONMENT 21
Product Portfolio Supply Chain 
Management
As part of the HBB program, all facilities 
trained on the protocol receive neonatal JHPIEGO worked with Tanzania’s 
resuscitation equipment, which is being Medical Supply Department (MSD) to The current challenge with the supply collected and restricted access to the 
procured and distributed by JHPIEGO facilitate procurement of the Laerdal chain system in Tanzania is the discrep- data collected, reducing the ability of 
and funded by CIFF. products by sharing specifications to ancy between orders and fulfillment. organizations to mobilize and respond 
sensitize the team on neonatal resus- Zonal warehouses often fulfill orders to stock-outs (41).
The equipment that is procured is citation equipment and outlining size based on what is available, rather than 
developed and manufactured by requirements. Though the country typ- what is requested by a facility. Typically, 
Laerdal, a global medical supplies ically operates on a “pull” system from a record of this discrepancy is not kept, Telecom Environment
company. Depending on the type facilities for ordering and distributing and consequently impacts future projec-
of facility, a precise quantity of sili- medical commodities, JHPIEGO is cur- tions of health commodities, which are While radio was historically the most 
cone resuscitators and masks in size rently “pushing” neonatal resuscitation based on fulfillment numbers rather than effective communication tool in 
0 and 1, penguin suction devices, and equipment to health facilities to lubri- request numbers. This limitation can Tanzania, as recently as 2005, mobile 
NeoNatalie kits for simulated training cate the system and generate demand. significantly jeopardize the consistent telephony has become the most visible 
are distributed. For instance, dispen- availability of a health commodity (39). and fastest growing media technology 
saries receive 2 silicone resuscitators On a recent supportive supervision in the country. As of September 2013, 
and 2 masks of each size, 3 penguin visit to 16 facilities, JHPIEGO found that Stock-outs of medical commodities there were 26,855,735 mobile phone 
suction devices and 1 NeoNatalie kit, orders of penguin suction devices were still remain a significant challenge in subscribers in the country, a penetration 
whereas district hospitals receive 6 not being fulfilled due to a historical stock Tanzania, and many program efforts rate of approximately 60% (42, 43). While 
silicone resuscitators and 3 masks in of the previously used foot operated to generate demand for health services formal research has not been conducted 
each size, 20 penguin suction devices product, which research has shown is and products are constantly confronted to survey the percent of health providers 
and 3 NeoNatalie kits (37). considered to be less effective (38). This by this barrier to progress. According in Tanzania that own a mobile phone, the 
indicates that the supply chain system to the Consumer Forum on Medicines perception amongst stakeholders is that 
still requires further strengthening to and Diagnostics (COFMED), a civil soci- between 80-90% of health providers 
ensure a consistent and reliable supply ety organization under the Southern own a basic handset (44, 45, 46). Further, 
of neonatal resuscitation equipment. Africa Regional Program on Access to while mobile penetration is 60%, approx-
Medicines (SARPAM), effective planning imately 90% of households have access 
versus availability is the key problem. In to a mobile phone through family and 
NEONATAL RESUSCITATION EQUIPMENT general, central warehouses have nearly community members (47).
six months of buffer stock for essential 
medicines, but delays in ordering, dis- Tanzania registers the highest average 
tribution and inaccurate data to inform number of text messages sent per 
forecasting exercises limit efficient allo- month per subscriber in East Africa. 
cation of the stock (40). In 2012, almost 5 billion text messages 
were sent and received, and between 
The impact of current efforts to manage April and June 2013, the average user 
stock-outs has been limited to report- sent 237 text messages. In general, the 
ing the scope of the problem, rather average user spends approximately 
FIGURE 1. Neonatal resuscitation equipment manufactured by Laerdal and distributed to dispensaries, than action and response. This is due to 25,000 ksh a month on mobile phone 
facilities and district hospitals in Tanzania as part of the Helping Babies Breathe program. delays in relaying and processing data minutes and text messages. 
22 mHEALTH AND NEONATAL RESUSCITATION
The use of mobile data and Internet is However, according to stakeholders, 
still nascent in the country. As of 2010, network coverage in rural areas and 
there were approximately 2.21 million health facilities can still be a significant 
mobile Internet users, a penetration rate challenge when implementing mHealth 
of about 5%, and as of December 2012, programs reliant on GPRS or broad-
smartphone penetration was approxi- band connectivity (52, 53, 54, 55). 
mately 13% (48). While the TCRA reports 
that the number of all Internet users is In fact, the Tanzanian government, in 
increasing at approximately 24% per year, collaboration with the World Bank, 
it currently does not track penetration in recently announced a large subsidy to 
its quarterly reporting activities  (49). improve network infrastructure in rural 
areas, and awarded Vodacom, Zantel, 
The leading mobile service providers Airtel and Tigo tenders to facilitate 
in the country include Vodacom (36%), development (56).
Airtel (32%), Tigo (24%), Zantel (7%) 
and Benson (1%) (50). All telecommunica- Both Tigo and Vodacom are especially 
tion providers offer discounts for calls active in the mHealth sector, working 
or text messages between members with NGO partners through their MOBILE PHONES OFFER 
to improve user loyalty. Users often foundations and CSR departments to 
receive discount offers that give them support programs and participating in 
the opportunity to buy larger amounts the mHealth COP (57). AN UNPRECEDENTED 
of credit, calls or text messages at a 
lower price. OPPORTUNITY TO ADDRESS 
As a result of high penetration, avail- INFORMATION ASYMMETRIES 
ability of mobile devices and knowledge 
about the use of the devices, Tanzania AND GAPS IN CONNECTIVITY 
was identified as fertile ground for 
mHealth solutions in a 2012 survey (51). WITHIN A HEALTH SYSTEM.
24 mHEALTH OPPORTUNITIES 25
5
mHealth workers are often initially resistant in Tanzania. “Healthy Pregnancy, Healthy to mHealth solutions due to a per- Baby” is working in collaboration with 
Opportunities ception that it will require additional the MOHSW and other key partners, work. However, programs have found including: the Elizabeth Glaser Pediatric 
that CHWs eventually find that using AIDS Foundation (EGPAF) on Prevention 
mHealth solutions makes their life eas- of Mother to Child Transmission (PMTCT) 
mHealth in Tanzania ier, especially when it involves monthly of HIV; PATH on immunization messag-
reporting requirements. ing; and the John Hopkins University 
There is significant mHealth activity across Tanzania, largely being led by Center for Communication Programs 
international NGO partners, in collaboration with the MOHSW. The majority Further, there is strong indication of (JHUCCP) on its Safe Motherhood 
of mHealth solutions focus on patient education, CHW support tools, supply collaboration amongst partners to cre- Campaign. Partners provide support 
chain management and disease surveillance that support goals related to ate more integrated and comprehensive to the program by developing content 
maternal and child health or reproductive health. While CHW support tools mHealth solutions. For instance, D-Tree and training CHWs to recommend the 
are still largely in pilot stages, patient education, supply chain management International and Pathfinder have cre- program to pregnant women and enroll 
and disease surveillance solutions have achieved regional and national scale. ated an mHealth tool that supports them (61). Currently, telecommunication 
This discrepancy may be a function of technology choice. Patient education, CHWs to assist patients in making companies, such as Airtel, are support-
supply chain management and disease surveillance tools are largely utilizing family planning decisions. The tool has ing “Healthy Pregnancy, Healthy Baby” 
SMS and USSD on basic mobile phones, whereas CHW support tools are being been integrated with Pathfinder’s family by zero-rating SMS messages that are 
built as applications on android smartphones or java-based phones that are planning stock management system, sent to pregnant women or caregivers. 
purchased by organizations for the programs. Few mHealth solutions were so that CHWs can “intelligently refer” However, the CDC Foundation is also 
found to be using interactive voice response (IVR) technology, which may patients to facilities with the desired exploring sustainable business models, 
be due to the cost of development, which was said to be higher than SMS product in stock. including using the service to generate 
and USSD (58). demand for other related services. 
Another example is the CDC Found- 
Though CHW support tools remain small-scale, programs focusing on spe- ation’s mHealth Public-Private-Partner- No evaluations have been conducted 
cific districts and facilities are significantly advancing the skillset of its target ship, which has established an SMS on the program to date, but JHUCCP 
CHWs on topics including family planning, home-based HIV care and MNCH. patient education program called is planning to evaluate the behavior 
Organizations are spending between USD $80-200 on handsets, depending “Healthy Pregnancy, Healthy Baby”, change impact of women enrolled in 
on the complexity of the application and need for memory and processing or “Wazazi Nipendeni”, on the Text to the program, as well as evaluate the 
power. Many organizations believe that purchasing mobile phones is a worthy Change platform that NGO partners are difference between self-enrolling and 
capital investment for improving monitoring and evaluation activities, akin to now using for their specific health focus being enrolled by a CHW. Early results 
buying facilities a laptop or computer, and critical to improving the perfor- areas. Launched in 2012, the program have shown that literacy is still a chal-
mance and accountability of CHWs. Training a CHW on a mobile support tool has amassed nearly 400,000 (60) sub- lenge among pregnant women, which 
has found to take approximately two days, accompanied by approximately scribers and aims to be the most trusted limits the impact of SMS and leaves 
two additional weeks to gain comfort in a demo mode (59). Community health short code for reliable health information registration into the program highly 
26 mHEALTH AND NEONATAL RESUSCITATION mHEALTH OPPORTUNITIES 27
mHealth for Neonatal Programs that have performed rigorous 
Resuscitation content assessments have determined 
that messaging on birth asphyxia and 
Given the nature of complications from neonatal resuscitation may not be 
birth asphyxia and the need to utilize appropriate for two reasons: a) it is a 
neonatal resuscitation equipment in the provider driven skillset that has to be 
“golden minute” after birth, the use of managed at a facility and b) during the 
mobile phones during service delivery “golden minute” pregnant women, who 
is not appropriate. Instead, mHealth are just recovering from labor, may not 
solutions to support the adoption and be best positioned to give advice or 
utilization of neonatal resuscitation demand action from providers. 
equipment are more appropriate prior 
to and after delivery. However, there may be an opportunity 
to target other caregivers – a husband, 
There are limited existing mHealth mother or mother-in-law. The key behav-
solutions in Tanzania that support ior that pregnant women and caregivers 
neonatal resuscitation equipment, and in Tanzania look for immediately fol-
reliant on television and radio mass Pathfinder International, have gone nurse, nurse midwives and doctors lowing delivery is whether the newborn 
media campaigns. As a result, the completely cashless, adopting mobile are seldom targeted. However, there baby is crying. If a newborn baby is not 
program is now considering adding money across the organization and are many opportunities to extend crying, it could be an indication of birth 
an Interactive Voice Response (IVR) into its programs. existing mHealth program efforts asphyxia and the need for resuscitation. 
component to complement the SMS or leverage existing technology and If given the necessary key messages 
messages. In addition, there appears However, despite significant progress, implementation lessons. prior to delivery, this could be a trigger 
to be a demand for an mHealth ques- mHealth solutions still suffer from point for caregivers, who may be in a 
tion and answer (Q&A) service. When common challenges including patchy Six key mHealth opportunities have better position to demand action if they 
JHUCCP launched the SMS program network coverage, limited electricity for been identified to support the adop- are present. 
under the Safe Motherhood Campaign, charging mobile phones, maintaining tion and use of neonatal resuscitation 
it received nearly 2 million questions and servicing mobile phones purchased equipment and should be considered in The “Healthy Pregnancy, Healthy 
to the shortcode, which was not set for a program, and a lack of evidence Tanzania: caregiver education, provider Baby” program by CDC Foundation 
up to answer the questions. The CDC on the impact and cost-effectiveness refresher training, intelligent referrals, and the “Safe Motherhood Campaign” 
Foundation is now considering launch- of mobile solutions to support scale-up supply chain management, patient reg- by JHUCCP both include a registration 
ing an USSD-based application to meet and longevity. SMS-based patient edu- istration and death registration. process in their programs. Users send 
this demand. cation programs that rely on funding an SMS to a short code and are then 
are often challenged by the inability Caregiver Education prompted with five questions, one of 
Given the high penetration rate of to predict accurate demand. When which includes classifying himself/her-
mobile money in Tanzania, mHealth JHUCCP launched a family planning Current mHealth patient education pro- self as either a: birth supporter, partner 
solutions are being integrated with SMS program with FHI360, nearly grams largely target pregnant women of pregnant women, pregnant woman 
this functionality to deploy incentive 620,000 individuals enrolled, which with the overarching goal of delivering or general information seeker. This may 
payments for CHWs and pregnant was much more than the program bud- at a facility, as 54% of deliveries are still present an opportunity to send custom-
women, as well as to transfer payment get could support. home-based. As a result, no programs ized messages on birth asphyxia and 
to taxi drivers for referral transpor- currently include messaging on birth neonatal resuscitation to birth support-
tation. Some organizations, like asphyxia and neonatal resuscitation. ers and partners of pregnant women. 
28 mHEALTH AND NEONATAL RESUSCITATION mHEALTH OPPORTUNITIES 29
Provider Refresher Training training sessions. This could be com-
Training healthcare providers, spe- plemented with an IVR system to add 
cifically nurses, nurse midwives and audio to the experience, field clarifica-
doctors, on the HBB protocol is a key tion questions by providers, and track 
part of the national strategy to address the number of providers engaging in 
mortality from birth asphyxia. However, refreshing his/her knowledge. 
Dr. Augustine Massawe of Muhimbili 
University of Health and Allied Sciences EGPAF and D-Tree International both 
noted that when skills are not frequently have mHealth solutions focused on pro-
used, they often go stale. Further, turn- vider training. EGPAF is in the early transportation. JHPIEGO’s program, were more likely to deliver babies with 
over of nurses and nurse midwives is stages of translating PMTCT paper MAISHA, which launched in 2008, birth asphyxia. Further, febrile illness 
high within facilities and across facil- manuals to mobile phones, which and introduced the mHealth solution during pregnancy, including confirmed 
ities. As a result, refresher training is will be complemented by pictures to eMNCH in 2010, has found an increase and suspected cases of malaria, ante-
critical to maximize the long-term value remind health providers of key prac- in the rates of risk factor detection partum hospitalization, antepartum 
of the HBB program. Currently, the tices. D-Tree International has also been and facility deliveries. Similarly, the or intrapartum anemia, antepartum 
HBB program does include follow-up leading research and implementation “mHealth for Safer Deliveries” program, hemorrhage and severe preeclamp-
components, but these are often not of electronic protocols of Integrated launched in 2010, found that facility sia/eclampsia were all significantly 
carried out due to insufficient funds, Management of Childhood Illness deliveries had increased from 30% to associated with birth asphyxia (63). 
transportation challenges and time (IMCI) which has been found to improve 72% (62) by mid-2013. Pathfinder is in Dr. Augustine Massawe of Muhimbili 
constraints. Unfortunately, there are clinician adherence from 60% to 84%. the early stages of its program, with University of Health and Allied Sciences 
no mHealth initiatives that support plans to launch the first phase in April in Dar es Salaam also believes that fac-
provider refresher training in the HBB Intelligent Referrals 2014. The program will also include tors including preterm labor, previous 
program at this time. In the past, the training for CHWs on standard MNCH neonatal death or still birth, multiple 
American Medical Association has dis- One of the largest challenges facing the curriculum, in addition to emergency pregnancies, disproportionate size of 
tributed CDs on neonatal resuscitation health system in rural areas of Tanzania system and obstetric care for facility fetus, diabetic mother, anemia and HIV 
as a refresher-training tool for hospi- are effective referrals. This includes providers, which will include modules could also contribute to increasing the 
tals in Tanzania, an approach that was relaying accurate information on the on birth asphyxia and neonatal resusci- risk of birth asphyxia. 
found to be useful. nature of the referral, and available tation techniques. All of its emergency 
transportation to execute the referral. protocols require approval from the Identifying these risk factors during 
There is an opportunity to include a As a result, a number of organizations Association of Gynecologists and antenatal care using mobile technology 
mobile component in the HBB training are focusing on this problem, includ- Obstetricians of Tanzania. could prompt more intelligent referrals 
program to support provider follow-up. ing JHPIEGO and the Etislat/Zantel during delivery, encouraging providers 
This could range from simple solutions, program called “mHealth for Safer In each of these programs, there at facilities and hospitals to prepare 
such as sending SMS messages remind- Deliveries”, in collaboration with D-Tree is an opportunity to link risk factor neonatal resuscitation equipment and 
ing providers to practice the protocol or International and Pathfinder. screening of pregnant women with trigger their memory of the protocol. 
share the knowledge with a colleague, the risk of delivering a newborn with 
to more advanced solutions, such as The solutions generally combine a birth asphyxia. Research has shown Supply Chain Management 
distributing memory cards with pre- screening protocol to assess the risk that there are predisposing antenatal 
loaded videos on neonatal resuscitation of complications for pregnant women, and intrapartum risk factors for birth The prevention of mortality from 
techniques. Currently, providers receive triggers to initiate emergency refer- asphyxia. A study in Uganda found that birth asphyxia is predicated on the 
a small paper-based booklet in English rals and systems to deploy payment women who did not attend antenatal availability and utilization of neonatal 
or Swahili with pictures during HBB to preselected drivers at fixed rates for care or attended fewer than four visits resuscitation equipment. Therefore, 
30 mHEALTH AND NEONATAL RESUSCITATION mHEALTH OPPORTUNITIES 31
While the program has not yet figured No existing mHealth solutions that 
out how medical equipment will be focus on utilization of neonatal resus-
tracked and reported, it will be working citation equipment through patient 
through the design over the next few and death registration were found. 
months. Organizations have suggested However, there is an opportunity to 
that JSI should consider tracking the learn from the birth registration system 
following three key indicators in the implemented by UNICEF in collabo-
new system: a) what is the availability ration with the Regulation Insolvency 
of equipment? b) does the equipment Trusteeship Agency (RITA) in Tanzania, 
work? c) have orders been fulfilled? with support from the Corporate Social 
These organizations have also recom- Responsibility department of Tigo, a 
mended that the UNCoLSC consider leading telecommunication company. 
tracking the availability and utilization by September 2014. The ILS system, making the reporting data openly In Tanzania, less than 20% of newborns 
of neonatal resuscitation at health facil- which launched in November 2010, was available, to encourage action and are registered at birth and less than 10% 
ities is critical to achieving this goal. designed to complement the existing accountability, in the case of stock-outs. have a birth certificate. The challenge 
ordering and reporting system, specifi- has been that families are required to 
Currently, MSD manages the pro- cally to prevent stock-outs and provide Patient and Death Registration travel to the district level to complete 
curement, storage and distribution a national snapshot of stock across the registration. The program, implemented 
of 800 commodities across sexu- country. Every month, the health facil- Similar to tracking the availability of by UNICEF, aims to bring the birth reg-
ally transmitted infection medicines, ity or store facility charge is required neonatal resuscitation equipment, mon- istration process to the community 
essential medicines, malaria, family to send an SMS with a count of stock itoring the utilization of this equipment level, by using SMS to send relevant 
planning, ARV/HIV, lab/diagnostics, on hand of each of the commodities is critical in assessing the impact of information to the national database. 
immunization and tuberculosis for in the system. Facilities also receive training efforts and addressing gaps The first phase, launched in 2013 in one 
5,000 facilities in the country. This SMS reminders to submit paper-based in service delivery. region, registered 150,000 children in 
process is managed by the Electronic orders during their ordering period to just five months. Tigo developed the 
Logistics Management Information the zonal level to initiate fulfillment. Currently, facilities keep registers to application and built it into SIM cards, 
System (eLMIS), and complemented Currently, the system has contributed to track the nature of deliveries, but do which were then distributed to health 
by a mobile reporting system called improving reporting rates from 50% to not list equipment used or not used. facilities or village offices on a basic 
the Integrated Logistics System (ILS), 75%, driving 100% adherence of  facil- Though registration of perinatal deaths handset for use. The program plans to 
which is implemented by John Snow ities ordering only during its assigned is institutionalized with a register that introduce the mHealth solution to two 
International (JSI) and was developed time period, and enabling 75% visibility includes a column for “cause of death,” additional regions in 2014. 
by the software firm Dimagi. Presently, into the current stock medical com- the register is both mired by poor main-
neither eLMIS nor ILS support or track modities in facilities across the country. tenance and limited by inaccurately This program illustrates that a basic 
neonatal resuscitation equipment (64). JSI reports that stakeholders are begin- determining the cause of a perina- SMS program with strong integration 
ning to trust ILS as a source of credible tal death. The perception amongst into national systems can contribute 
However, JSI is currently in discussions data, but support is still required to stakeholders is that the process and to better understanding of population 
with the UNCoLSC to add the 13 essen- instill change management training at requirements for a maternal death demographics. 
tial commodities, including neonatal the regional level on effectively utilizing audit, which takes between 8-10 hours 
resuscitation equipment, to its sys- and responding to data being collected. post-labor, has weakened the efforts 
tem for rollout across 5,000 facilities of perinatal and neonatal death audits. 
33
6
Deaths from complications of birth asphyxia due to Conclusion
weak availability, adoption and utilization of neonatal 
resuscitation equipment can be prevented through targeted interventions 
that strengthen existing health systems. The penetration and adoption of 
mobile phones offers an unprecedented opportunity to address information 
asymmetries and gaps in connectivity between caregivers, patients, providers 
and institutions within a health system. 
The nature of birth asphyxia calls for interventions that integrate and com-
plement the continuum of care for pregnant women, supporting efforts 
especially during antenatal care. Our research revealed an opportunity for 
the UNCoLSC to leverage existing promising efforts in Tanzania to improve 
maternal, newborn and child health using mobile technology. This includes 
equipping caregivers with the information to trigger action from providers 
based on key danger signs, supporting providers with options to refresh training 
on neonatal resuscitation protocols, identifying women at risk of birth asphyxia 
during antenatal care and initiating more informed and intelligent referrals 
to providers at facilities and hospitals, and using mobile phones to track the 
availability, condition, and utilization of neonatal resuscitation equipment to 
monitor where knowledge and skill gaps may persist. 
WEAK AVAILABILITY, The MOHSW in Tanzania is an enthusiastic supporter of mHealth solutions 
to improve health outcomes related to MDG 4. It has not only appointed an 
ADOPTION AND UTILIZATION mHealth coordinator at the national level to oversee country activities, but 
also established a community of practice across international organizations 
OF NEONATAL RESUSCITATION to collaborate, share knowledge, and drive scale of high impact solutions. 
EQUIPMENT CAN BE PREVENTED As a next step, engaging the principal secretary at the MOHSW, the mHealth coordinator, and institutions involved in mHealth implementations will be 
THROUGH INTERVENTIONS critical to establishing a Tanzania program that leverages existing efforts and aligns with national programs and objectives. In this way, the potential 
THAT STRENGTHEN EXISTING to use mHealth to increase adoption and utilization of neonatal resuscitation equipment can be advanced.
HEALTH SYSTEMS.
34 mHEALTH AND NEONATAL RESUSCITATION APPENDIX 35
Appendix A Appendix A 
Interview guide (continued)
1. Problem  H. According to the HBB report, there is high availability of bag and mask resuscitators in PHCs 
 A. What is the scope of the problem of birth asphyxiation in Tanzania? in Tanzania? What factors have led to this outcome?
 B. Geographic concentration of the problem?  I. How is NNR equipment tracked across the supply chain – from entry into country / manufacturer 
 C. Profile of most marginalized / underserved women? to utilization at the facility level? Up to what level does data exist? Where does it break down?
 J. What initiatives currently exist to track NNR equipment / health outcomes from birth 
2. Policy Environment asphyxiation cases? 
 A. Is birth asphyxiation and NNR equipment considered a priority at the government level? 
 B. What guidelines / strategic plans is birth asphyxiation and NNR equipment part of? 5. Telecom environment 
 C. What Ministry supports programs focused on birth asphyxiation and NNR equipment?  A. What is the mobile phone penetration in Tanzania? 
 D. Is there are coordinating body / technical working group focused on birth asphyxiation and  B. Urban/rural split? 
NNR equipment?  C. Basic phone / smartphone penetration? Barriers impacting the latter? 
 E. Is NNR equipment included on the Essential Medicines List? Any other recommended  D. Schemes supporting mobile phone ownership by health providers? 
commodities lists? 
6. Patient Knowledge 
3. Healthcare Delivery and Provider Training  A. What campaigns and initiatives exist to improve patient knowledge of pregnancy related 
 A. According the national standard guidelines, which cadre of health professionals are responsible risks such as birth asphyxiation? 
for managing complications from birth asphyxiation?  B. What is the current behavior of rural/urban pregnant women with regards to antenatal care, 
 B. What is the training program for this health cadre? and delivery? 
 C. What is the current status of training for this health cadre?  C. What initiatives/schemes exist to improve current health practices around maternal health?
 D. Provider knowledge of birth asphyxiation management? Gaps and barriers to improving  D. What has worked / not worked? 
knowledge and practice levels?
 E. How does birth asphyxiation feature in the training program? 7. Mobile Health
 F. What tools are provided to the health cadre to learn, and support the management of birth  A. What are three high-impact opportunities to improve accessibility and utilization of NNR 
asphyxiation? equipment with the support of mobile phones and connectivity? 
 G. Are any mobile or wireless technologies used to support provider training?  B. What mHealth programs supporting NNR equipment or RMNCH more broadly in Tanzania 
 H. How are births and deaths at birth registered in Tanzania? What initiatives exist to support has the potential for national scale? 
this goal?  C. Do any mHealth programs exist in Tanzania that support for birth asphyxiation and NNR 
equipment could be added on it?
4. Product / Supply Chain Management  
 A. What types of NNR equipment are available in Tanzania? (brands, companies, cost, shelf-life, 
replacement rate, maintenance) 
 B. What organizations procure NNR equipment? 
 C. What is the forecasting process for NNR equipment?  
 D. What is the procurement cycle for NNR equipment?
 E. Who are the major donors of NNR equipment in Tanzania?
 F. What is the shortage or surplus of NNR equipment in the country?
 G. What bottlenecks are there in the procurement process impacting the accessibility of NNR 
equipment?
36 mHEALTH AND NEONATAL RESUSCITATION REFERENCES 37
Appendix B References
Stakeholder List
Janita Ferentinos, CDC Foundation 1. Agravat, N. (2013). Mhealth and neonatal resuscitation: a review of interventions, approaches and applications. 
Asia Kassim Hussein, UNICEF [report] Washington: mHealth Alliance.
Dunstan Bishanga, JHPIEGO 2. Mrisho, M. (2008). Neonatal survival in rural Tanzania: Home deliveries, neonatal mortality and subsequent 
help and health seeking behaviour for the newborn by mothers in rural Tanzania (Doctoral dissertation, 
Erica Thomas, JHPIEGO
University of Basel).
Gaudiosa Tibaijuka, JHPIEGO
3. Ersdal, H. L., Mduma, E., Svensen, E., & Perlman, J. (2012). Birth asphyxia: a major cause of early neonatal 
Christopher Awinia, PRAXIS Research mortality in a Tanzanian rural hospital. Pediatrics,129(5), e1238-e1243.
Dr. Mohammed Makame, PATH
4. Msemo, G., Massawe, A., Donan Mmbando, D., Rusibamayila, N., Manji, K., Kidanto, H. L., Mwizamuholya, D., 
Lucy Fulgence Silas, D-Tree International Ringia, P., Ersdal, H. L. & Perlman, J. (2013). Newborn mortality and fresh stillbirth rates in tanzania after 
Waziri Nyoni, John Hopkins University Center for Communication Programs helping babies breathe training. Pediatrics, 131 (2), doi:10.1542/peds.2012-1795 [Accessed: 15 Feb 2014].
Roland Van de Ven, Elizabeth Glaser Pediatric AIDS Foundation 5. Perlman, Jeffrey. “Helping Babies Breathe outcomes study in Tanzania.” American Academy of Pediatrics. 
Chrispine Kimario, Elizabeth Glaser Pediatric AIDS Foundation Web. 19 Feb. 2014.<http://www2.aap.org/nrp/docs/Fri%20209%201120%20Perlman%20GlobalTalk2Final.pdf>.
Marasi Mwencha, John Snow International 6. Msemo, G., Massawe, A., Donan Mmbando, D., Rusibamayila, N., Manji, K., Kidanto, H. L., Mwizamuholya, D., 
Colin Spurway, BBC Media Action Ringia, P., Ersdal, H. L. & Perlman, J. (2013). Newborn mortality and fresh stillbirth rates in tanzania after 
helping babies breathe training. Pediatrics, 131 (2), doi:10.1542/peds.2012-1795 [Accessed: 15 Feb 2014].
Mustafa Kudrati, Pathfinder International 
7. Hussein, A. K. (2014). Interview on birth asphyxia and neonatal resuscitation in tanzania. Interviewed by Hima 
Benjamin Mrema, Pathfinder International 
Batavia [in person] UNICEF Dar es Salaam Office, February 17, 2014.
Dr. Mwendwa Mwenesi, Ministry of Health and Social Welfare, Tanzania 
8. Perlman, Jeffrey. “Helping Babies Breathe outcomes study in Tanzania.” American Academy of Pediatrics. 
Dr. Augustine Massawe, Muhimbili University of Health and Allied Sciences Web. 19 Feb. 2014.  
Woinde Shisael, TIGO <http://www2.aap.org/nrp/docs/Fri%20209%201120%20Perlman%20GlobalTalk2Final.pdf>.
9. NBS [Tanzania] and ORC Macro, Tanzania Demographic and Health Survey 2004-2005 - Key Findings. 
National Bureau of Statistics, Dar es Salaam and ORC Macro, Calverton, MD.
10. Perlman, Jeffrey. “Helping Babies Breathe outcomes study in Tanzania.” American Academy of Pediatrics. 
Web. 19 Feb. 2014. <http://www2.aap.org/nrp/docs/Fri%20209%201120%20Perlman%20GlobalTalk2Final.
pdf>.
11. Source: Neonatal Survival 2 Darmstadt, G. Bhutta, ZA, Cousens, S, Taghreed, A, Walker, N, de Bernis, L, 
Evidence-Based, Low-cost interventions: How many newborn babies can we save?  
www.the lancet.com published on line 3 March 2005 http:// image. The lancet.com/extras/05 art 17 web
12. “About Helping Babies Breathe.” Helping Babies Breathe. Web. 17 Feb. 2014.  
<http://www.helpingbabiesbreathe.org/about.html>.
13.  Msemo, G., Massawe, A., Donan Mmbando, D., Rusibamayila, N., Manji, K., Kidanto, H. L., Mwizamuholya, 
D., Ringia, P., Ersdal, H. L. & Perlman, J. (2013). Newborn mortality and fresh stillbirth rates in tanzania after 
helping babies breathe training. Pediatrics, 131 (2), doi:10.1542/peds.2012-1795 [Accessed: 15 Feb 2014].
14. Appropriate neonatal resuscitation equipment refers to infant sized artificial manual breathing unit (AMBU)-
bags, masks and suction devices. 
15. Manji, K. Situation analysis of newborn health in Tanzania: Current situation, existing plans and strategic next 
steps for newborn health. Dar es Salaam: Ministry of Health and Social Welfare, Save the Children; 2009
16. Manji, K. Situation analysis of newborn health in Tanzania: Current situation, existing plans and strategic next 
steps for newborn health. Dar es Salaam: Ministry of Health and Social Welfare, Save the Children; 2009
17. Plotkin, M., Tibaijuka, G., Makene, C. L., & Currie, S. Quality of Care for Prevention and Management of Common 
Maternal and Newborn Complications. 
18. Plotkin, M., Tibaijuka, G., Makene, C. L., & Currie, S. Quality of Care for Prevention and Management of Common 
Maternal and Newborn Complications.
38 mHEALTH AND NEONATAL RESUSCITATION REFERENCES 39
19. Manji, K. Situation analysis of newborn health in Tanzania: Current situation, existing plans and strategic next 41. Kudrati, M. (2014). Opportunities for mhealth to improve neonatal resuscitation in tanzania. Interviewed by 
steps for newborn health. Dar es Salaam: Ministry of Health and Social Welfare, Save the Children; 2009 Hima Batavia [in person] Pathfinder International Dar es Salaam office, February 20, 2014.
20. United Republic of Tanzania Ministry of Health and Social Welfare. (2008). The national road map strategic 42. Quarterly Telecom Statistics. (2013). [report] Tanzania Communications Regulatory Authority.
plan to accelerate reduction of maternal, newborn and child deaths in tanzania. [report] Dar es Salaam.
43. National Bureau of Statistics, National Statistical Office of Tanzania. (2014). [online] Retrieved from: 
21. United Republic of Tanzania Ministry of Health and Social Welfare. (2008). The national road map strategic http://www.nbs.go.tz/ [Accessed: 16 Feb 2014].
plan to accelerate reduction of maternal, newborn and child deaths in tanzania. [report] Dar es Salaam.
44. Ferentinos, J. (2014). Opportunities for mhealth to improve neonatal resuscitation in tanzania. Interviewed by 
22. United Republic of Tanzania Ministry of Health and Social Welfare. (2008). The national road map strategic Hima Batavia [in person] Seacliff Hotel, Dar es Salaam, February 17, 2014.
plan to accelerate reduction of maternal, newborn and child deaths in tanzania. [report] Dar es Salaam.
45. Mwenesi, M. (2014). Opportunities for mhealth to improve neonatal resuscitation in tanzania. Interviewed by 
23. Manji, K. Situation analysis of newborn health in Tanzania: Current situation, existing plans and strategic next Hima Batavia [in person] Ministry of Health and Social Welfare office in Dar es Salaam, February 21, 2014.
steps for newborn health. Dar es Salaam: Ministry of Health and Social Welfare, Save the Children; 2009
46.  Mwencha, M. (2014). Using mhealth for supply chain management. Interviewed by Hima Batavia [in person] 
24. Manji, K. Situation analysis of newborn health in Tanzania: Current situation, existing plans and strategic next John Snow International (JSI) Dar es Salaam Office, February 21, 2014.
steps for newborn health. Dar es Salaam: Ministry of Health and Social Welfare, Save the Children; 2009
47. Ferentinos, J. (2014). Opportunities for mhealth to improve neonatal resuscitation in tanzania. Interviewed by 
25. Perlman, Jeffrey. “Helping Babies Breathe outcomes study in Tanzania.” American Academy of Pediatrics. Hima Batavia [in person] Seacliff Hotel, Dar es Salaam, February 17, 2014.
Web. 19 Feb. 2014.  
48. Bizcommunity. “Africa finding its own solutions using mobile tech.” Marketing & media trends. 25 Jan. 2013. 
<http://www2.aap.org/nrp/docs/Fri%20209%201120%20Perlman%20GlobalTalk2Final.pdf>.
Web. 24 Feb. 2014. <http://www.bizcommunity.com/Article/196/424/88287.html>.
26. Msemo, Georgina. “Implementation of the Helping Babies Breathe program in Tanzania comprehensive final 
49. Quarterly Telecom Statistics. (2013). [report] Tanzania Communications Regulatory Authority.
report.” Helping Babies Breathe. Web. 17 Feb. 2014.  
<http://www.helpingbabiesbreathe.org/docs/AAP%20Final%20Report%20docx.pdf>. 50. Quarterly Telecom Statistics. (2013). [report] Tanzania Communications Regulatory Authority.
27. Thomas, E. (2014). Helping babies breathe program in tanzania. Interviewed by Hima Batavia [in person] 51. “Mobile phone use in Tanzania.” Text to Change. Web. 12 Feb. 2014.  
JHPIEGO Dar es Salaam Offices, February 18, 2014. <http://www.texttochange.org/sites/default/files/newsfiles/TTC%20Brochure%20Tanzania.pdf>.
28. Ersdal, H. L., Vossius, C., Bayo, E., Mduma, E., Perlman, J., Lippert, A., &Søreide, E. (2013). A one-day 52. Awinia, C. (2014). Opportunities for mhealth to improve neonatal resuscitation in tanzania. Interviewed by 
“Helping Babies Breathe” course improves simulated performance but not clinical management of neonates. Hima Batavia [in person] PRAXIS Research Dar es Salaam office, February 18, 2014.
Resuscitation,84(10), 1422-1427. 53. Nyoni, W. (2014). Opportunities for mhealth to improve neonatal resuscitation in tanzania. Interviewed by 
29. The COP coordinates its efforts using an online Google Group called “Tanzania-mHealth” Hima Batavia [in person] John Hopkins University Center for Communication Programs Dar es Salaam Office, 
February 19, 2014.
30. Silas, L. F. (2014). Opportunities to use mhealth for neonatal resuscitation equipment in tanzania. Interviewed 
by Hima Batavia [in person] D-Tree International Dar es Salaam Office, February 19, 2014. 54. Mwenesi, M. (2014). Opportunities for mhealth to improve neonatal resuscitation in tanzania. Interviewed by 
Hima Batavia [in person] Ministry of Health and Social Welfare office in Dar es Salaam, February 21, 2014.
31. Manji, K. Situation analysis of newborn health in Tanzania: Current situation, existing plans and strategic next 
steps for newborn health. Dar es Salaam: Ministry of Health and Social Welfare, Save the Children; 2009 55. Van De Ven, R. (2014). Opportunities for mhealth to improve neonatal resuscitation in tanzania. Interviewed by 
Hima Batavia [in person] Elizabeth Glaser Pediatric AIDS Foundation Dar es Salaam Office, February 19, 2014.
32. Massawe, A. (2014). Birth asphyxia in tanzania and opportunities for mhealth to improve neonatal 
resuscitation. Interviewed by Hima Batavia [in person] Muhimbili University of Health and Allied Sciences, 56. The Guardian Reporter. “Govt pushes ICT use into rural areas.” IPP Media. Web. 24 Feb. 2014.  
February 20, 2014. <http://www.ippmedia.com/frontend/?l=64092>.
33. A train-the-trainer model enables more experienced health professionals at the national and regional levels to 57. Mwenesi, M. (2014). Opportunities for mhealth to improve neonatal resuscitation in tanzania. Interviewed by 
teach less-experienced health professionals at the district and facility levels on a new health practice or product. Hima Batavia [in person] Ministry of Health and Social Welfare office in Dar es Salaam, February 21, 2014.
34. Hussein, A. K. (2014). Interview on birth asphyxia and neonatal resuscitation in tanzania. Interviewed by Hima 58. Shisael, W. (2014). Opportunities for mhealth to improve neonatal resuscitation in tanzania. Interviewed by 
Batavia [in person] UNICEF Dar es Salaam Office, February 17, 2014. Hima Batavia [in person] TIGO offices in Dar es Salaam, February 21, 2014.
35. Silas, L. F. (2014). Opportunities to use mhealth for neonatal resuscitation equipment in tanzania. Interviewed 59. Silas, L. F. (2014). Opportunities to use mhealth for neonatal resuscitation equipment in tanzania. Interviewed 
by Hima Batavia [in person] D-Tree International Dar es Salaam Office, February 19, 2014. by Hima Batavia [in person] D-Tree International Dar es Salaam Office, February 19, 2014.
36. Nyamtema, A. S., Urassa, D. P., Massawe, S., Lindmark, G., & Van Roosmalen, J. (2008). Staffing needs for 60. Approximately 10-13% of pregnant women in Tanzania. However, though the program is targeted to pregnant 
quality perinatal care in Tanzania.African journal of reproductive health, 12(3). women, anyone can register 
37. Thomas, E. (2014). Helping babies breathe program in tanzania. Interviewed by Hima Batavia [in person] 61. Josette. “Scaled nationwide mHealth campaign for pregnant women in Tanzania.” Text to Change. Web. 19 Feb. 
JHPIEGO Dar es Salaam Offices, February 18, 2014. 2014. <http://www.texttochange.org/news/scaled-nationwide-mhealth-campaign-pregnant-women-tanzania>.
38. Thomas, E. (2014). Helping babies breathe program in tanzania. Interviewed by Hima Batavia [in person] 62. Riley, Pamela. “Mobile money for health.” mHealth Working Group. 28 May 2013. Web. 18 Feb. 2014.  
JHPIEGO Dar es Salaam Offices, February 18, 2014. <http://www.mhealthworkinggroup.org/sites/mhealthwg.org/files/mobile_money_master.pptx>.
39. Kudrati, M. (2014). Opportunities for mhealth to improve neonatal resuscitation in tanzania. Interviewed by 63. Kaye, D. (2004). Antenatal and intrapartum risk factors for birth asphyxia among emergency obstetric 
Hima Batavia [in person] Pathfinder International Dar es Salaam office, February 20, 2014. referrals in Mulago Hospital, Kampala, Uganda.East African medical journal, 80(3), 140-143.
40. Awinia, C. (2014). Opportunities for mhealth to improve neonatal resuscitation in tanzania. Interviewed by 64. Mwencha, M. (2014). Using mhealth for supply chain management. Interviewed by Hima Batavia [in person] 
Hima Batavia [in person] PRAXIS Research Dar es Salaam office, February 18, 2014. John Snow International (JSI) Dar es Salaam Office, February 21, 2014.
1750 Pennsylvania Avenue, NW 
Suite 300
Washington, D.C. 20006
202.887.9040 (phone)
202.887.9021 (fax)
www.mhealthalliance.org
