mCENAS! 
Addressing barriers to sexual and reproductive health services for youth in 
Mozambique 
BEHAVIOR CHANGE COMMUNICATION 
Implementation date: September 2013 to June 2014  
In Mozambique, youth under 15 years of age comprise over 45 percent of the population. Additionally, of married or in-union 
women above the age of 15, only 11 percent use a method of contraception. Through the USAID-funded Extending Service 
Delivery Family Planning Initiative (ESD/FPI) project, Pathfinder aims to increase access to and use of contraceptives and high-
quality sexual and reproductive health (SRH) services by women and youth in four provinces of Mozambique.  The youth strategy 
of the ESD/FPI projects includes supporting the government to increase young people’s access to youth-friendly SRH services and 
working with community-based organizations and youth peer educators to increase young people’s awareness of and demand for 
services.  During the initial two years of project implementation, it became increasingly clear that young people needed access to 
more information and support to overcome the many barriers they face in accessing and using contraceptive and other SRH 
services.   
Leveraging the growing use of mobile phones in urban and peri-urban areas of Mozambique, Pathfinder developed a 
comprehensive SMS-based program specifically tailored for youth aged 15 to 24 with different content for those with and without 
children.  The initiative, called mCenas! (English translation: mobile scenes), aims to motivate youth to start or continue using a 
contraceptive method by increasing knowledge about and dispel common myths around contraception, and address common 
barriers youth face surrounding the use of contraception.  
About mCenas! 
mCenas! is an interactive two-way SMS system that is free for the entire duration of the project.  
f or clients. Developed through a participatory process 
informed by formative research, mCenas! has three main Twenty activists enrolled clients through community events, 
c omponents: 1) a behavior change theory-based story 
schools and door to door recruitment strategies. As part of 
delivered through SMS messages that youth can relate to and the ESD/FPI project, mCenas! complemented and reinforced 
draw on for further dialogue and reflection with peers (two ongoing interpersonal behavior change activities and 
m onths of messaging); 2) informational messages about each 
improved service delivery for young people. Peer educators 
contraceptive method adapted from FHI360’s Mobile 4 were oriented on how to use the SMS stories to generate 
Reproductive Health (m4RH) project (one month of reflection and dialogue among youth on the barriers and 
 
m essaging); and 3) an interactive “Frequently Asked 
facilitators to use of contraception. In addition, youth were 
Questions” (FAQs) function where youth could ask about a also linked to a youth-friendly hotline called Alo Vida, run by 
range of  SRH topics, including more information on the Ministry of Health, where a live representative could 
c ontraception. Clients had access to the interactive menus answer questions about contraception and SRH. 
18  |  mHealth Compendium Volume 4 
Evaluation and Results 
A total of 2,005 young people were enrolled in mCenas; 54 percent were 15 to 17 years old, 46 percent were 18 to 24, 57 
percent were women, and 33 percent had a child. The system received 10,451 requests for information about sexuality. The 
most common requests were “Am I ready for sex?” (14 percent), “Masturbation” (9 percent), and “Sexual Pleasure” (9 
percent). The most common inquiries about contraceptive methods were on injectables (19 percent), IUDs (13 percent), 
and implants (12 percent).  Despite instructions on how to use the menu-driven system (key words triggered the SMS back 
to the client), over 8,000 non-conforming, free form texts were received. Approximately half were failed attempts to get 
information from the menu system while the other half were messages expressing opinions about the story or soliciting 
more personal advice. Results from a closer analysis will be available in November 2014.  
USAID’s centrally-funded cooperative agreement, Evidence to Action (E2A), conducted a research study based on the 
mCenas! project in order to generate evidence of whether a SMS contraception information initiative is socially acceptable 
and has an impact on the knowledge, attitudes, and self-efficacy of male and female youth aged 18 to 24 in Mozambique. E2A 
conducted a baseline (December 2013) and endline (June 2014) survey using both SMS and in-person interviews with a 
sample of young people enrolled in the program. Study results are expected in November 2014. 
Lessons Learned 
 Utilizing a participatory development process rooted in behavior change theory allowed for the development of a story 
and a set of FAQs that are responsive to the realities of young people in Mozambique 
 Undergoing formative research allowed for the realization of important differences in the barriers to contraceptive use 
between youth with children and those without children, thereby creating two, more tailored stories 
 Pre-tests with young people confirmed the importance of using youth vernacular in the text messages 
 There is a need to carefully pretest menu key word systems with SMS projects 
 Young people expect high degree of interactivity with a SMS system and therefore it is recommended to create 
programs that allow for this 
Conclusion Geographic Coverage: Maputo and Inhambane 
Provinces, Mozambique  
mCenas!, the first mHealth program to focus on youth and 
Implementation Partners: Pathfinder 
contraception in Mozambique, provides an important learning 
International, Dimagi  
opportunity.  It is uniquely designed to incorporate narratives – 
known to be an effective behavior change strategy – with standard Funder: USAID through the Extending Service 
informational messages and an interactive menu of FAQs. It will be Delivery Family Planning Initiative  
critical to integrate the content and themes from the stories and Contact Information: 
messages into the regular activities of the ESD/FPI project, including 
Pathfinder International: Rita Badiani, Country 
community mobilization and peer education. This will provide Representative, Mozambique 
opportunity for reflection and dialogue to reinforce the content of (rbadiani@pathfinder.org) 
mCenas!, drive changes in behavior, and create a real impact on a 
USAID/Mozambique: Maria da Conceição 
young person’s choice of whether or not to begin or continue using 
Rodrigues, Clinical Outreach Specialist, Health 
contraception. Office (mrodrigues@usaid.gov) 
 
mHealth Compendium Volume 4  |  19 
