  
  
m Trac: Monitoring Essential Medicine Supply 
  
B rief Overview 
 
Challenges in supply chain management of 
health supplies in Uganda have resulted in 
regular stock-outs of life-saving medicines in 
recent years, including artemisinin-
combination therapies (ACTs) used for the 
treatment of malaria and antiretroral (ARV) 
drugs used for treating HIV and AIDS. In 
order to to address this, in partnership with 
the World Health Organization and the UK 
Department for International Development 
(DFID), UNICEF Uganda is supporting the 
Ministry of Health (MOH) in the nationwide 
roll-out of an SMS-based disease surveillance 
and medicine tracking system (mTrac) at all 
5,000 health facilities and through 8,000 
medicine-distributing village health workers.  
 
The main purpose of the mTrac initiative is to strengthen the national Health Management Information System 
(HMIS) reporting, with an focus on disease surveillance, medicines monitoring, and the generation of 
community derived reports on health service quality with the aim of empowering government with real-time 
data, improving health sector accountability, and reducing stock outs.  mTrac is built on open-source 
RapidSMS technology and is designed to work on the mobile phone already in the hands of Ugandan health 
professionals, with no actual phones being distributed as part of this initiative. mTrac was officially launched in 
December 2011. mTrac currently has over 15,000 Health Sector Professionals already using the system, with 
national coverage expected to be achieved by December 2012. 
 
 
  Geographic Coverage: 
Uganda (National) 
 
 Implementation Partners: 
UNICEF is working with a team of partners which includes: 
Ugandan Ministry of Health | WHO | UK Department for International Development 
(DFID) | Foundation for Innovative New Diagnostics (FIND) | Ugandan National Medical 
Stores (NMS) | Ugandan Medicines and Health Service Delivery Monitoring Unit 
(MHSDMU) | Malaria Consortium  
 
 Funder: 
DFID 
 
 For More Information Contact: 
UNICEF Uganda  
 Sean Blaschke, Child Survival Systems Strengthening Specialist;  
Plot 9 George Street, PO Box 7047, Kampala, Uganda; 
Tel: +256-4-1717-1000; email: sblaschke@unicef.org 
 
 
 49 
 
Logistics 
 mTrac: Monitoring Essential Medicine Supply 
 
About mTrac  
mTRAC is an innovation initiative using SMS to transmit  
weekly HMIS surveillance reports from the nearly 5,000  
Health Facilities in Uganda, tracking disease outbreaks  
and health facility stock of essential medicines. The data  
is automatically analyzed by a central server with the  
data validated and disseminated through a web based  
dashboard and via SMS alerts, providing the Ministry of  
Health and district health offices with timely, accurate  
figures with which to plan and monitor programs.  
District Health Offices are now using this data to shift  
medicines from overstocked to under stocked facilities,  
and lobby the NMS for resupply based on their ability to  
present reliable and timely data.   
  
The second component of mTrac is an anonymous SMS  
Service Delivery Complaints toll free hotline through  
which any community member can report health  
service-related issues, including health centres closed The mTrac hotline has also proven extremely effective, 
during working hours and stockouts of essential drugs in with complaints ranging from drug theft to rape. 
hospitals. Currently, more than 10 million mobile UNICEF is working closely with the government to 
subscribers are capable of engaging with the government follow up on complaints. Between March and June 2012, 
in the monitoring of health services through mTrac 524 high priority cases were investigated and 362 cases 
using free SMS messages.  It is a service that is rapidly successfully resolved. Additionally, community reports 
gaining popularity among low-income families that do from suspected disease outbreaks, such as Ebola, have 
not have access to computers but own phones. been forwarded to district health teams for further 
 investigation. 
Evaluation and Results  
Through mTrac, the Ministry of Health can now access Lessons Learned 
weekly HMIS data in near real-time. For example, mTrac • National ownership and full government 
data is now incorporated into the Ministry of Health’s participation is critical to long term project 
Surveillance Unit’s weekly news bulletin and reports of sustainability.  
drug stock-outs, and is being integrated into the national • Regular monitoring and contingency plans must 
DHIS2 database. mTrac recently showed, for example, be made for mobile network failures, which 
that 14 percent of reporting facilities had complete were far more frequent than anticipated. 
stock-outs of ACTs. This information is then forwarded  
to the NMS and MHSDMU for follow-up and action. Conclusion 
 The availability of timely, accurate and complete health 
Information coming into m-Trac on reported disease information is critical for the planning, accounting, 
cases is also proving extremely useful for districts to monitoring and evaluation of activities and interventions 
identify problems in service delivery. In January 2012 in for the health sector. mTrac is an affordable and 
Kotido district in northern Uganda, for example, district sustainable solution that is helping the Ugandan Ministry 
officials noticed a spike in reported cases of fast of Health to improve services, prevent stock-outs, and 
breathing (a sign of pneumonia). On investigation, the be held accountable to Ugandan citizens. Using open-
district health team realized that HCW were source, RapidSMS technology that is utilized by mHealth 
misdiagnosing and mistreating pneumonia, and initiatives in approximately 15 other African countries, 
conducted a retraining on the spot.  mTrac is highly scalable and replicable.  
Information was excerpted from: 
50 http://www.unicef.org/uganda/9903.html  http://healthland.time.com/2012/08/15/disease-cant-hide/#ixzz24rLCEFYd 
http://www.unicef.org/uganda/MoRES_Uganda_-_results_and_lessons_learned_July_30th_2012(1).pdf 
http://www.finddiagnostics.org/export/sites/default/media/news/pdf/sms-uganda/mTrac report-9dec2011.pdf 
