COMMUNITY
SPOTLIGHT
CHATSALUD 
NICARAGUA
BACKGROUND
HEALTH LANDSCAPE IN NICARAGUA
In Nicaragua, 1:4 adolescent girls will become pregnant before the age of 19, and in 
some rural areas, that statistic rises to 1:3 girls. 
As studies have shown, the risk of maternal mortality doubles for adolescents under 
the age of 19. In addition, the infant mortality rate increases among those born to 
adolescent mothers, and they also face other health risks such as malnutrition. 
While nearly one third of Nicaragua’s population is comprised of youth, many ado-
lescents face barriers to accessing sexual and reproductive health information and 
services. Several studies have cited distrust and negative attitudes toward health 
centers among youth, mainly due to a fear that the services are not confidential. 
Instead, many adolescents use the internet to learn about sexual and reproduc-
tive health, and purchase family planning methods from pharmacies and local 
ventas (storefronts). 
CHATSALUD AND MHEALTH IN NICARAGUA
Nearly 90% of Nicaraguans have access to mobile phones, and cell phone signals are 
available country-wide. Youth are especially accustomed to using mobile phones. 
When asked about their comfort level with texting, one youth responded that “tex-
ting is kind of like my hobby.” 
TWO COMMUNITY HEALTH WORKERS USE THE 
ChatSalud is a project that aims to harness the ubiquity and anonymity that mobile 
CHATSALUD SYSTEM FOR THE FIRST TIME.
phones provide by using SMS to connect youth to sexual and reproductive health 
MAMA: MOBILE ALLIANCE FOR MATERNAL ACTION | COMMUNITY SPOTLIGHT 1
information. We’re hoping youth will use their phones to find “friendly” services in 
nearby cities.
While many youth already use their mobile phones to search for sexual and reproduc-
tive health information, some have complained that the internet connection is slow and 
inconsistent, and that it is difficult to know which websites have reliable information.
Since ChatSalud is based on a mobile platform that does not rely on the internet, 
A YOUTH GROUP MEMBER USES A MODEL PHONE but rather on the signal from local cell phone towers, SMS can be a faster and more 
DESIGNED BY A PEACE CORPS VOLUNTEER TO reliable way to access information. 
SIMUL ATE USING THE CHATSALUD SYSTEM 
WHICH WAS USED TO TEST THE MESSAGING. LESSONS LEARNED AND CHALLENGES 
PROGRAM SPECIFICS
PARTNERS 
ChatSalud is not an organization in and of itself; rather, it is a project run by collabora-
tion of local organizations that started as a Peace Corps project. A group of volunteers 
came together and realized that they could leverage the power and anonymity of mo-
bile phones to connect youth to reliable sexual and reproductive health information.
The idea caught on, and several partners have come together to bring ChatSalud to 
life. Together, this collaboration of partners has the capacity to bring a project like 
ChatSalud to scale.
ChatSalud is housed within the Nicaraguan Red Cross, where Planned Parenthood 
Global has channeled funding to hire a full-time project coordinator. Planned Par-
enthood Global and the Nicaraguan Red Cross provide technical support in project 
implementation, management, and monitoring and evaluation. 
Peace Corps Nicaragua is still an integral component of the project, providing 
brainpower and people power to help get the project off the ground. By being able to 
tap into the network of the approximately 200 volunteers living across Nicaragua, 
ChatSalud has been able to carry out research activities with youth to ensure that it 
meets their needs.
CIES-UNAN, the Nicaraguan School of Public Health, is providing expertise in pub-
lic health to develop ChatSalud content and to help with the monitoring, evaluation, 
and research components of the project.
Other partners are contributing significant in-kind contributions to the project, 
including: a major telecommunications company in Nicaragua has agreed to provide 
free text-messaging for ChatSalud and the end-user, making it completely free to the 
general public, and a marketing firm is developing a campaign to increase awareness 
of ChatSalud across the greater population. ther organizationsare dedicating their 
time and expertise to advise the ChatSalud team on themes as diverse as public 
health, ICT, and mobile health in the Nicaraguan context.
DEVELOPING CONTENT FOR CHATSALUD
In order to develop appropriate text messages, the ChatSalud team worked hand-in-
hand with a committee of experts in sexual and reproductive health issues from Nica-
ragua. Using a combination of MAMA messaging, m4RH messaging, and messaging 
from local organizations as a base, we adopted all messages to fit the local context.
MAMA: MOBILE ALLIANCE FOR MATERNAL ACTION | COMMUNITY SPOTLIGHT 2
Once the messages were finalized within the content development committee, we 
reached out to Peace Corps Volunteers across Nicaragua who were already working 
with youth groups. We trained the Peace Corps Volunteers to lead focus groups with 
the youth to determine how we could modify the content to be engaging, cool, and 
informative for youth. We used paper prototypes of mobile phones to ensure that the 
interface was user friendly and made sense to our end-users.
Finally, all text messages were reviewed and vetted by the Nicaraguan School of 
Public Health (CIES-UNAN) and all content will undergo an ethical review before 
being included in the ChatSalud system.
A YOUTH GROUP TESTS CHATSALUD AND SHOWS HUMAN-CENTERED DESIGN
OFF THEIR CELL PHONES, FOUND UBIQUITOUSLY 
At the heart of ChatSalud is the belief in human-centered design that puts people at 
THROUGHOUT NICARAGUA.
the center of the design process. Rather than retro-fitting an innovation to a health 
issue, we first wanted to explore the challenges and assets of Nicaraguan commu-
nities and the needs of youth who want to access sexual and reproductive health 
information. ChatSalud has used a number of methods to ensure a participatory 
design process.
Through a relationship with Johns Hopkins School of Public Health and the Johns 
Hopkins Global mHealth Initiative, the ChatSalud team conducted 42 in-depth in-
terviews among adolescents ages 14-25 in four separate communities located in four 
distinct regions of Nicaragua. 
The purpose of the interviews was to gain a better understanding of the challenges 
that youth face in accessing sexual and reproductive health services at their local 
health centers, how youth learn about sexual and reproductive health, and lastly, 
how they would feel about accessing that type of information through text mes-
saging. Each participant got to test out a prototype of ChatSalud before giving their 
feedback to the interviewer.
The result of the formative research was an understanding of the socio-cultural 
barriers that youth are up against when accessing sexual and reproductive health 
information and services, as well as of where a mobile health intervention might be 
able to make the greatest impact within the existing health system.
The ChatSalud team ran a small pilot among 25 youth in a rural community in 
Nicaragua that ran for three-weeks. The pilot included a workshop at the beginning 
to learn how to use ChatSalud, short text-based surveys sent out via SMS once a 
week, and focus groups to allow for more in-depth feedback. This helped the ChatSa-
lud team figure out what worked well, and what still needs improvement, before 
launching. The team hopes to run another small pilot with a slightly larger group of 
participants in the next couple months.
CHALLENGES
As with any project, there have been a number of challenges and bottlenecks along 
the way. The major challenges with the ChatSalud project can fit under three main 
categories: Sustainability, funding, and politics. 
• S USTAINABILITY: The problem of sustainability was clear from the beginning. 
Since the project was started by Peace Corps Volunteers who serve in Nicaragua 
for two-three year terms, the Co-Founders of the project had two years to turn the 
project over to a Nicaraguan organization. The project was successfully transferred 
MAMA: MOBILE ALLIANCE FOR MATERNAL ACTION | COMMUNITY SPOTLIGHT 3
over to the Nicaraguan Red Cross in March 2014 with financial support from 
Planned Parenthood Global.
• F UNDING: ChatSalud must be free to the end-user in order to reach those who need 
the service most. As such, it was imperative that we engage with the telecommu-
nication companies in Nicaragua to ensure free text-messaging for us and for the 
end-user. In the end, persistence and networking have helped solidify a relationship 
with one of the telecommunication companies, but we are still working to engage 
with the second major company in Nicaragua to ensure access for all Nicaraguans, 
regardless of their mobile carrier.
• P OLITICS: In order for the project to exist, the ChatSalud team had to develop 
an intimate understanding of the political climate in Nicaragua and learn how 
to navigate changing political currents, motives, and personnel. Knowing who 
to contact to achieve certain goals has been a crucial element to the project, and 
the ChatSalud team is still learning and adapting to the ever-changing politics in 
Nicaragua. While politics are different for every context, it is important that every 
organization understand the setting in which they are working, because it could 
mean the success or failure of a project.
FUTURE PLANS
After a lot of groundwork the ChatSalud team is finally preparing to rollout the 
first phase of ChatSalud in a major Nicaraguan city. Using lessons learned from our 
formative research, we will launch ChatSalud using a community-based approach, 
engaging with local leaders, youth, and health care providers. 
In addition to an opt-in text message system and a population-based marketing 
campaign, ChatSalud will also train youth promoters to teach their peers about 
ChatSalud. We would also like to work directly with health care providers to raise 
awareness of and conduct training for youth-friendly practices in order to encourage 
the utilization of available health care services among youth.
Looking to the future we hope to learn from our first rollout of ChatSalud and con-
tinue to scale up in a systematic way. All the decisions we have made as a team have 
been made with scale up in mind. As a result, the technology on which ChatSalud is 
based is scalable, and most importantly, the partnerships we have made can support 
a country-wide growth of ChatSalud.
MAMA: MOBILE ALLIANCE FOR MATERNAL ACTION | COMMUNITY SPOTLIGHT 4
The MAMA Community Spotlight series 
shines a light on some of the great work 
being done by organizations using MAMA’s 
adaptable mobile messages. Each month 
we feature a new organization that has 
downloaded our messages and is using mobile 
technology to improve maternal, newborn and 
child health. 
Inspired by these innovative programs? 
Download the MAMA messages for yourself by 
visiting www.mobilemamaalliance.org 
and completing our short questionnaire.
For inquires about working with our 
partnership, contact: 
MAMA Global
 tel: 202.887.9040 
email: info@mobilemamaalliance.org
Media Inquiries, contact: 
Stephanie Bowen 
tel: 202.864.5157 
email: sbowen@mobilemamaalliance.org
