 
Digital	Entrepreneurship
Highlights Publications Donors
Internet	and	mobile	technologies	are	powerful	tools	for	creating	high-value	jobs	and	strengthening	social
inclusion.	The	Digital	Entrepreneurship	Program	supports	the	growth	of	competitive	mobile	applications
industries	in	emerging	and	frontier	markets.	The	program	is	scaling	Mobile	Application	Labs	(mLabs)—incubation
facilities	and	innovation	hubs	for	digital	entrepreneurs—in	Kenya,	South	Africa,	and	Senegal.
+
-
Leaflet
Mobile	Application	Labs	(mLabs)
mLabs	are	regional	incubation	facilities	for	mobile	software	entrepreneurs	that	offer	physical	work	spaces,	state-of-the-art
equipment	and	testing	facilities,	business	skills	training,	and	access	to	early-stage	finance	through	investor	networks.	Explore
the	map	to	learn	more	about	mLabs	and	local	innovation	hubs	(mHubs).
Highlights
Article
Evolution	of	an	mLab:	Innovating	and	Iterating	to	Help	South	African	Entrepreneurs
Article
Caribbean	Transit	Solutions:	Paving	the	Way	for	a	More	Efficient	Caribbean
Transportation	System
Article
Investors	Take	Notice	as	Start-Up	Sendy	Disrupts	Last-Mile	Logistics	in	Kenya
Highlight
Technology	Entrepreneurs	See	Increased	Financing	with	XL	Africa
Article
Tanzania:	Jamii	Is	Increasing	Digital	Inclusion	and	Making	an	Impact
Article
Transforming	Tourism	in	Nepal,	One	Trek	at	a	Time
Article
Ghana:	Tech	Entrepreneur	Connects	Farmers	to	Global	Supply	Chains
Highlight
Creating	Digital	Markets	for	Traders	in	Mozambique
Article
Turning	Youth	into	Developers,	and	Developers	into	Entrepreneurs!
Article
South	Africa:	Start-Up	Geekulcha	Grows	Tech	and	‘Geek’	Culture	at	Colleges	and
Beyond
More	Highlights
Publications
Internet	of	Things:	The	New	Government	to	Business	Platform
Sensors	in	elevators	that	alert	government	agencies	to	public	safety	risks;	data	from	school	bags	to	keep	children	safe;
garbage	trucks	with	the	smarts	to	save	cities	money…	The	Internet	of	Things	(IoT)	will	change	everything.	That	is	the
conventional	wisdom.	We	set	out	to	look	for	evidence...
Read	more
This	report	is	a	follow-up	assessment	from	the	2014	report	Do	mLabs	make	a	Difference.	The	report	shares	key	findings	on
Do	mLabs	Still	Make	a	Difference?
the	impact	of	infoDev’s	mobile	application	labs	(mLabs).	mLabs	were	designed	as	pilot	projects	in	2011,	to	provide
specialized	incubation	and	acceleration	services	to	digital...
Read	more
Business	Analytics	Toolkit	for	Tech	Hubs
This	toolkit	was	made	for	managers	of	tech	hubs.	Dozens	of	tech	hubs	have	emerged	over	the	last	few	years	across	the
globe.	Managers	of	these	innovation	and	entrepreneurship	enablers	grapple	with	problems	that	infoDev	has	experience
with.	This	toolkit	takes	lessons	that	infoDev	has	gathered...
Read	more
Mobile	at	the	Base	of	the	Pyramid
This	set	of	reports	assesses	existing	mobile	application	(app)	business	models	targeted	at,	or	suitable	for,	people	living	at	the
base	of	the	pyramid	(BoP).	The	reports	address	specific	pain	points	for	app	developers	and	provide	practical,	actionable
advice.	Their	recommendations	are	specific	to...
Read	more
More	Publications
Donors
Partners
Nokia
Who	We	Are
About	infoDev
What	We	Do
Agribusiness	Entrepreneurship
Climate	Technology
Digital	Entrepreneurship
Early	Stage	Financing
Women's	Entrepreneurship
Entrepreneurship	Program	for	Innovation	in	the	Caribbean
Knowledge
Publications
Training	Guides
Innovation	Policy	Platform
Impact
Annual	Report
Featured	Entrepreneurs
News
Media	Coverage
Press	Releases
Videos
Videos
Work	with	Us
Job	Opportunities
Request	for	Expressions	of	Interest
SIGN	UP	FOR	OUR	NEWSLETTER:
Your	Email	Address SUBSCRIBE
