Having immediate access 
to the data, along with 
observations in the field, 
AIRS Angola identified 
high refusal rates quickly in 
two villages. 
PMI Africa Indoor Residual Spraying (AIRS)
IMPLEMENTATION DATE:  October 2013 to November 2013 
Increasing data collection efficiency through mobile phones in Angola
Many global health monitoring and evaluation (M&E) systems rely on paper-based data collection and 
data verification in the field. Supervisory staff members inadvertently overlook data errors during 
quality control, and data clerks commit data entry errors when transferring data from paper forms to 
electronic databases. Program staff members spend significant time transporting data from remote 
villages to data centers and entering data. These challenges affect the data quality and accessibility and 
impede corrective action to improve program operations. To overcome these supervisory issues and 
increase the speed with which project management staff received data, The President’s Malaria Initiative 
Africa Indoor Residual Spraying (PMI AIRS) Project implemented mobile data collection in Angola. 
About PMI AIRS
During the 2013 spray campaign, AIRS Angola piloted In October 2013, The PMI AIRS Project piloted mobile a mobile data collection and verification system as an data collection and data verification in Huambo, Angola. 
alternative to the standard, paper-based data collection and Forty-eight field staff were initially tasked to record data on 
quality assurance tools in Bailundo Capital, a commune in smartphones from roughly 12,000 households and electron-
Huambo province, Bailundo Municipality (~15,000 targeted ically submit to a cloud-based system accessible to the M&E 
structures). Given the advantages of using mobile data collec- manager at the home office. Eight team leaders were then 
tion applications (i.e. “real-time” data accessibility, elimination provided with Android tablets to simultaneously review the 
of data center, data entry clerk, and data transport costs, etc.), data to supervise staff performance and data quality. Phones 
the results of the mobile pilot are provided and the imple- were programmed with validation checks to prevent skipping 
mentation and feasibility of using mobile data collection and mandatory fields and avoid data errors commonly found on 
verification in a low-capacity setting for an indoor residual paper forms.
spraying campaign are examined. Due to low literacy, 23 staff exhibiting poor understanding of 
the mobile system were reassigned to paper-based data collec-
34  n  DATA COLLECTION
PMI AIRS
tion within four days of the pilot onset. The technical capacity n The spray operator submitted data at the end of the day 
was successfully built for ~25 staff and six team leaders and data rather than by structure, which made data validation 
was collected and analyzed concurrently. TThe length of train- difficult in the required format. Henceforth, the 
ing is recommended to be extended from three days to 10-14 modified system should allow spray operators to submit 
days for low literate staff and a modified system is proposed to data after every structure sprayed so team leaders can 
increase field data verification and data cleaning speeds. validate data throughout the day.
n Technological “bugs” in the team leader verification 
Evaluation and Results system the first week of spray (i.e., filtering and sorting 
difficulties) made data supervision difficult. PMI AIRS 
Overall, 25 spray operators used smartphones to collect spray recommends developing and testing a modified data 
data during the campaign. Six team leaders used tablets to aggregation system.
verify their team data at the end of the day. Once the spray 
data was uploaded onto the server, the team leader opened Conclusion
the tablet and viewed the verification table that listed the 
key indicators for their spray teams for that day. If any issues While the team encountered some difficulties during early 
were identified in the data, the team leader flagged the spray stages of implementation, the advantages of shorter delays 
operator form electronically and noted the issue in a text between data entry and the opportunity for data analysis 
comment for the M&E team to correct, as necessary. The were clear. The mobile system successfully allowed the AIRS 
M&E team downloaded the data and team leader flags from Angola team to detect a number of performance issues 
the “cloud” and reconciled any errors in a master dataset. and adapt operations to address the problems in a timely 
Having immediate access to the data, along with observa- manner. Following the success of this pilot, the PMI AIRS 
tions in the field, AIRS Angola identified high refusal rates team decided to implement innovative mobile systems in all 
quickly in two villages. AIRS Angola deployed a mobilization project countries conducting spray operations. 
unit the next day to circulate in the specific villages and sur-
rounding neighborhoods with a loudspeaker to disseminate This year, The PMI AIRS Project will implement three 
IRS messages in order to increase awareness and willingness mobile systems to assist in the monitoring of environmental 
to participate. Thanks to the real-time data provided through compliance and performance supervision, daily operational 
the mobile data collection system and subsequent efforts of data reporting, as well as to send mass communication for 
the AIRS team to return to low acceptance communities in daily reminders and motivational messages. The systems will 
order to reinforce mobilization messages, IRS acceptance utilize a varied range of phones, from Android phones to  
rates increased in these areas. the simpler short message service-enabled brick phones. By 
using the different types of phones, The PMI AIRS Project 
For the weekly spray progress and end-of-spray reports, the will be able to engage with personnel at all levels of opera-
M&E team used an Access-based query programmed by tions and in more remote areas where Internet connectivity 
their technology partner, Client Technology Center. This may have otherwise posed difficulties. Through the experi-
system allowed the team to export the master mobile dataset ences in Angola, The PMI AIRS Project will be able to cap-
and arrange the data in the same reporting format as the italize on lessons learned and ensure improved performance 
Access data for seamless integration of both datasets. The across all countries. n
integration of both datasets allowed the M&E team to have 
a better understanding of spray operator performance and 
spray progress throughout the campaign.
Lessons Learned 
n Low literacy prolonged training and hands-on super-
vision. The project recommends piloting in PMI AIRS 
countries with higher literacy and education levels.  Geographic Coverage: Huambo Province, Angola
n The pilot occurred in a new IRS area, thus new spray Implementation Partner: Abt Associates, Inc.
operators were learning both spray skills and phone data Donor: USAID | Bureau for Global Health, President’s Malaria 
entry skills. In the future, PMI AIRS recommends imple- Initiative (PMI) 
menting mobile data collection with personnel expe- Contact Information: Laura McCarty, Senior Manager, Communi-
rienced in IRS and allocating more time for training. cations, Abt Associates Inc., Laura_Mccarty@abtassoc.com
mHEALTH COMPENDIUM  VOLUME 5  n  35
