mWATER 
Social water monitoring in Tanzania  
DATA COLLECTION 
Implementation date: May 2012 to 2014 
Recent evidence indicates that in spite of the global progress made toward access to drinking water, over 1.8 billion people still 
drink from a contaminated water source. With diarrheal disease still a leading cause of death for children under five years of age 
and a growing awareness of the linkages between repeated bouts of diarrhea and malnutrition and stunting, addressing the 
water quality crisis is critical to achieving better health outcomes and ensuring productive lives for children. The first step toward 
improving water quality is putting in place an effective method for detecting unsafe water sources so that remediation efforts and 
new investments in infrastructure can be targeted at the most at risk areas.  
About mWater 
mWater is a free and open-access mobile platform for programs by conducting household and community-level 
m apping sites such as water sources, sharing test results and surveys of water users. At the end of the USAID-funded 
performing surveys. mWater leverages mobile technology project, mWater was able to turn over administration of the 
and a central online database to simplify the work of water groups and surveys to local authorities.  
q uality testing. The mobile application is available as a free 
The mWater field test kit and application can detect E. coli, 
download on Android smartphones and is also available via 
a type of bacteria that indicates fecal contamination of 
the web. Both the Android and web versions work offline 
 drinking water, based on the World Health Organization’s 
and automatically sync with a secure server when a data 
recommended limits for safe drinking water and safe bathing 
connection is available. The Android version goes a step 
water. Over a one-week period, mWater was able to train 
f urther by integrating with the mWater test kit, 
participants with no prior experience with smartphones or 
automatically counting the number of bacteria grown on a 
water quality testing to perform tests with this kit and 
test plate and computing the results. All test results can be 
l 
upload the results, with periodic follow-up by a training 
inked to a site, such as a water point, allowing others to 
coordinator who visited the field sites. A key part of the 
instantly see the new result and all previous data from that 
model was cross-sector engagement between health 
l ocation.  workers, community development officers and utility 
The mWater Surveyor portal greatly expands the capacity of workers, who share responsibility for safe drinking water in 
t he platform, allowing anyone to create and deploy their local communities. 
own surveys to users or groups, visualize incoming data in 
real time and download the results. Water.org and 
WaterAid now use this platform to internally monitor their 
 
38  |  mHealth Compendium Volume 4 
 Evaluation and Results 
mWater performed a quantitative evaluation of 
community surveys and platform-use statistics and 
a qualitative evaluation to assess the experience of 
participants and policy changes that resulted from 
the program, in Mwanza, Tanzania. Over the first 
six months, more than 500 water quality tests 
were recorded by the 25 participants, who 
reported that additional information about water 
safety is in high demand in their surrounding 
communities. During this time, feedback on how 
to make the mWater platform more effective was 
incorporated into the software design. These 
updates included translating the application into 
Swahili, combining all tests into a single form, 
creating printable reports with test results and 
advice about household water safety that can be 
posted in public areas.  
One critical result that impacted policy was the high level of fecal contamination detected in shallow dug wells throughout 
the Mwanza. Many local residents and non-profit organizations build these wells to supply drinking water to parts of the city 
not yet reached by the piped water network. The ubiquitous contamination found is in line with recent international studies 
(Bain et al 2014, PLoS Medicine), but having local results from the community was a powerful motivating factor in making a 
policy change away from these sources.  
Lessons Learned 
 The free and open-access mobile survey platform is a powerful concept for catalyzing investment among organizations 
who share a vision for high quality monitoring tools that can be easily shared with local communities who lack financial 
and technological resources. 
 Regular in-person support following the initial training is important for uptake of a new innovation among users 
unfamiliar with the technology. 
 Efforts to monitor water quality should incorporate planning and 
stakeholder input regarding how to present the results to the 
community.  
 Presenting local data, collected by respected members of the Geographic Coverage: Mwanza, Tanzania; 
community, is a powerful tool to motivate policy change. Global coverage via a free online platform 
International estimates are important for setting national and Implementation Partners: mWater, Mwanza 
global policy, but local governments respond best to local data.  Urban Water and Sewerage Authority, Mwanza 
City Council Public Health Office  
Conclusion Funder: USAID Development Innovation 
The mWater demonstration project in Mwanza has shown that local Ventures Program 
health and utility workers with no background in smartphones or Contact Information: 
water quality testing can learn to use both of these tools to reliably 
mWater | Anne Feighery, Co-Founder and CEO 
monitor water sources for contamination. The initial investment by 
(annie@mWater.co) 
USAID was leveraged to achieve even greater results through a 
coalition of water organizations that use the rapidly expanding USAID | Peter Khaemba (pkhaemba@usaid.gov) 
platform in their own monitoring work. Making all of the features 
See References on page  89. 
available for unlimited use was an important factor in motivating these 
investments.  
 
mHealth Compendium Volume 4  |  39 
